READING, PA
CODE OF ORDINANCES
Current through November 24, 2025
Published by:
American Legal Publishing
525 Vine Street, Suite 310
Cincinnati, Ohio 45202
Tel: (800) 445-5588
Internet: http://www.amlegal.com
PREFACE
The City of Reading has, over the years, passed through a process of
legislative change common to many American communities. While only a few simple
laws were necessary at the time of the establishment of the City Council,
subsequent growth of the community, together with the complexity of modern
life, has created the need for new and more detailed legislation for the proper
function and government of the City Council. The recording of local law is an
aspect of municipal history, and as the community develops and changes, review
and revision of old laws and consideration of new laws, in the light of current
trends, must keep pace. The orderly collection of these records is an important
step in this ever-continuing process. Legislation must be more than mere
chronological enactments reposing in the pages of old records. It must be
available and logically arranged for convenient use and must be kept up-to-
date. It was with thoughts such as these in mind that the City ordered the
following codification of the City Council's legislation.
Chapter C
HOME RULE CHARTER
ARTICLE I
Powers of the City
§
101.   The City.
§
102.   Grant of power.
§
103.   Exercise of powers.
§
104.   Preservation of powers of the people.
§
105.   Construction.
ARTICLE II
Council — The Legislative Branch
§
201.   Composition.
§
202.   Eligibility.
§
203.   Election and terms.
§
204.   Compensation.
§
205.   Vacancies.
§
206.   Forfeiture of office.
§
207.   Filling of vacancies.
§
208.   General powers and duties.
§
209.   Prohibitions.
§
210.   Investigations.
§
211.   Removal powers.
§
212.   Procedures.
§
213.   Citizens' right to be heard.
§
214.   Quorum.
§
215.   Ordinances in general.
§
216.   Form of ordinance.
§
217.   Procedures.
§
218.   Final passage of ordinance resolutions.
§
219.   Effective date of legislation.
§
220.   Emergency ordinance.
§
221.   Submission to Mayor and veto power.
§
222.   Recording of ordinances.
§
223.   Codification of ordinances.
§
224.   Action by resolution or motion.
§
225.   City Clerk.
§
225(a).   Council Staff.
§
226.   City Council Solicitor.
ARTICLE III
Executive Branch
§
301.   The Mayor.
§
302.   Election and terms.
§
303.   Eligibility.
§
304.   Vacancy.
§
305.   Forfeiture of office.
§
306.   Prohibitions.
§
307.   Compensation.
§
308.   Powers and duties of the Mayor.
§
309.   Appointment by the Mayor.
§
310.   Removals by Mayor.
§
311.   Managing Director.
§
312.   Deputy Mayor.
ARTICLE IV
Managing Director
§
401.   Appointment; qualification; compensation.
§
402.   Approval by Council.
§
403.   Vacancy.
§
404.   Removal.
§
405.   Prohibitions.
§
406.   Powers and duties.
ARTICLE V
City Auditor
§
501.   Election and terms.
§
502.   Eligibility.
§
503.   Responsibilities.
§
504.   Forfeiture.
§
505.   Vacancy.
§
506.   Prohibitions.
ARTICLE VI
Administration
§
601.   Administrative Manual.
§
602.   (Reserved)
§
603.   Heads of departments, offices, and agencies.
§
604.   Qualifications.
§
605.   Prohibitions.
§
606.   Department of Public Works/City Engineer.
§
607.   Department of Finance.
ARTICLE VII
Personnel System
§
701.   Job discrimination.
§
702.   Personnel system and personnel code.
§
703.   Personnel Code.
§
704.   Collective bargaining agreements.
§
705.   Compensation of heads of departments, offices and agencies.
§
706.   Political activity.
§
707.   Department of Human Resources.
ARTICLE VIII
City Solicitor
§
801.   Qualifications and responsibilities.
ARTICLE IX
Financial Procedures
§
901.   Fiscal year.
§
902.   Submission of balanced budget and capital program.
§
903.   Budget message.
§
904.   Budget.
§
905.   City Council action on budget.
§
906.   Revised budget.
§
907.   (Reserved)
§
908.   Amendments after adoption.
§
909.   Lapse of appropriation.
§
910.   Administration of the budget and capital program.
§
911.   Capital program.
§
912.   City Council action on capital program.
§
913.   Public records.
§
914.   Independent audit.
§
915.   Bidding process.
ARTICLE X
Boards and Commissions
§
1001.   Establishment.
§
1002.   Membership.
ARTICLE XI
Citizen's Rights and Participation
§
1101.   General provisions.
§
1102.   Initiation of ordinances by electors.
§
1103.   Reconsidering ordinances by electors.
§
1104.   (Reserved).
§
1105.   (Reserved).
§
1106.   (Reserved).
§
1107.   (Reserved).
§
1108.   (Reserved).
§
1109.   (Reserved).
§
1110.   (Reserved).
§
1111.   Citizens right to place an item of the City Council agenda.
§
1112.   Citizens rights to call a special meeting of City Council.
§
1113.   Council submission for initiative of certain proposals.
ARTICLE XII
General Provisions
§
1201.   Conflict of interest and Code of Ethics.
§
1202.   Prohibitions.
§
1203.   Review of Charter.
§
1204.   Amendments.
ARTICLE XIII
Transition
§
1301.   Purpose of article.
§
1302.   Effective date.
§
1303.   Initial elections.
§
1304.   Initial salaries of elected officials.
§
1305.   Continuation of boards and commissions.
§
1306.   Specific transfer of functions.
§
1307.   Personnel.
§
1308.   1996 budget.
§
1309.   Legal continuity.
§
1310.   Temporary ordinances.
§
1311.   Mandatory acts.
§
1312.   Council districts.
§
1313.   Transition Committee.
Charter Amendments Approved by Referendum
Amendment I
[HISTORY: Approved by the voters of the City of Reading at the general election
on 11-7-1993. Amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Administrative Code — See
Ch. 5.
Charter Board — See
Ch. 23, Part 6.
Personnel — See
Ch. 70.
PREAMBLE
We, the people of Reading, Berks County, in order to secure the fullest measure
of City home rule and responsive, effective, and economical local self-
government under the Constitution and laws of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania,
do hereby adopt this Charter as our instrument of government.
ARTICLE I
Powers of the City
§ 101.   The City.
The City shall be a municipality of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania known as
the City of Reading. Its boundaries shall remain as they are on the effective
date of this Charter unless otherwise changed by law. The City shall be
governed pursuant to this Charter.
§ 102.   Grant of power.
The City shall have the power to exercise any power or to perform any function
not denied by the Constitution of the United States, by the Constitution of
Pennsylvania, by act of the General Assembly of Pennsylvania, or by this
Charter.
§ 103.   Exercise of powers.
All powers of the City shall be exercised as provided by this Charter, or if
the Charter makes no provision, as provided by ordinances or resolutions of the
City Council.
§ 104.   Preservation of powers of the people.
Powers reserved to the people by the Constitution of the United States and the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania shall be inviolate.
   (a)   No person shall serve as a City Councilman for more than two
consecutive four-year terms.
   (b)   No person shall serve as a City Council President for more than two
consecutive four-year terms.
   (c)   No person shall serve as a Mayor for more than two consecutive four-
year terms.
   (d)   No person shall serve as an Auditor for more than two consecutive
four-year terms. [Approved by Charter Referendum at the June 2, 2020 Primary
Election]
§ 105.   Construction.
   (a)   Powers. The powers of the City under this Charter shall be construed
liberally in favor of the City, and the specific mention of particular powers
in the Charter shall not be construed as limiting in any way the general power
granted in this article.
   (b)   Severability. If any provision of this Charter shall be judged by any
court of competent jurisdiction to be invalid, such judgment shall not affect,
impair, or invalidate the remainder of this Charter, but shall be limited in
its effect and operation to the particular provision involved.
   (c)   Titles. In the interpretation of this Charter, the titles shall be
used to explain and understand the purposes of any given chapter or section.
   (d)   Residency. All references to "residency" in this Charter shall mean
legal residence or domicile. [Added at the November 2007 General Election]
ARTICLE II
Council — The Legislative Branch
§ 201.   Composition.
There shall be seven members of Council. Six shall be nominated and elected by
district and one, the President of Council, shall be nominated and elected at
large by the qualified voters of the City.
§ 202.   Eligibility.
Only qualified voters of the City who have resided continuously in the City one
year prior to the date of the primary election for that office shall be
eligible to hold the office of President of Council. Only qualified voters of
the City who have resided in the district which they are to represent
continuously one year prior to the date of the primary election for that office
shall be eligible to hold the office of Council member.
The President of Council must retain residency in the City during his or her
term of office.
District Council members must retain residence in the district of the City from
which they were elected, during their term of office.
§ 203.   Election and terms.
The regular election of Council members shall be held on the general municipal
election day as established by the laws of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
The terms of Council members shall begin at noon on the first Monday of January
next following the municipal election and when the transition from the old to
the new form of government is completed shall be for four years.
In the year the Mayor is elected, three district Council persons shall be
elected. In the next municipal election, the President of Council and three
district Council persons shall be elected.
Cross-Reference:
   Please see term limits in Charter Section
104
§ 204.   Compensation. 1
Each Council member elected at the first election under this Charter shall
receive a nominal annual salary in the amount of $5,000. The President of
Council shall receive $5,500. Council members shall receive no other benefits
with the exception of reimbursement for legitimate expenses related to the
office of council. Council may raise by ordinance the salary of Council, but
such ordinance will not take effect until the date of the commencement of the
terms of Council members elected at the next regular municipal election,
provided that such election follows the adoption of such ordinance by at least
six months.
1.   Editor's Note: For the current salary of Council members and the President
of Council, see §
91-101.
§ 205.   Vacancies.
The office of Council member shall become vacant upon death of the member,
resignation, removal from office in any manner authorized by law or forfeiture
of office.
§ 206.   Forfeiture of office.
A member of Council shall forfeit office if the member:
   (a)   Lacks at any time during the term of office any qualification for the
office prescribed by this Charter or by law;
   (b)   Violates any express prohibition of this Charter;
   (c)   Fails to attend three consecutive regular meetings of the Council
without being excused by Council; or
   (d)   Is convicted of any crime classified as a misdemeanor of the second
class or higher, under the laws of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania or the
United States, or be convicted of any comparable crime under the laws of any
other state in the United States.
In all cases of forfeiture, the member shall be entitled to notice and a
hearing before Council in accordance with administrative procedures to be
established by Council.
(Note: Resolution 34-2018, adopted at a Special Mtg on Feb 20, 2018 includes
maternity and FMLA leave as excused absences)
§ 207.   Filling of vacancies.
A vacancy in the Council shall be filled by a majority vote of the remaining
members of Council.
If the Council fails to act within 30 days following the occurrence of the
vacancy, the Court of Common Pleas of Berks County shall, upon petition of
three members of Council or 10 qualified voters of the City, fill the vacancy
in such office by the appointment of a qualified resident of the City. In the
case of a vacated district seat, the person appointed to fill that seat either
by Council itself or the Court of Common Pleas must be a resident of the
district. The individual appointed will remain in office until the first Monday
in January following the next municipal election. At such municipal election, a
qualified person shall be elected to serve from the first Monday of January
following the election for the remainder of the term of the person originally
elected to such office or, if such term would otherwise expire on the first
Monday following, for a new full term.
§ 208.   General powers and duties.
All powers of the City not otherwise provided for in this Charter shall be
exercised in a manner to be determined by Council. Council shall provide for
the exercise and performance of any such other powers and duties in a manner
consistent with the terms of this Charter.
§ 209.   Prohibitions.
   (a)   No Council member shall hold any compensated appointive City office or
City employment during the term for which the member was elected to Council.
   (b)   No Council member shall serve as an elected official in any other
office in the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania or political subdivision thereof.
   (c)   No Council member shall hold any compensated appointive City office or
City employment until one year after the expiration of the term for which the
member was elected to the Council.
   (d)   Except for the purpose of inquiry, the Council and its members shall
deal with all departmental and bureau employees through the Mayor or the
Managing Director.
   (e)   Neither the Council nor any of its members shall in any manner dictate
the appointment or removal of any City administrative offices or employees whom
the Mayor or subordinates of the Mayor are empowered to appoint except as
otherwise provided in this Charter.
   (f)   No Council member shall serve as an employee of any municipal
authority which is created solely or jointly by the City with one or more
political subdivisions until one year after the expiration of the term for
which the member was elected to Council.
   (g)   Any Council member who has a financial interest, direct or indirect,
or by reason of ownership of stock in any corporation, in any sale of land with
the City or in any contract with the City, shall immediately make publicly
known their interest and shall refrain from voting upon, or otherwise
participating in the sale of such land or making of such contract. A statement
of such interest shall be filed with the City Clerk.
Any Council member who willfully conceals such interests shall be guilty of
malfeasance in office.
Violation of this section with the knowledge expressed or implied of the person
or corporation contracting with or making a sale to the City shall render the
contract or sale voidable by the City.
§ 210.   Investigations.
Council shall have the power, by ordinance, to make or cause to be made,
investigations, audits, or studies of the City and the conduct of any City
department, office or agency, and, for this purpose may retain professional and
technical assistance, subpoena witnesses, administer oaths, take testimony,
require the production of evidence, and provide funds for such investigation,
audit, or study.
The subjects of such investigation, audit, or study shall be specifically
stated in the authorizing ordinance.
§ 211.   Removal powers.
   (a)   Council shall have the power to remove from office for cause set forth
in this section any person appointed to the office by Council. Malfeasance,
committing a fraud upon the City or commission of any corrupt act or practice
shall constitute grounds for removal.
   (b)   Council may at its discretion remove the City Solicitor if five
members of the City Council vote in favor of a motion to do so.
   (c)   Council shall have the power to remove any elected official or
appointed department head from office if the Council finds such person guilty
of malfeasance in office.
§ 212.   Procedures.
   (a)   Rules. The Council shall determine its own rules and Order of
Business.
   (b)   Meetings. Council shall hold a regular meeting at least twice each
month in the evening on a day and place as the Council may prescribe by rule.
   (c)   Special meetings. Special meetings may be held on the call of the
President of Council or at least four members of Council at such time and place
and under such conditions as the Council may prescribe by rule.
   (d)   Meetings open to the public. All meetings shall be open to the public,
except executive sessions as authorized by law. The chambers shall be arranged
in such a way as to have all members of Council facing the public.
   (e)   Voting. All action shall be at a public session; shall require a
majority full vote of Council, except in the case of a vote to override a veto,
which shall require an affirmative vote of five members, and in the case of
passage of an ordinance, which shall require a majority vote of Council as a
whole unless otherwise specified in this Charter; voting shall be by roll call
vote, and the vote of each member of the Council shall be entered in the
minutes of the meeting.
   (f)   The Council shall provide for keeping of a journal of its proceedings.
The journal shall be a public record, and shall be maintained in City Hall and
a copy in the Reading Public Library and the Berks County Law Library.
§ 213.   Citizens' right to be heard.
The Council must provide reasonable opportunity for interested citizens and
taxpayers to address the Council on matters of general or special concern.
Citizens' right to be heard shall be the first order of business at all public
meetings and before a vote on any Council business. The public shall be granted
the opportunity to comment at Council meetings without time limitations, except
when Council by a majority plus one of the members present imposes a reasonable
time limitation deemed necessary.
§ 214.   Quorum.
A quorum of Council shall consist of four Council members.
§ 215.   Ordinances in general.
[Amended at the November 2014 General Election]
Council may legislate by passage of an ordinance. All ordinances introduced
shall be kept in a place accessible to the public at all reasonable times.
Final action on all ordinances shall take place during public meetings. Acts of
Council shall be by ordinance which:
   (a)   Adopt or amend the codes or establish, alter, or abolish any unit of
the City;
   (b)   Provide for a fine or other penalty or establish a rule or regulation
for which a fine or other penalty is imposed;
   (c)   Levy taxes and provide for service charges, permit fees and
assessments;
   (d)   Grant, renew or extend a franchise;
   (e)   Adopt or amend the annual budget and capital program budget;
   (f)   Repeal or amend any ordinance;
   (g)   Adopt procedures for purchasing of products, goods, or services, for
making contracts and for the sale or lease of personal or real property of the
City;
   (h)   Adopt other actions which are legislative in nature;
   (i)   Authorize the borrowing of money;
   (j)   Purchase, convey, or lease lands or buildings; or
   (k)   Adopt zoning, subdivision or other land use controls.
§ 216.   Form of ordinance.
Every ordinance shall have a title clearly expressing its subject and every
ordinance shall contain only one subject.
§ 217.   Procedures.
   (a)   The first reading of an ordinance may be introduced by any Member at
any regular or special meeting of the Council without vote.
   (b)   After the first reading, the City Clerk shall distribute a copy of the
proposed ordinance to each Council member and to the Mayor and shall file and
make available a reasonable number of copies in the office of the City Clerk.
§ 218.   Final passage of ordinance resolutions.
A minimum of 14 days must intervene between introduction and passage of an
ordinance unless Council finds and declares a public emergency posing a sudden,
clear and present danger to life or property.
§ 219.   Effective date of legislation.
Every adopted ordinance except emergency legislation shall become effective at
the expiration of 30 days after passage by Council and approval by the Mayor,
or repassage by Council over the Mayor's veto, or at a date specified therein,
but not less than 10 days after adoption.
§ 220.   Emergency ordinance.
An emergency ordinance may be adopted to meet a public emergency posing a
sudden, clear and present danger to life or property. An emergency ordinance
shall be introduced in the form and manner prescribed for ordinance generally,
except that it shall be plainly designated as an emergency ordinance and shall
describe in clear and specific terms the nature of the emergency.
Every emergency ordinance shall automatically stand repealed as of the 91st day
following the date on which it was adopted, but this shall not prevent
reenactment of the ordinance if the emergency still exists.
§ 221.   Submission to Mayor and veto power.
Before any ordinance takes effect, it must first be submitted to the Mayor for
approval. The Mayor shall sign the ordinance within 10 days if approved, but if
not, shall return it to Council stating objections. Council shall, at its next
meeting, reconsider the ordinance and may pass it over the Mayor's veto by the
affirmative vote of five members of City Council.
If the Mayor fails within 10 days after any ordinance is submitted to him to
sign the ordinance and/or return it to Council, such ordinance shall be
considered adopted at the expiration of the ten-day period.
The veto power of the Mayor shall not apply to ordinances adopted by initiative
or referendum.
§ 222.   Recording of ordinances.
All ordinances shall be contained in permanent separate record books. The
ordinance book and all other actions taken by Council at a public meeting shall
be open and available for public inspection at normal business hours in the
office of the City Clerk, and a copy in the Reading Public Library.
§ 223.   Codification of ordinances.
Within three years after the effective date of this Charter, the Council shall
provide for a codification with an index of ordinances of the City. No later
than three months after the close of each year, Council, with the assistance of
the City's legal department, shall classify ordinances according to the
division and subdivision of the Code for insertion in the Code during said
year.
§ 224.   Action by resolution or motion.
Nothing in the article is intended to preclude Council from taking appropriate
action by resolution or motion.
§ 225.   City Clerk.
Within 30 days of taking office, City Council shall appoint an officer of the
City who shall have the title of City Clerk. The City Clerk shall give notice
of Council meetings to its members and the public, take the minutes of all City
Council meetings, keep the journal of its proceedings, shall have the power of
a notary public, shall serve as secretary to the Council and perform such other
duties as are assigned by the administrative code, the Council, or state law.
The term of City Clerk shall be two years with option to be reappointed for
successive terms. The City Clerk shall serve at the pleasure of Council.
§ 225(a). Counsel Staff.
City Council shall appoint all assistants and employees of Council office,
whose number and compensation shall be fixed as Council by budgetary
provisions, provides, and who, in all other respects, shall be considered
employees of the City. [Approved by Charter Referendum at the June 2, 2020
Primary Election]
§ 226. City Council Solicitor.
City Council shall appoint a Council Solicitor who shall be a member of the Bar
of the Supreme Court of Pennsylvania and experienced in municipal law. The
Council Solicitor shall serve as legal advisor to City Council. Council's
Solicitor shall perform professional legal services for City Council. The
primary responsibility of the position of Council Solicitor is to advise City
Council on questions of law. City Council's Solicitor shall have his or her own
legal secretary to assist in the preparation of all opinions, memorandums, and
whatever other correspondence is required in the performance of the Council
Solicitor's duties. Compensation shall be fixed as Council, by budgetary
provisions, provides, and who, in all other respects, shall be considered
employees of the City. [Approved by Charter Referendum at the June 2, 2020
Primary Election]
ARTICLE III
Executive Branch
§ 301.   The Mayor.
The executive, administrative, and law enforcement powers of the City shall be
vested in the Mayor. The Mayor shall control and be accountable for the
executive branch of City government, as provided by this Charter.
§ 302.   Election and terms.
The election of the Mayor shall be held in municipal elections in the manner
provided by law. The term of office of the Mayor shall be four years commencing
the first Monday in January after the election.
Cross-Reference:
   Please see term limits in Charter Section
104
§ 303.   Eligibility.
The candidate for Mayor shall be a registered voter of the City who shall have
resided in the City continuously for at least one year immediately preceding
the primary election in which the Mayor seeks office. The Mayor shall continue
to reside in the City throughout the term of office.
§ 304.   Vacancy.
   (a)   If the office of the Mayor becomes vacant for any reason, Council
shall appoint an interim Mayor who shall serve until the next municipal
election.
   (b)   A vacancy in the office of Mayor shall be filled at the next municipal
election, in the manner provided by law. The person elected shall hold the
qualifications for the office of the Mayor and shall serve the remaining
portion of the vacated term.
§ 305.   Forfeiture of office.
The Mayor shall forfeit that office if the Mayor:
   (a)   Lacks at any time during term of office for which elected any
qualification for the office prescribed by this Charter or by law;
   (b)   Violates any express prohibition of the Charter; or
   (c)   Is convicted of any crime classified as a misdemeanor of the second
class or higher, under the laws of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania or the
United States, or be convicted of any comparable crime under the laws of any
other state in the United States.
In all cases of forfeiture, the Mayor shall be entitled to notice and a hearing
in accordance with the administrative procedures to be established by Council.
§ 306.   Prohibitions.
   (a)   The Mayor shall not hold any compensated appointive City office or
City employment during the term of office for which the Mayor was elected.
   (b)   The Mayor shall not serve as an elected official in any other office
in the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania or political subdivision thereof.
   (c)   The Mayor shall not hold any compensated appointed City office or City
employment until one year after the expiration of the term for which the Mayor
was elected.
   (d)   The Mayor shall not serve as an employee of a municipal authority
which is created solely or jointly by the City with one or more political
subdivisions until one year after the expiration of the term for which the
Mayor was elected.
   (e)   If during his or her first term in office the Mayor wishes to run for
another political office, he or she must resign his or her position as Mayor.
After one complete term, the Mayor may run for another office without
relinquishing his or her position as Mayor.
   (f)   A Mayor who has a financial interest, direct or indirect, or by reason
of ownership of stock in any corporation, in any contract with the City or in
the sale of land, shall immediately make known that interest to Council. A
Mayor who wilfully conceals any such interest shall be guilty of malfeasance in
office. Violation of this section with the knowledge expressed or implied of
the person or corporation contracting with or making a sale to the City shall
render the contract or sale voidable by the City.
§ 307.   Compensation.
   (a)   The Mayor shall receive an annual salary in the amount of $55,000
until such amount is changed by City Council.2
   (b)   City Council may determine the annual salary of the Mayor by
ordinance, but no ordinance changing such salary shall become effective until
the date of commencement of the term of the Mayor elected at the next regular
election, provided that such election follows the adoption of such ordinance by
at least six months.
2.    Editor's Note: For the current salary of the Mayor, see §
91-101A.
§ 308.   Powers and duties of the Mayor.
The Mayor shall have the following powers and duties:
   (a)   Execute, enforce, and obey the ordinances of the City and laws of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania and the United States of America.
   (b)   Prepare and present a budget to City Council in accordance with the
provisions of this Charter.
   (c)   Inform City Council and the public each January of the financial and
general condition of the City.
   (d)   Provide Council with all information concerning finances and general
conditions of the City as may be requested by Council.
   (e)   Introduce proposed legislation to Council and make recommendations to
City Council concerning the affairs of the City.
   (f)   Be responsible for the hiring, with the approval of Council, of the
City Managing Director.
   (g)   Direct the administration of all departments, offices, and agencies of
the City as supervised by the Managing Director, except as otherwise provided
by this Charter or by law.
[Amended at the November 2014 General Election]
   (h)   Ensure that all laws, provisions of this Charter and acts of City
Council, subject to enforcement by the Managing Director, are faithfully
executed by the Managing Director.
   (i)   Be responsible for the establishment and development of administrative
policy to be implemented by the Managing Director.
   (j)   Be present or represented at all public council meetings. The Mayor
may participate in all public discussions but shall have no vote.
   (k)   Execute all bonds, notes, contracts, and written obligations of the
City.
   (l)   Issue subpoenas and compulsory processes, under the Official Seal of
the Mayor, for the attendance of such persons and the production of such books
and records as deemed necessary by the Mayor, and seek enforcement of such
subpoenas by the Court of Common Pleas of Berks County.
   (m)   Unless otherwise provided, be responsible for the employment of
personnel necessary for the effective operation of City government.
   (n)   Perform such other duties and exercise such other powers as stated in
this Charter, by law, or ordinance.
§ 309.   Appointment by the Mayor.
The Mayor shall appoint:
   (a)   One City Solicitor. Any person so appointed shall hold office unless
removed during the term for which the Mayor is elected and until a successor is
appointed and qualified. Four affirmative votes of Council shall be necessary
for confirmation.
   (b)   All members of boards, authorities and commissions, over which he has
the power to appoint. Four affirmative votes of Council shall be necessary for
confirmation.
§ 310.   Removals by Mayor.
The Mayor may remove from office anyone appointed pursuant to §
309(b), unless otherwise provided by law.
§ 311.   Managing Director.
The Mayor pursuant to the provisions of this Charter shall appoint a full-time
officer of the City who shall have the title of Managing Director and who shall
receive compensation comparable to that received by a person in a position of
similar responsibilities.
§ 312.   Deputy Mayor.
In the event of the Mayor's temporary absence from the City, or temporary
disability, the Managing Director shall act as Deputy Mayor. The Deputy Mayor
shall exercise all the duties of the Mayor, except the power of appointment or
removal from office.
ARTICLE IV
Managing Director
§ 401.   Appointment; qualification; compensation.
   (a)   Within 90 days of taking office, the Mayor, with the approval of City
Council, shall appoint a Managing Director for an indefinite term, subject to
at least a biennial review, and fix the Managing Director’s compensation. [The
Residency requirement for the Managing Director and Department Directors was
eliminated by the electorate via referendum at the November 10, 2020 General
Election.]
   (b)   Any candidate for Managing Director shall:
      (1)   Have a Master's degree in public administration, business
administration, or its equivalent and have at least three years' experience at
an executive or administrative level; or
      (2)   Have a Bachelor's degree in public administration, or its
equivalent, and have at least five years of experience at an executive or
administrative level.
   (c)   City Council may, by ordinance, establish additional qualifications
for the position of Managing Director, prior to advertisement for the hiring of
the Managing Director.
   (d)   In the event that the position of Managing Director cannot be filled
by the Mayor, the Mayor may appoint a Temporary Managing Director for a period
of time not to exceed 90 days. During this period of time, the Mayor shall
continue to use all available means to fill the position.
   (e)   In the event the Mayor has not filled the position of Managing
Director within 180 days of taking office, City Council shall, within 90 days
thereafter, hire a Managing Director. Any person hired by City Council shall
hold the qualifications for said position prescribed by this Charter. The Mayor
shall not have the power of veto over any candidate hired by City Council in
accordance with the provisions of this Charter.
§ 402.   Approval by Council.
   (a)   City Council approval shall be necessary for the hiring of the
Managing Director appointed by the Mayor. Such approval shall be made within 30
days from the date of the appointment. If no action is taken by City Council
within such period, the approval of the hiring of the candidate shall be
automatic.
§ 403.   Vacancy.
   (a)   If the position of Managing Director becomes vacant at any time, the
provisions of §
401 shall apply to the hiring of a replacement.
§ 404.   Removal.
   (a)   The Managing Director may be removed from office by the Mayor at any
time, without cause.
   (b)   At least 15 days prior to the removal from office, the Mayor shall
notify the Managing Director and City Council in writing of such removal.
   (c)   Council may, by ordinance, remove the Managing Director from office
for failure to hold the qualifications set forth in §
401 or for violation of any of the prohibitions set forth in §
405.
§ 405.   Prohibitions.
   (a)   The Managing Director shall devote full time to the office; shall hold
no elective public office; shall hold no other City office or City employment
for which any compensation is paid or received; and shall hold no office in any
political party or organization.
   (b)   A Managing Director who has a financial interest, direct or indirect,
or by reason of ownership of stock, in any corporation, in any sale of land
with the City or, in any contract with the City, shall immediately make known
that interest to Council. A Managing Director who wilfully conceals such an
interest shall be guilty of malfeasance in office. Violation of this section
with the knowledge expressed or implied of the person or corporation
contracting with or making a sale to the City shall render the contract or sale
voidable by the City.
   (c)   The Managing Director shall refrain from participating in the debate
and discussion of policy by City Council unless authorized by the Mayor, but
may respond to inquiries on any matter under consideration.
§ 406.   Powers and duties.
The Managing Director shall be the chief administrative officer of the City,
responsible to the Mayor for the administration of all City affairs placed in
the Managing Director's charge pursuant to this Charter. In addition to other
powers and duties prescribed by this Charter, the Managing Director shall:
      (1)   Execute and enforce the provisions of this Charter and all
ordinances, resolutions, and motions of City Council;
      (2)   Supervise the administration of all departments, offices, and
agencies of the City, as directed by the Mayor, except as otherwise provided by
this Charter or by law; [Amended at the November 2014 General Election]
      (3)   Appoint, suspend, or remove any City employee, except as otherwise
provided by this Charter or by law;
      (4)   Prepare and submit to the Mayor on an annual basis a five-year
financial plan and a budget.
      (5)   Supervise and direct the negotiation and administration of any
collective bargaining agreements with City employees;
      (6)   Submit to the Mayor a complete report of the finances and
administrative activities of the City within 30 days of the end of each fiscal
year;
      (7)   Assure that the laws of the commonwealth relating to the affairs
and government of the City are faithfully executed and enforced;
      (8)   Present to the Mayor from time to time such information concerning
the business and affairs of the City as the Managing Director may deem
necessary, or as City Council by motion may request; and recommend such
measures for legislative action as are believed to be in the best interests of
the City; and
      (9)   Perform such other duties as are specified in this Charter or may
be required by the Mayor or City Council.
ARTICLE V
City Auditor
§ 501.   Election and terms.
The election of the City Auditor shall be held in municipal elections in the
manner provided by law. The term of office of the City Auditor shall be four
years commencing the first Monday in January after the election.
§ 502.   Eligibility.
[Amended at the November 2008 General Election 3 ; November 2014 General
Election]
The candidate for City Auditor shall be a registered voter of the City who
shall have resided in the City continuously for at least one year immediately
preceding the primary election in which the City Auditor seeks office. The City
Auditor shall continue to reside in the City throughout the term of office. In
addition, the City Auditor must have a Bachelor's Degree in Business
Administration, Municipal Government, Accounting, Management or a related
field. The City Auditor elected at the first election under this Charter shall
receive an annual salary of $40,000.4
3.   Editor's Note: The link between the Mayor and Auditor salary was
eliminated via approval of the referendum question at the November 2008 General
Election.
4.   Editor's Note: For the current salary of the City Auditor, see §
91-101D.
Cross-Reference:
   Please see term limits in Charter Section
104
§ 503.   Responsibilities.
The City Auditor shall:
   (a)   Have financial oversight of City finances, independent of the
Executive and Legislative branches and shall review all expenditures of the
Mayor, City Council, and City boards, commissions and agencies;
   (b)   Review the annual budget before approval by City Council, and make
nonbinding recommendations to City Council for consideration;
   (c)   Be present or represented at all Council meetings;
   (d)   Perform specific audits of City finances from time to time as
determined by the City Auditor or City Council;
   (e)   Report to Council on the progress of the implementation of any
recommendations as found in the annual audit and management letter;
   (f)   Assist in all audits conducted by independent auditors;
   (g)   Assure the accurate and timely completion and submittal of audit
reports along with appropriate follow-up recommendations;
   (h)   Furnish to City Council, the Mayor, the Managing Director, and others,
as appropriate, periodic reports of audits conducted;
   (i)   Interpret and communicate audit policies and procedures to all City
management and staff;
   (j)   Direct internal financial security and loss investigation activities;
   (k)   Prepare an annual budget for the office of City Auditor and operate
the office of City Auditor within approved budget limitations; and
   (l)   Issue any subpoenas in order to fulfill the duties and
responsibilities of the office of City Auditor.
   (m)   Appoint all assistants and employees of his or her office, whose
number and compensation shall be fixed as Council, by budgetary provisions,
provides, and who, in all other respects, shall be considered employees of the
City. [Approved by Charter Referendum at the June 2, 2020 Primary Election)]
§ 504.   Forfeiture.
The City Auditor shall forfeit that office if the City Auditor:
   (a)   Lacks at any time during term of office for which elected any
qualification for the office prescribed by this Charter or by law;
   (b)   Violates any express prohibition of the Charter; or
   (c)   Is convicted of any crime classified as a misdemeanor of the second
class or higher, under the laws of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania or the
United States, or be convicted of any comparable crime under the laws of any
other state in the United States.
In all cases of forfeiture, the City Auditor shall be entitled to notice and a
hearing in accordance with the administrative procedures to be established by
Council.
§ 505.   Vacancy.
   (a)   If the office of the City Auditor becomes vacant for any reason,
Council shall appoint an interim City Auditor who shall serve until the next
municipal election.
   (b)   A vacancy in the office of City Auditor shall be filled at the next
municipal election, in the manner provided by law. The person elected shall
hold the qualifications for the office of the City Auditor and shall serve the
remaining portion of the vacated term.
§ 506.   Prohibitions.
   (a)   The City Auditor shall not hold any compensated appointive City office
or City employment during the term of office for which the City Auditor was
elected.
   (b)   The City Auditor shall not serve as an elected official in any other
office in the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania or political subdivision thereof.
   (c)   The City Auditor shall not hold any compensated appointed City office
or City employment until one year after the expiration of the term for which
the City Auditor was elected.
   (d)   The City Auditor shall not serve as an employee of a municipal
authority which is created solely or jointly by the City with one or more
political subdivisions until one year after the expiration of the term for
which the City Auditor was elected.
   (e)   A City Auditor who has a financial interest, direct or indirect, or by
reason of ownership of stock in any corporation, in any sale of land with the
City or in any contract with the City, shall immediately make known that
interest to Council. A City Auditor who wilfully conceals any such interest
shall be guilty of malfeasance in office. Violation of this section with the
knowledge expressed or implied of the person or corporation contracting with or
making a sale to the City shall render the contract or sale voidable by the
City.
ARTICLE VI
Administration
§ 601.   Administrative Manual. 5  
[Amended at the November 2014 General Election]
Within six months of the adoption of this Charter amendment, 6 the Mayor shall
establish and then, from time to time, amend an Administrative Manual which
shall set forth in detail the administrative policies and procedures of the
City, including:
   (a)   General administrative policies, as directed by the Mayor, and
implemented by the Managing Director, for the efficient and effective operation
of government;
   (b)   The internal procedures for the operation of the departments, offices,
and agencies, as directed by the Managing Director and heads of departments;
and
   (c)   Any other rules, regulations, and procedures for the efficient and
effective administration.
5.   Editor's Note: See Ch. 5, Administrative Code.
6.   Editor's Note: The Charter amendment was approved by referendum 11-4-2014
at the November 2014 General Election.
§ 602.   (Reserved) 7
7.   Editor's Note: The repeal of former § 602, Common administrative
procedures, was approved by referendum at the November 2014 General Election.
§ 603.   Heads of departments, offices, and agencies.
   (a)   Appointment. Except as otherwise provided by this Charter, the Mayor
shall appoint and remove the head of any department, office and agency. An
appointment shall not be effective unless City Council by resolution confirms
it or fails to reject it within 60 days after the appointment. The appointee
shall serve unless rejected by City Council or until removal from office,
whichever is sooner.
   (b)   Removal. The Mayor shall have the power at any time to remove the head
of any department, office or agency immediately under the Managing Director's
direction and supervision, but the Mayor shall within 14 days notify in writing
City Council of the removal and the reason for it.
§ 604.   Qualifications.
The heads of departments, offices, and agencies shall be selected solely on the
basis of education, training, experience; and professional, executive, and
administrative abilities; and such other qualifications as may be set forth in
this Charter. (See §
705)
§ 605.   Prohibitions.
   (a)   The department head shall devote full time to the office; shall hold
no elective public office; shall hold no other City office or City employment
for which any compensation is paid or received; shall hold no office in any
political party or organization.
   (b)   A department head who has a financial interest, direct or indirect, or
by reason of ownership of stock in any corporation, in any sale of land with
the City or, in any contract with the City, shall immediately make known that
interest to Council. A department head who willfully conceals such an interest
shall be guilty of malfeasance in office. Violation of this section with the
knowledge expressed or implied of the person or corporation contracting with or
making a sale to the City shall render the contract or sale voidable by the
City.
   (c)   The department head shall refrain from participating in the debate and
discussion of policy by City Council unless authorized by the Mayor, but may
respond to inquiries on any matter under consideration.
§ 606.   Department of Public Works/City Engineer.
   (a)   The Department of Public Works is mandated by this Charter. The Mayor
shall appoint and fix the compensation of the head of the Department of Public
Works. He or she shall perform the duties required through the Administrative
Code or other action, or as may be required by general law. The Mayor shall
also designate an individual who is professional engineer registered in the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania to serve as the City Engineer.
   (b)   The Department of Public Works shall include an environmentalist who
shall be appointed by the head of the Department of Public Works, whose duties
shall include education, lobbying, research and public liaison. The
environmentalist shall have sufficient technical qualifications for a position
of this type.
§ 607.   Department of Finance.
[Amended at the May 2010 Primary Election8] [Amended at the June 2020 Primary
Election to separate the Department of Administrative Services into Finance and
Human Resources Departments]
There shall be a Department of Finance which is established for the purpose of
creating a unified city accounting system. A Director of Finance shall be
appointed by the Mayor with confirmation of Council (as per Section 603). As a
minimum requirement, the Director of Finance shall have a degree in business
administration or management. The Director of Finance shall be responsible for
the administration of activities that include (i) the receipt, expenditure,
accounting, investment, custody, and control of municipal funds and assets,
including the budget (both operating and capital); (ii) financial accounting,
which shall be conducted according to generally accepted accounting principles;
(iii) investments and insurance; (iv) payroll; (v) pension administration; (vi)
materials management; and (vii) all other financial matters that may arise.
8.   Editor's Note: Approved by referendum in May 2010 to combine the
Departments of Finance (previously § 607 of the Home Rule Charter) and Human
Resources (previously § 705 of the Home Rule Charter) into a Department of
Administrative Services.
ARTICLE VII
Personnel System
§ 701.   Job discrimination.
No individual shall be discriminated against with respect to any position or
office because of age, gender, race, creed, handicap, color, religion,
ancestry, veteran status, national origin, sexual orientation, political
opinions or affiliations, or lawful activity in any employee organization. The
City shall adopt adequate and reasonable affirmative action policies in
accordance with Pennsylvania law.
§ 702.   Personnel system and personnel code.
Each elected official, officer, and employee of the City shall be a member of
either the career or exempt service.
   (a)   The exempt service shall consist of:
      (i)   All elected officials;
      (ii)   The Managing Director and the City Solicitor;
      (iii)   The heads of departments, offices, and agencies immediately under
the direction and supervision of the Managing Director;
      (iv)   One Clerk or secretary for each of the full-time elected City
officials and the heads of each City department;
      (v)   The City Clerk;
      (vi)   The members of authorities, boards, and commissions;
      (vii)   Temporary, part-time, or seasonal employees;
   (b)   All other officers and employees shall be members of the career
service.
   (c)   Merit personnel system. There shall be a merit personnel system, the
purpose of which shall be to require that all personnel decisions be made
solely on the basis of merit and qualifications, applicable to all employees.
Any appointment, promotion, transfer, demotion, suspension, dismissal, or
disciplinary action shall be carried out in accordance with the merit personnel
system.
§ 703.   Personnel Code.
Within six months of the effective date of this Charter and as a part of the
Reading City Code, City Council shall enact and from time to time may amend a
Personnel Code for all City employees.9 It shall be the goal of the Personnel
Code to provide for merit selection for all applicable positions; establish
well-defined job descriptions with salaries to be reviewed on a regular basis;
provide for fair and objective annual employee evaluations; provide equal
access to employee training; promotion from within the career service; and
ensure payment on an equal worth basis. The Personnel Code shall include, but
not be limited to, the following:
   (a)   Classification of all City positions based on the duties, authority
and responsibility of each position with adequate provisions for
reclassification of any position when needed;
   (b)   Well-defined job descriptions for all City positions;
   (c)   Well-defined provisions for salary, fringe benefits such as sick and
vacation leave, holidays, overtime and salary administration, including a
uniform pay plan for all City positions;
   (d)   Procedures concerning the substance, procedure, and enforcement of a
merit personnel system, including fair and objective annual employee
evaluations;
   (e)   Procedures for the recruitment, selection, training, and development
of personnel, based solely on merit and qualifications;
   (f)   Procedures for advancement based on merit and qualifications with
emphasis on promotion from within the career service;
   (g)   Procedures concerning the discipline and discharge of personnel,
including reduction in force;
   (h)   Procedures providing for in-house training programs for personnel;
   (i)   Procedures for those holding provisional appointments;
   (j)   Procedures establishing grievance procedures, with final hearings on
such grievance to be held by the Mayor or Managing Director;
   (k)   Procedures governing relationship with employee organizations; and
   (l)   Any other procedures necessary for the administration of personnel.
9.   Editor's Note: See Ch. 70, Personnel.
§ 704.   Collective bargaining agreements.
No personnel procedures or policies established under the provisions of this
Charter shall conflict with acts of the General Assembly providing for
collective bargaining and labor agreement administration. Nothing in this
Charter or any ordinances passed by City Council shall interfere with any
lawful collective bargaining agreement entered into between the City and
representatives of its employees.
§ 705.   Compensation of heads of departments, offices and agencies.
The compensation of all heads of departments, offices and agencies under the
direction of the Mayor shall be proposed by the Mayor and approved by
ordinance. Compensation of all other employees shall be set in accordance with
the uniform pay plan established by City Council in the Personnel Code. [The
Residency requirement for the Managing Director and Department Directors was
eliminated by the electorate via referendum at the November 10, 2020 General
Election.]
§ 706.   Political activity.
All employees are prohibited from engaging in any form of political activity
during regular work hours and are prohibited from using City facilities or
property for any political activity. Violation of this section will warrant
discharge or other discipline under the provisions of the Personnel Code.
§ 707. Department of Human Resources.
[Amended at the May 2010 Primary Election to combine the Human Resources and
Finance Departments into the Department of Administrative Services8] [Approved
by Charter Referendum at the June 2, 2020 Primary Election. This amendment
separates the Department of Administrative Services into Finance and Human
Resources Departments]
There shall be a Department of Human Resources. A director of the Department of
Human Resources shall be appointed by the Mayor. The Director of Human
Resources shall be responsible for administering the Department of Human
Resources and administering the personnel system on the merit principles
described in this Charter and promulgated by City Council as a part of the
Personnel Code or otherwise. The Director of Human Resources shall coordinate
and oversee the hiring, training, assignment, re-assignment, rotation,
performance evaluation, and discharge of all employees.
8.   Editor's Note: Approved by referendum in May 2010 to combine the
Departments of Finance (previously § 607 of the Home Rule Charter) and Human
Resources (previously § 705 of the Home Rule Charter) into a Department of
Administrative Services.
ARTICLE VIII
City Solicitor
§ 801.   Qualifications and responsibilities.
   (a)   The Mayor shall appoint, with the approval of Council, a Solicitor who
shall be a member of the Bar of the Supreme Court of Pennsylvania and
experienced in municipal law. The Solicitor, as Head of the Legal Department,
shall serve as chief legal advisor to the Mayor, the Council, and all City
departments and agencies; and shall represent the City in all legal proceedings
and shall perform such other duties prescribed by law, by this Charter, by the
City Administrative Code or action of Council. It is the intent of this Charter
that only one person shall be the legal advisor of the City except as may be
otherwise required by law.
   (b)   The Mayor, with the approval of Council, shall have the power, if
needed, to engage other temporary Solicitors to represent the City as the need
may be. Such appointments shall be temporary and shall be for the purpose of
representing the City in specific individual legal matters. Such representation
shall be secured by requests for proposal.
ARTICLE IX
Financial Procedures
§ 901.   Fiscal year.
The fiscal year of the City shall be the calendar year. If not prohibited by
law, the Council may, by ordinance, adopt a different fiscal year, specifying
an orderly procedure for financial and budgetary controls in making such
transition.
§ 902.   Submission of balanced budget and capital program. [Amended at the
November 2007 General Election]
On or before 90 days prior to the ensuing fiscal year, the department heads
will submit proposed budget and capital program to the Managing Director. On or
before 90 days prior to the ensuing fiscal year, the Mayor will submit to the
City Council a balanced budget, capital program, and an accompanying message.
The proposed balanced budget and capital program shall be in such form as the
Mayor deems desirable, unless otherwise required by Council.
§ 903.   Budget message.
The Budget shall be accompanied by a message which shall include:
   (a)   An explanation of the expenditures and revenues in the proposed
budget, indicating and explaining major changes from the current year and the
prior year.
   (b)   An outline of proposed programs and an explanation of new, expanded,
or abolished programs or functions.
   (c)   A summary of the City's debt position.
   (d)   Such other material that will inform the Council and the public of
municipal goals.
§ 904.   Budget.
The budget shall provide a complete financial plan of all City funds and
activities for the ensuing fiscal year in accordance with all generally
accepted accounting principles and, except as required by this Charter, shall
be in such form as the Mayor deems desirable or the Council may require. In
organizing the budget, the Mayor shall utilize the most feasible combination of
expenditure classification by fund, organization unit, program, purpose or
activity, and object. The budget shall contain, among other things, the
following:
   (a)   It shall begin with a general summary of its contents.
   (b)   It shall show in detail all estimated income, indicating the existing
and proposed tax levies, as well as other assessments, fees and charges.
   (c)   It shall show all proposed expenditures, including debt service, for
the ensuing fiscal year.
   (d)   It shall detail the number, salary, and benefits of proposed employees
in every job classification. This detail shall be delivered to City Council in
a form acceptable to be included in the Annual Position Ordinance adopted in
unison with the Budget Ordinance. It is expressly understood the Annual
Position Ordinance must be amended prior to actual hiring of City personnel
exceeding that authorized by the current Annual Position Ordinance. [Amended at
the November 2014 General Election]
   (e)   It shall be so arranged as to show comparative figures for actual and
estimated income and expenditures for the current fiscal year and actual income
and expenditures of the preceding four fiscal years.
   (f)   It shall indicate proposed expenditures during the ensuing fiscal
year, detailed by offices, departments and agencies, in terms of their
respective work programs and the methods of financing such expenditures.
   (g)   It shall indicate proposed capital expenditures during the ensuing
fiscal year, detailed by office, departments and agencies when practicable, and
the proposed method of financing each such capital expenditure. The Mayor will
include this separate capital program section in the annual budget and submit
to Council with appropriate supporting information as to the necessity for such
programs.
   (h)   It shall indicate anticipated net surplus or deficit for the ensuing
fiscal year of each utility owned or operated by the City and the proposed
method of its disposition; subsidiary budgets for each such utility giving
detailed income and expenditure information shall be attached as appendices to
the budget.
The total of proposed expenditures shall not exceed the total of estimated
income.
§ 905.   City Council action on budget.
   (a)   Notice and hearing. Council shall publish in one or more newspapers of
general circulation in the municipality the general summary of the budget with
a notice stating:
      (1)   The times and places where copies of the budget message and budget
document are available for inspection by the public.
      (2)   The time, place, and date, not less than 15 days or more than 30
days after such publication, for a public hearing on the budget. The public
hearing shall not be on the date of a regular Council meeting.
      (3)   The proposed budget shall be available for public inspection at
City Hall and copies shall be available for the public at a reasonable fee to
be set by the Council.
   (b)   Amendment before adoption. After the public hearing, the City Council
may adopt the budget with or without amendment. In amending the budget, it may
add or increase programs or amounts and may delete or decrease any programs or
amounts, except expenditures required by law or for debt service or for an
estimated cash deficit, provided that no amendment to the budget shall increase
the authorized expenditures to an amount greater than total estimated income
and thereby allowing for line item changes by the City Council.
If the amended budget increases, decreases, or readjusts funding requirements
by more than 5%, or adds or deletes a program, the budget shall be returned to
the Mayor immediately for comment and resubmission to the Council within three
normal City workdays. Council shall provide for another public hearing to be
held within five days after the Mayor has resubmitted the budget.
   (c)   Adoption. Council must adopt an annual budget by no later than
December 15 of the fiscal year currently ending. If Council fails to adopt a
budget by December 15th, then the Mayor's original proposed balanced budget
shall become the official budget of the City for the ensuing fiscal year.
§ 906.   Revised budget.
Notwithstanding any other provisions of this article, when the fiscal year of
the City is the calendar year, in any year following a municipal election year,
the Council may, within 45 days after the start of the fiscal year, revise the
budget and tax levies adopted by the previous Council. The procedures for
adopting a revised budget shall be in accordance with §§ 905, 906, with the
time periods adjusted to 45 days after the start of the fiscal year. Ordinances
adopting a revised budget shall be effective as of the start of the fiscal year
and shall rescind and replace the budget ordinance of the previous Council. It
is the intent of this Charter that a new Council, in the year following a
municipal election, shall have the power to revise the budget and tax levies
adopted by the previous Council.
§ 907.   (Reserved)
§ 908.   Amendments after adoption.
   (a)   Emergency appropriations may be made by the Council to meet a public
emergency posing a sudden, clear and present danger to life or property. Such
appropriations may be made by emergency ordinance in accordance with the
provisions of §
220 of this Charter.
   (b)   Supplemental appropriations may be made by the Council by ordinance
upon certification by the Mayor that there are available for appropriation
revenues in excess of those estimated in the budget.
   (c)   Transfer of appropriations shall be made in accordance with the
provisions of §
215.
[Amended at the November 2014 General Election]
§ 909.   Lapse of appropriation.
Every appropriation, except an appropriation for a capital expenditure, shall
lapse at the close of the fiscal year to the extent that it has not been
expended or encumbered.
§ 910.   Administration of the budget and capital program.
The Mayor shall be responsible for and with the assistance of the Managing
Director shall supervise the administration of the annual and capital budgets.
§ 911.   Capital program.
   (a)   Submission to City Council. The Mayor shall prepare and submit to the
City Council a five-year capital program no later than the final date for
submission of the budget.
   (b)   Contents of capital program. The capital program shall include:
      (1)   A clear general summary of its contents;
      (2)   A list of all capital improvements and other capital expenditures
which are proposed to be undertaken during the five fiscal years next ensuing,
with appropriate supporting information as to the necessity for each;
      (3)   Cost estimates and recommended time schedules for each improvement
of other capital expenditure;
      (4)   Method of financing, upon which each capital expenditure is to be
reliant;
      (5)   The estimated annual cost of operating and maintaining the
facilities to be constructed or acquired; and
      (6)   All capital projects must be included in the Capital Program
Budget.
The above shall be revised and extended each year with regard to capital
improvements still pending or in process of construction or acquisition.
   (c)   Financing capital projects. Bonds required for Financing Capital
Projects shall be secured by competitive bidding.
   (d)   Capital projects approved. Proposed capital projects in the capital
programs must be considered on their own individual merits by the Finance
Director, the City Auditor, and the proposer of the project. The procedures to
approve the individual capital projects are:
      (1)   Preliminary feasibility study. The capital project preliminary
feasibility study shall include:
         (i)   A clear general summary of its purpose and justification.
         (ii)   The cost estimates and time schedule for the capital project
including the cost of the post-project completion audit.
         (iii)   The method of financing and sources upon which this capital
project is reliant.
         (iv)   The annual cost of operating and maintaining the project to be
constructed or acquired.
The Council approval of capital projects in this preliminary feasibility study
will require a simple majority vote in order to move on to a final approval and
funding acceptance.
      (2)   Final proposal and financing. The final capital project proposal
and financing shall include:
         (i)   A clear general summary of its purpose and justification.
         (ii)   The cost estimates and time schedule for the capital project
including the cost of the post-project completion audit.
         (iii)   The method of financing and sources upon which this capital
project is reliant.
         (iv)   The annual cost of operating and maintaining the project to be
constructed or acquired.
         (v)   This final capital project proposal will be published and made
available for the public to review (Use Notice and Hearing Notice, §
912). Capital project replaces capital program. The final Council approval of
capital projects will require five votes to approve.
      (3)   Capital project reporting.
         (a)   Current projects. All capital projects in process must be
reported on a quarterly basis and provide an update on cost, completion date,
and estimated revised operating costs. This information is to be supplied by
the Finance Director and the project manager to the City Council in such a form
that it is available to the public.
         (b)   Extended projects. If commencement of a capital project does not
begin by end of the fiscal year following the year in which final approval is
obtained, the project must go through §
911(d)(1) and (2).
      (4)   Post-project completion audit. Following completion of the capital
project, a complete and detailed audit must be published and made available to
the public. This post audit is to be completed by an independent auditor
appointed by the Council. The purpose of the post audit is to confirm the
estimates of costs and explain any deviation between actual and estimated
costs.
§ 912.   City Council action on capital program.
   (a)   Notice and hearing. Council shall publish in one or more newspapers of
general circulation in the municipality the general summary of the capital
program with a notice stating:
       (1)   The times and places where copies of the capital program message
and capital program document are available for inspection by the public.
      (2)   The time, place, and date, not less than 15 days or more than 30
days after such publication, for a public hearing on the capital program.
      (3)   The proposed capital program shall be available for public
inspection at City Hall and copies shall be available for the public at a
reasonable fee to be set by the Council.
   (b)   Adoption. Council must adopt an annual capital program by no later
than December 15th of the fiscal year currently ending. If Council fails to
adopt a capital program by December 15th, then the Mayor’s original capital
program shall become the official capital program of the City for the ensuing
fiscal year.
§ 913.   Public records.
Copies of the budget, capital program and appropriation and revenue ordinances
shall be public records and shall be made available to the public at suitable
places in the City.
§ 914.   Independent audit.
The Council shall provide for an annual independent audit to be completed and
submitted to the Mayor within 180 days of the close of the fiscal year. It
shall include City receipts, expenditures, accounts and reports by a
Pennsylvania Certified Public Accountant or a Certified Public Accounting firm,
experienced in municipal finance, having no personal interest, direct or
indirect, in the fiscal affairs of the City or any of its elected or appointed
personnel. The Council may provide for more frequent audits at its discretion.
Within 30 days of completion, the Mayor shall present to the Council the
results of the annual audit and a financial statement of the fiscal affairs of
the City, with the results of the independent auditor's survey of internal
control and any recommendations thereon. The evaluation of the internal control
shall take the form of a management letter. This management letter shall be
submitted to the City Council after every audit. A summary of the annual audit
of the independent auditor shall be published at least once in one or more
newspapers of general circulation in the City within 30 days after submission
to the Mayor. The annual audit shall be conducted in accordance with generally
accepted auditing standards. The financial report shall be prepared in
accordance with generally accepted accounting principles, and shall include a
balance sheet for each fund, and on a consolidated fund basis reflecting all
current assets, current liabilities and fund balances. The Council shall
designate such accountant or firm annually or for a period not exceeding three
years.
§ 915.   Bidding process.
   (a)   Whenever the estimated cost of any construction, erection,
installation, completion, alteration, repair of, or addition to, any project
subject to the control of the City shall exceed $10,000, it shall be the duty
of the City to have such work performed pursuant to a contract awarded to the
lowest responsible bidder [subject to Subsection (d)], after advertisement for
bids. Every such contract shall contain a provision obligating the contractor
to the prompt payment of all material furnished, labor supplied or performed,
rental for equipment employed, and services rendered by public utilities in or
in connection with the prosecution of the work, whether or not the said
material, labor, equipment or service enter into and become component parts of
the work or improvement contemplated. Such provision shall be deemed to be
included for the benefit of every person, copartnership, association or
corporation who, as subcontractor or otherwise, has furnished material,
supplied or performed labor, rented equipment or services in or in connection
with the prosecution of the work as aforesaid, and the inclusion thereof in any
contract shall preclude the filing by any such person, copartnership,
association or corporation of any mechanics' lien claim for such material,
labor or rental of equipment.
   (b)   Whenever the estimated costs of any purchase of supplies, materials or
equipment or the rental of any equipment, whether or not the same is to be used
in connection with the construction, erection, installation, completion,
alteration, repair of, or addition to, any project subject to the control of
the City, shall exceed $10,000, it shall be the duty of the City to have such
purchase or rental made pursuant to a contract awarded to the lowest
responsible bidder [subject to Subsection (d)], after advertisement for bids,
such advertisement to be inserted in a newspaper of general circulation in
Berks County.
      (1)   The City shall not evade the provisions of Subsection (a) or (b) as
to advertising for bids by purchasing materials or contracting for services
piecemeal for the purpose of obtaining prices under $10,000 upon transactions
which should, in the exercise of reasonable discretion and prudence, be
conducted as one transaction amounting to more than $10,000. This provision is
intended to make unlawful the practice of evading advertising requirements by
making a series of purchases or contracts, each for less than the advertising
requirement price, or by making several simultaneous purchases or contracts,
each below said price, when, in either case, the transactions involved should
have been made as one transaction for one price.
      (2)   Written or telephonic price quotations from at least three
qualified and responsible contractors shall be requested for all contracts that
exceed $4,000 but are less than the amount requiring advertisement and
competitive bidding or, in lieu of price quotations, a memorandum shall be kept
on file showing that fewer than three qualified contractors exist in the market
area within which it is practicable to obtain quotations. A written record of
telephonic price quotations shall be made and shall contain at least the date
of the quotation, the name of the contractor and the contractor's
representative, the construction, reconstruction, repair, maintenance or work
which was the subject of the quotation and the price. Written price quotations
and written records of telephonic price quotations and memoranda shall be
retained for a period of three years.
   (c)   The City shall require as a condition of the award of any contract,
pursuant to Subsection (a) or (b) of this section, that the contractor give to
the City any bond or letter of credit (including bonds for the performance of
the contract, and for the prompt payment by the contractor for material,
supplies, labor, services and equipment) which are prescribed by law for
contracts awarded by cities of the third class.
   (d)   Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in this section.
City Council may, in those cases where an individual or company with
headquarters in the City submits a bid which is within 10% of the lowest bid,
award the contract to said individual or company. In acting pursuant to this
provision, City Council shall find that such an award will be in the best
interests of the citizens of the City. The City Council must show just cause
for the awarding of such contracts to locally owned companies who provide local
labor, materials or produced goods.
   (e)   All contracts shall be on file in the office of the City Auditor and
shall be available for public inspection during normal business hours.
ARTICLE X
Boards and Commissions 10
10.    Editor's Note: See Ch. 23, Boards, Commissions, Committees and Councils.
§ 1001.    Establishment.
   (a)   By ordinance.
      (i)   City Council shall encourage the participation of citizens in their
government through the establishment of boards and commissions to carry out
City business. Such boards and commissions shall be established by ordinance
including a clear statement of whether they shall be advisory in nature or they
shall have power and authority under City ordinance or state or federal code.
      (ii)   City Council may not change the powers or authority of any board
or commission except by ordinance.
      (iii)   City Council may by ordinance abolish any board or commission not
established by state or federal mandate or by this Charter.
§ 1002.    Membership.
   (a)   Appointments. City Council shall approve all appointments for each
board and commission. Broad citizen participation shall be encouraged in
recruiting appointees and making appointments. No appointee of any board or
commission shall hold any other elected public office or any compensated
position for the City.
   (b)   Vacancies. Any vacancy caused by death or resignation shall be filled
promptly pursuant to the procedure set forth in §
309(b). The person so appointed shall serve for the unexpired term of the
person vacating such position.
   (c)   Qualifications. As a general rule, members of boards and commissions
shall be residents of the City. At the discretion of Council, persons not
residents of the City, but who have a significant property or business interest
in the City, may be selected to serve. No person may concurrently serve on more
than one authority, board, or commission.
ARTICLE XI
Citizen's Rights and Participation 11
11.    Editor's Note: See also
Ch. 51, Initiative and Referendum.
§ 1101.    General provisions.
The Council shall protect and promote the right of the citizens of the City of
Reading to participate in a positive and constructive manner in the government
of the City. Any citizen of the City may participate in the government of the
City by:
   (a)   Seeking elective office of the City as prescribed by this Charter and
voting for candidates for elective office;
   (b)   Serving on boards, commissions, authorities or other agencies of the
City government when requested by the appropriate officials;
   (c)   Attending and being heard at public meetings of the Council and other
boards, commissions, authorities and agencies of the City government;
   (d)   Addressing suggestions to the Council and others to provide guidance
for their actions;
   (e)   Exercising the right of initiative, referendum, and recall of elected
officials as provided in this Charter or as otherwise may be provided by law.
§ 1102.    Initiation of ordinances by electors.
   (a)   Submission. Except as provided in Section 1102(b), a proposed
ordinance may be submitted to Council by a petition signed by the electors of
the City and considered by Council in accordance with the same terms,
conditions and procedure set forth in Title 11 Pa.C.S. Sections 11031 - 11041,
as amended.
   (b)   Exclusions. The following proposed ordinances may not be submitted by
petition to council in accordance with this subchapter:
      (1)   A proposed ordinance:
         (i)   Expressly required to be enacted by the general laws of this
Commonwealth including, but not limited to, those set forth in 53 Pa.C.S. §
2962, as amended;
         (ii)   Expressly required to be enacted by the provisions of any act
of the General Assembly;
         (iii)   That contains provisions and matters which are subject to the
approval of an officer or tribunal of the Commonwealth;
         (iv)   That provides for Tax levies or fees;
         (v)   That provides for and other appropriations;
         (vi)   That provides for the exercise of the right of eminent domain;
         (vii)   That provides for the preservation of the public peace,
health, morals and safety;
         (viii)   That provides for the exercise of the police powers of the
city government;
         (ix)   That provides for the prevention and abatement of nuisances;
         (x)   That provides for an election to increase indebtedness and any
other ordinance which by law must be submitted to an election before it shall
take effect;
         (xi)   That provides for the opening, paving, grading or other
improvement of streets or highways if the improvement is petitioned for by a
majority, in number or interest, of the abutting property owners;
         (xii)   That provides for the construction of sewers; or
         (xiii)   That provides for streets, highways and sidewalks to be kept
in:
            (A)   Good order and repair.
            (B)   In a safe and passable condition.
         (2)   Proposed ordinances to repeal, amend or modify an ordinance
which took effect after having been subject to the provisions of the referendum
for reconsideration of the ordinance.
         (3)   Proposed ordinances to amend the City's Home Rule Charter.
   (c)   Petition and notice. If the city clerk receives a written request for
the preparation of a petition for the submission of a proposed ordinance to
council by at least 100 qualified electors of the city and the request is
accompanied by a copy of the proposed ordinance, within 10 days of receipt the
city clerk shall do each of the following:
      (1)   Prepare the requested petition.
      (2)   Publish notice at least once in a newspaper of general circulation
that provides at least the following information:
         (i)   The date on which the request for the petition was received and
that the petition will be ready for signing at the expiration of 10 days from
that date.
         (ii)   The purpose for which the petition is made.
         (iii)   The place at which and the dates and times during which the
petition may be signed, with 15 business days being allowed for signatures.
   (d)   Signing and oath.
      (1)   Petition. A petition for the submission of a proposed ordinance
shall be signed in the city clerk's office. Petitions can also be signed by
completing and returning the form that will be posted on the City's website at
readingpa.gov to the City Clerk's Office according to the terms provided
herein. The petition shall be retained in the city clerk's office at all times
for a period of 15 days. Each signer shall:
         (i)   Add to the signer's signature the signer's address.
         (ii)   Make oath before the city clerk that the signer is a qualified
elector of the city and resides at the address given.
      (2)   Hours. The city clerk shall keep the city clerk's office open, at a
minimum, from 9 a.m. through 7 p.m. Monday through Friday, except holidays, for
the purpose of permitting electors to sign the petition. The city clerk shall
not permit an individual to sign the petition after 7 p.m. on the last day for
signing the petition.
   (e)   Number of signatures, examination and certificate by city clerk.
      (1)   Signatures. Within 10 days after the period of time for signing the
petition has elapsed, the city clerk shall:
         (a)   Examine the petition.
         (b)   Ascertain whether or not the petition is signed by electors of
the city, equal in number to at least 20% of the entire votes cast by
registered electors for all candidates for mayor at the last preceding
municipal election at which a mayor was elected.
      (2)   Employees. If necessary, council may allow the city clerk
additional help for the purpose of complying with this section.
      (3)   Results. The city clerk shall attach to the petition the clerk's
certificate showing the result of the examination.
      (4)   Failure. If less than the required 20% under subsection (a)(2) is
certified, the petition shall fail and shall be filed in the office of the city
clerk.
   (f)   Submission to council. If the petition is certified to contain
signatures as required in section 1102(e) (relating to number of signatures,
examination and certificate by city clerk), the city clerk shall submit the
petition to council without delay.
   (g)   Actions by council and notices. If the petition accompanying the
proposed ordinance is signed by electors of the city as required in section
1102(e) (relating to number of signatures, examination and certificate by city
clerk), council shall do one of the following:
      (1)   Enact the proposed ordinance without alteration within 20 days,
except as otherwise provided in this chapter, after attachment of the city
clerk's certificate to the accompanying petition.
      (2)   Call for a referendum to be held at the time of the next general,
municipal or primary election occurring at least 90 days thereafter, at which
election the proposed ordinance must be submitted, without alteration, to the
electors of the city for a vote, after attachment of the city clerk's
certificate to the accompanying petition. Notice of the election and the text
of the question to be submitted to the electors shall be published in the same
manner as publication is required in section 1201 of the Pennsylvania Election
Code.
   (h)   Form of ballot on submission to vote. The question to be submitted to
the electors on the proposed ordinance shall be framed to state the nature of
the proposed ordinance, followed by the words "yes" and "no". The question
shall be placed on the ballot which shall be counted, returned and computed in
accordance with section 11062 (relating to computing and filing returns) and
the election laws of this Commonwealth.
   (i)   Effect of majority vote. If the majority of the qualified electors
voting on the proposed ordinance vote in favor of the ordinance, the ordinance
shall become a valid and binding ordinance of the city.
   (j)   No repeal within two years. An ordinance proposed by petition, whether
enacted by councilor adopted by a vote of the electors, shall not be repealed
or amended within two years of the effective date except by a vote of the
electors.
   (k)   Number of proposed ordinances to be submitted and elections limited.
Any number of proposed ordinances may be voted upon at the same election, in
accordance with the provisions of this subchapter. Proposed ordinances on the
same subject matter shall not be submitted by petition more frequently than
once every three years.
   (l)   Submission for repeal by council. Council may submit a proposition for
the repeal or amendment of an ordinance to be voted upon at a succeeding
municipal, general or primary election occurring at least 90 days after
council's submission of the proposition. Should the submitted proposition
receive a majority of the votes cast on the proposition at the election, the
ordinance shall be repealed or amended accordingly.
   (m)   Publication of proposed ordinance, repeal or amendment. Whenever a
proposed ordinance is to be submitted to the electors of the city at an
election or an ordinance is submitted by council for repeal or amendment,
notice of the election and text of the question to be submitted to the electors
shall be published in the same manner as publication is required in section
1201 of the Pennsylvania Election Code.
§ 1103.    Reconsidering ordinances by electors.
   (a)   Timing. Except as provided in subsection 1103(b), an ordinance enacted
by council may not go into effect before 10 days from the time of the
ordinance's final enactment by council as per Charter Sections
219,
220 and
221.
   (b)   Immediate enactment. The following may be made effective upon final
enactment:
      (1)   An ordinance:
         (i)   Expressly required to be enacted by the general laws of this
Commonwealth.
         (ii)   Expressly required to be enacted by the provisions of any act
of the General Assembly.
         (iii)   That contains provisions and matters which are subject to the
approval of an officer or tribunal of the Commonwealth.
      (2)   An ordinance or resolution where permitted providing for any of the
following:
         (i)   Tax levies or fees.
         (ii)   Annual and other appropriations.
         (iii)   The exercise of the right of eminent domain.
      (3)   An ordinance providing for any of the following:
         (i)   The preservation of the public peace, health, morals and safety.
         (ii)   The exercise of the police powers of the city government.
         (iii)   The prevention and abatement of nuisances.
      (4)   An ordinance providing for an election to increase indebtedness and
any other ordinance which by law must be submitted to an election before it
shall take effect.
      (5)   An ordinance providing for the opening, paving, grading or other
improvement of streets or highways if the improvement is petitioned for by a
majority, in number or interest, of the abutting property owners.
      (6)   An ordinance providing for either:
         (i)   the construction of sewers; or
         (ii)   streets, highways and sidewalks to be kept in:
            (A)   Good order and repair.
            (B)   In a safe and passable condition.
   (c)   Petition and reconsideration of ordinance. With the exception of an
ordinance dealing with the subjects set forth in section 1103(b) (relating to
time ordinances go into effect), an ordinance shall be suspended from going
into operation and shall be reconsidered by council if all of the following
occur:
      (1)   A petition is presented to council:
         (i)   within 10 days after the ordinance's final enactment;
         (ii)   in accordance with this subchapter; and
         (iii)   which protests against enactment of the ordinance.
      (2)   The petition must be signed by electors as required in section
1102(e) (relating to number of signatures, examination and certificate by city
clerk).
   (d)   Preparation of petition by city clerk and notice.
      (1)   Petition. A petition under section 11051 (relating to petition and
reconsideration of ordinance) shall be prepared by the city clerk immediately
upon receipt by the clerk of the written request of 100 qualified electors of
the city asking that the petition be prepared. Upon preparation of the
petition, the clerk shall give notice by publication in a newspaper of general
circulation:
         (i)   That the petition is ready for signing.
         (ii)   The purpose of the petition.
         (iii)   The place and time when the petition may be signed.
      (2)   Signing. The signing shall be done only in the city clerk's office
where the petition shall be retained during the period of 10 days after the
enactment of the ordinance. Petitions can also be signed by completing and
returning the form that will be posted on the City's website at readingpa.gov
to the City Clerk's Office according to the terms provided herein.
   (e)   Additional petitions.
      (1)   Petitions. In order to facilitate the signing of the petition, the
city clerk shall make at least two additional similar petitions for signing by
the qualified electors. Signing an additional similar petition shall have the
same force and effect as signing the original petition. The city clerk is
authorized to employ at least two individuals to take charge of the additional
petitions.
      (2)   Employees. The city clerk and employees hired under this section
are empowered to administer the oath required to be taken by the electors. This
section also shall apply to petitions initiating ordinances under
1102 (relating to initiating ordinances by electors).
   (f)   Signatures, oath and time of signing.
      (1)   Signers. Each signer of a petition under section 1103 (relating to
petition and reconsideration of ordinance) shall also do all the following:
         (i)   Include the signer's address.
         (ii)   Make an oath before the city clerk or other person authorized
under section 1102(d) (relating to additional petitions) that the signer:
            (A)   Is a qualified elector of the city.
            (B)   Resides at the address given.
      (2)   Office hours. The city clerk shall keep the city clerk's office
open, at a minimum, from 9 a.m. through 7 p.m. Monday through Friday, except
holidays, for the purpose of receiving signatures to the petitions. The city
clerk shall not permit an individual to sign a petition after 7 p.m. of the
tenth day following the enactment of the ordinance on which the referendum vote
is requested.
   (g)   Presentation of petition to council. At the expiration of 10 days, the
petition shall be filed with council and presented by the city clerk at
council's next meeting.
   (h)   Ascertainment of number of signers and report. After presentation of
the petition to council, the city clerk shall ascertain whether or not the
referendum petition is signed by a number of registered electors equal to 20%
of all the votes cast for all candidates for mayor at the last preceding
municipal election at which a mayor was elected. Council may allow the clerk
additional help for that purpose. After the clerk has made the examination, the
clerk shall report the result to council.
   (i)   Effect of petition and submission to electors.
      (1)   Petition lacking signatures. If it appears that the petition under
this subchapter has not been signed by the required number of electors, no
action shall be taken. The ordinance shall be taken to be in full force from
the time or times it would have gone into effect had there been no petition
against the ordinance.
      (2)   Reconsideration. Council must reconsider an ordinance if the
petition is signed by a number of electors equal to 20% of all the votes cast
for mayor. If the ordinance is not entirely repealed by council on
reconsideration, council must call a referendum to be held at the time of the
next general, municipal or primary election occurring at least 60 days after
the reconsideration.
      (3)   Submission. At the election, the ordinance shall be submitted
without alteration in accordance with the Pennsylvania Election Code.
   (j)   Certification to county board of elections, ballots or ballot labels
and expense of elections.
      (1)   Certification. The city clerk, after consultation with the city
solicitor, shall certify to the county board of elections a copy of the
ordinance and the proceedings of council directing the referendum vote. The
county board of elections shall cause the question to be printed for use in the
election districts of the city.
      (2)   Preparation. The preparation of ballots or ballot labels for and
the holding of a referendum shall be conducted in the manner as provided in the
Pennsylvania Election Code.
      (3)   Number. Any number of ordinances may be referred and voted on at
the same election.
   (k)   Form of ballot or ballot label. The ballot used when voting on the
ordinance shall contain a question stating the nature of the referred ordinance
followed by the words "yes" and "no" and shall be conducted in the manner as
provided in the Pennsylvania Election Code.
   (l)   Computing and filing returns.
      (1)   Computing. An officer holding an election shall keep a tally sheet
and make a return of votes on the referendum question in the same manner as a
tally sheet is kept and a return is made in an election of officers and the
submission of other questions as provided by the Pennsylvania Election Code.
      (2)   Filing. A return shall be filed with the county board of elections
which shall compute the return and certify the results to council. The return
and certification of a referendum question shall be conducted in the manner as
provided in the Pennsylvania Election Code.
   (m)   Effect of vote. If a majority of the electors vote in favor of the
ordinance, the ordinance shall take effect when the results of the election are
certified by council. If a majority of the electors vote against the ordinance,
the ordinance shall be nullified.
   (n)   Publication of ordinance before election. Before any referendum is
held on any ordinance in accordance with this subchapter, the city shall
provide notice of the ordinance by publishing a copy of the ordinance in a
newspaper of general circulation. Publication in accordance with this section
shall be in addition to the publication requirements of the Pennsylvania
Election Code.
§ 1104.    (Reserved)
§ 1105.    (Reserved)
§ 1106.    (Reserved)
§ 1107.    (Reserved)
§ 1108.    (Reserved)
§ 1109.    (Reserved)
§ 1110.    (Reserved)11A
11A.   Editor’s Note: The repeal of former § 1110, Recall of elected officials,
was approved by referendum at the November 2021 General Election.
§ 1111.   Citizens right to place an item of the City Council agenda.
   (a)   The qualified voters of the City of Reading, upon receipt of a
petition by the City Clerk, may enter one agenda item on the regular agenda of
City Council.
   (b)   The petition filed with the City Clerk must contain the signatures and
addresses of 35 duly qualified voters of the City and the item to be placed on
the agenda of City Council for discussion/consideration before Council. Upon
receipt of such petition and a two-day review/certification period of the
petition by the City Clerk, the President of City Council must include the item
on the agenda at the next regularly scheduled meeting of City Council.
§ 1112.   Citizens rights to call a special meeting of City Council.
   (a)   The qualified voters of the City of Reading, upon filing a signed
petition with the City Clerk, may require the City Council to hold a special
meeting.
   (b)   The petition filed with the City Clerk must contain the signatures and
addresses of 200 duly qualified voters of the City and the purpose for which
the meeting is being called. Upon receipt of such petition and a two-day
review/certification period of the petition by the City Clerk, the President of
City Council must convene the special meeting on an evening within 14 days of
the certification.
   (c)   The public notification process will adhere to the special meetings
provisions of this Charter.
§ 1113.   Council submission for initiative of certain proposals. [Added at the
November 2014 General Election]
Wherever there is a proposal to sell, lease or enter into a concession
agreement, for a period longer than 10 years, other than to or with a municipal
authority created by the City, with respect to any City asset or combination of
assets with a market value that is, or may be, in excess of $10,000,000,
Council shall submit the proposal to citizen initiative at the next election
legally possible.
ARTICLE XII
General Provisions
§ 1201.   Conflict of interest and Code of Ethics.
   (a)   Conflicts of interest. The use of public office for private gain is
prohibited. No elected official, officer, or employee shall (i) act in an
official capacity on matters in which the employee or official has a private
financial interest clearly separate from that of the general public; (ii)
accept gifts and other things of value in return for a favorable decision or
vote. In all cases, gifts received must be publicly recorded and submitted to
the City Clerk specifying the date received, the name and address of the donor,
and the value of the gift; (iii) act in a private capacity on matters dealt
with as a public official or employee; (iv) use confidential information for
personal gain; and (v) appear before City departments, offices, and agencies on
behalf of private interests.
   (b)   Code of Ethics.12 As a part of the Administrative Code, City Council
shall adopt and enact a City Code of Ethics within one year of the effective
date of this Charter which shall apply to all elected officials, officers, and
employees. The Code of Ethics shall adopt regulations implementing the conflict
of interest provision set forth above, shall provide for reasonable public
disclosure of finances by officials with major decisionmaking authority over
monetary expenditures and contractual matters, and insofar as permissible under
state law, provide for fines and imprisonment for violations.
   (c)   Board of Ethics. The Mayor, with the approval of City Council, shall
establish an independent Board of Ethics consisting of five City residents
holding terms of three years, to administer and enforce the conflict of
interest provision §
1201 of this Charter and the prohibition sections of this Charter. No member of
the Board may hold elective or City office under the City or any other
government or hold any political party office. Insofar as possible under state
law, the Mayor shall authorize the Board to issue binding opinions, conduct
investigations on its own initiative and on referral or complaint, refer cases
for prosecution, impose administrative fines, and to consult with independent
counsel. City Council shall appropriate sufficient funds to the Board of Ethics
to enable it to perform the duties assigned to it. Members of the Board of
Ethics may be removed by the Mayor with the consent of City Council.
12.   Editor's Note: See Ch. 5, Part 10, Code of Ethics.
§ 1202.   Prohibitions.
   (a)   Activities prohibited.
      (i)   No person shall willfully make any false statement, certificate,
mark, rating, or report in regard to any test, certification, or appointment
under the provisions of this Charter or the rules and regulations made
thereunder, or in any manner commit or attempt to commit any fraud preventing
the impartial execution of such provisions, rules, and regulations.
      (ii)   No person who seeks appointment or promotion to any City position
or appointive City administrative office shall directly or indirectly give,
render, or pay any money, service, or other valuable thing to any person for or
in connection with his or her test, appointment, proposed appointment,
promotion, or proposed promotion.
      (iii)   No elected City official shall knowingly or willfully solicit or
assist in soliciting any assessment, subscription, or contribution for any
political party or political purpose to be used in conjunction with any City
election from any City employee.
   (b)   Penalties. Any person found in violation of this section by the Board
of Ethics and confirmed by Council shall be ineligible for a period of five
years following such decision to hold any City office or position, and if an
officer or employee of the City, such person shall immediately forfeit his or
her office or position. City Council shall establish by ordinance such further
penalties as it may deem appropriate.
§ 1203.   Review of Charter. [Amended at the November 2014 General Election]
At least every five years, but no sooner than every three years, City Council
and the Mayor shall appoint a Charter Review Commission composed of 11 members.
To avoid conflict of interest, no elected City official or employee shall serve
on the Charter Review Commission. Nothing herein shall preclude such officials
from attending or participating in the actions of the Commission. Seven members
of this Commission shall be appointed by City Council and four members shall be
appointed by the Mayor. All appointees shall be current residents and
registered voters of the City. The Charter Review Commission shall review the
current Charter, submit a report to the City Council, the Mayor, and the
citizens of the City, within six months of its appointment, and recommend any
proposed amendments to the Charter. City Council and the Mayor, by ordinance,
shall place all proposed amendments on the ballot no later than the next
municipal election. City Council shall provide appropriations for the
reasonable expenses incurred by the Charter Review Commission.
§ 1204.   Amendments. 13
[Amended at the 2021 General Election]
The Charter shall be amended by:
   (a)   The citizens of the City through the Berks County Board of Elections
and the process defined in State Statute Title 53, Subpart E Home Rule and
Optional Plan, Chapter 29;
   (b)   City Council through the enactment of an ordinance to refer referenda
to the Berks County Board of Elections; or
   (c)   Proposed amendments by a Charter Review Commission being placed on the
ballot in accordance with §
1203 of this Charter.
13.    Editor’s Note: For the timing of placing Charter Amendments on the
ballot see Section 2943 of the Home Rule Charter and Optional Plans Law:
   (a)   Filing. -- A petition containing a proposal for referendum on the
question of amending a home rule charter or an optional plan of government
signed by electors comprising 10% of the number of electors voting for the
office of Governor in the last gubernatorial general election in the
municipality or an ordinance of the municipal governing body proposing
amendment of a home rule charter or an optional plan shall be filed with the
election officials not later than the 13th Tuesday prior to the next primary,
municipal or general election. The petition and the proceedings therein shall
be in the manner and subject to the provisions of the election laws which
relate to the signing, filing and adjudication of nomination petitions insofar
as such provisions are applicable, except that no referendum petition shall be
signed or circulated prior to the 20th Tuesday before the election nor later
than the 13th Tuesday before the election. The name and address of the person
filing the petition shall be clearly stated on the petition.
ARTICLE XIII
Transition
§ 1301.   Purpose of article.
The purposes of this article are to establish an orderly procedure for the
transition to the new form of government provided by this Charter. The
provisions of this article address the transition from the existing form of
government to the form of government established by this Charter. Where
inconsistent with the preceding articles of this Charter, the provisions of
this article shall constitute temporary exceptions.
§ 1302.   Effective date.
This Charter shall be submitted to the voters at the general election of 1993,
and if adopted, shall take effect on the first Monday of January 1996. However,
to the extent necessary to comply with the other provisions of this article
governing the period between the date of adoption and the effective date of
this Charter, this Charter shall be implemented upon the date of adoption.
§ 1303.   Initial elections.
   (a)   1995 election. The following elected officials shall be nominated at
the primary election in May 1995 and shall be elected at the municipal election
in November 1995 for the following terms:
      (i)   One Mayor, for a term of four years; and
      (ii)   Five members of City Council as follows: The at-large President of
Council shall be elected for a two-year term. Of the four members elected by
district, the three members shall serve for an initial term of four years, and
one member shall serve for an initial term of two years. The districts to be
represented in this election will be determined by the Transition Committee.
The two carryover Council members from the previous term shall fulfill the term
of their office. Commencing at the succeeding municipal election and at all
subsequent elections, all Council members shall be elected for four-year terms.
   (b)   Vacancy. If any of the elected offices becomes vacant between the time
this Charter is effective and January 1, 1998, such vacancy shall be filled as
provided for in this Charter.
§ 1304.   Initial salaries of elected officials.
The members of City Council elected at the municipal election of 1995 shall be
initially compensated at the annual salaries set forth in Article II. These
salaries of elected officials shall continue until changed in accordance with
this Charter.
§ 1305.   Continuation of boards and commissions.
All boards and commissions established for or under the authority of the City
before the effective date of this Charter shall continue to exist and operate
unless abolished by this Charter or by ordinance of City Council. Members of
the boards and commissions existing on the effective date of this Charter and
not abolished by its provisions shall remain in office for as long as their
respective terms continue or until the status of their respective boards or
commissions shall be altered by City Council. Vacancies in the membership of
such boards and commissions shall be filled in accordance with this Charter.
§ 1306.   Specific transfer of functions.
The duties, functions, and powers assigned by law and not inconsistent with
this Charter are hereby transferred to City Council or to the Mayor or Managing
Director in accordance with this Charter. If a department, office or agency is
abolished by this Charter, its functions, powers, and duties shall be
transferred to the department, office or agency designated by the Charter or,
if the Charter makes no such provision, as designated by ordinance. All
departments, offices and agencies shall continue until abolished or modified.
§ 1307.   Personnel.
   (a)   Charter effect on employees. Nothing in this Charter, except as
otherwise specifically provided, shall affect or impair the rights or
privileges of individuals who are employees of the City on the effective date
of this Charter as to salary, tenure, residency, retirement, or pension
benefits; employments; leave with pay; or other personal rights. Nothing in
this Charter shall diminish the rights and privileges of any former employees
in their pension or retirement benefits.
   (b)   Exemption from competitive tests. Any employee holding a position with
the City at the time this Charter takes effect who is serving in the same or
comparable position at the time of its adoption shall not be subject to
competitive tests as a condition for continuance in the same position, but in
all respects shall be subject to the personnel system provided for in this
Charter.
   (c)   Personnel action. Until approval by City Council of the Personnel Code
required by §
703, the Mayor, in consultation with the Managing Director, shall have the
power to establish by written directive a personnel system for all employees.
All appointments and promotions, except additions to the exempt service, shall
be made on the basis of merit and fitness. All personnel actions shall be in
accordance with the provisions of a personnel system established by such
written directive. Copies of all such directives shall be forwarded by the
Mayor to City Council within 24 hours after being issued.
§ 1308.   1996 budget.
The City Council in office in 1995 shall prepare and adopt in 1995 the budget
for 1996, complying insofar as possible with the provisions of this Charter.
This shall in no way limit the power of City Council taking office on the first
Monday of January 1996 to revise the 1996 budget as authorized by law and by
this Charter.
§ 1309.   Legal continuity.
   (a)   City laws. All City ordinances, resolutions, rules, and regulations
which are in force on the effective date of this Charter, not inconsistent with
the provisions of this Charter, shall continue in force until amended or
repealed.
   (b)   Legal actions. All rights, claims, actions, orders, contracts, and
legal or administrative proceedings involving the City shall continue except as
modified pursuant to the provisions of this Charter.
   (c)   Property, records, and equipment. All property, records, and equipment
of any agency existing on the effective date of this Charter shall be
transferred to the agency assuming its powers and duties; but in the event that
the powers and duties are to be discontinued or divided between agencies, or in
the event that any conflict arises regarding a transfer, such property,
records, or equipment shall be transferred to one or more agencies designated
by City Council in accordance with this Charter.
§ 1310.   Temporary ordinances.
In order to effect the transition of government under this Charter, City
Council shall have the power to enact temporary ordinances. A temporary
ordinance may be introduced and passed at any regular meeting of City Council
during the three-month period following the effective date of this Charter. It
shall become effective immediately after passage and shall automatically stand
repealed at the end of six months after the effective date of this Charter. A
temporary ordinance shall not be renewed or otherwise continued except as in
the manner prescribed by this Charter for the regular consideration and
adoption of ordinances.
§ 1311.   Mandatory acts.
Within six months after the effective date of this Charter, City Council and
the Mayor or Managing Director shall adopt or enact the codes mandated by §§
601,
703,
902 and
1002 of this Charter.
§ 1312.   Council districts.
   (a)   From the date of adoption of this Charter until changed otherwise, the
districts are comprised as follows, and one member of the City Council shall be
elected from each district:
      (1)   District 1.
         1st Ward
         2nd Ward — 1st precinct
         4th Ward
         5th Ward
         18th Ward
      (2)   District 2.
         2nd Ward — 2nd precinct
         3rd Ward — 1st precinct
         10th Ward
         16th Ward
         9th Ward — 5th precinct
      (3)   District 3.
         3rd Ward — 2nd precinct
         8th Ward
         9th Ward — 2nd precinct
         11th Ward
         17th Ward — 3rd and 5th precincts
      (4)   District 4.
         13th Ward
         17th Ward
      (5)   District 5.
         14th Ward — 6th precinct
         15th Ward
         19th Ward
      (6)   District 6.
         6th Ward
         7th Ward
         12th Ward — 1st precinct
         14th Ward — 1st, 4th and 5th precincts
   (b)   The boundaries of the existing Council districts, created in 1993 by
the Charter Commission, as recommended by the Redistricting Committee, are
amended as follows:14
      (1)   District 1.
         (i)   1st Ward — 1st precinct.
         (ii)   2nd Ward — 1st precinct.
         (iii)   3rd Ward — 1st precinct.
         (iv)   5th Ward - 1st precinct.
         (v)   18th Ward - 1st, 2nd, 3rd and 4th precincts.
      (2)   District 2.
         (i)   3rd Ward — 2nd precinct.
         (ii)   8th Ward — 1st precinct.
         (iii)   10th Ward — 1st precinct.
         (iv)   16th Ward — 1st, 2nd, 4th and 5th precincts.
      (3)   District 3.
         (i)   9th Ward — 2nd and 5th precincts.
         (ii)   11th Ward — 2nd and 3rd precincts.
         (iii)   12th Ward — 1st, 3rd and 5th precincts.
         (iv)   13th Ward — 1st precinct.
      (4)   District 4.
         (i)   13th Ward — 2nd and 5th precincts.
         (ii)   17th Ward — 1st, 2nd, 5th, 7th and 8th precincts.
      (5)   District 5.
         (i)   14th Ward — 6th precinct.
         (ii)   15th Ward — 1st, 2nd, 6th and 7th precincts.
         (iii)   19th Ward — 1st and 2nd precincts.
      (6)   District 6.
          (i)   4th Ward - 1st precinct.
         (ii)   6th Ward - 1st and 3rd precincts.
         (iii)   7th Ward - 1st precinct.
         (iv)   14th Ward - 1st, 4th and 5th precincts.
14.   Editor's Note: The subsection was enacted pursuant to Ord. No. 3-2012,
adopted 1-23-2012. See §
5-215, Council districts, of the City Code.
§ 1313.   Transition Committee.
   (a)   Establishment and powers. On or before January 1, 1995, there shall be
a Transition Committee established consisting of 11 persons to facilitate the
transition from the existing form of government to the form of government
established by this Charter. The Transition Committee may draft necessary
ordinances, rules, and regulations, including the Administrative, Fiscal and
Personnel Codes in order that they may be adopted on or after the effective
date of this Charter.
   (b)   Membership. The Transition Committee shall include:
      (i)   The current Mayor;
      (ii)   One member of current City Council;
      (iii)   Three members of the Reading City Government Study Commission,
said members to be selected by the Chairperson of the Commission; and
      (iv)   Three staff employees of the City of Reading, including one from
personnel and one from finance, such employees to be selected by the Mayor.
      (v)   Three qualified voters of the City, said individuals to be
appointed by current City Council.
   (c)   Vacancies. Any vacancy on the Transition Committee shall be filled by
a majority of the remaining members of the Transition Committee.
   (d)   Compensation. The Transition Committee shall serve without
compensation but shall be reimbursed for legitimate expenses.
Charter Amendments Approved by Referendum
November 2002 — Creating the Charter Board and affirming the supremacy of the
Charter (see Ch. 23, Part 6, Charter Board; see Amendment I to the Charter).
November 2007 — Adding the definition of "Residency" to §
105(d) and amending §
902 by changing the submission date of the budget from 60 days prior to the
ensuing fiscal year (November 1) to 90 days prior to the ensuing fiscal year
(October 1).
November 2008 — Eliminating the link between the salary of the Mayor and
Auditor, by removing the requirement for the Auditor’s salary to be increased
when the Mayor’s salary is increased (§
502).
May 2010 — Combining the Departments of Finance and Human Resources and calling
it the Department of Administrative Services. Also replacing all references to
the Director of Finance and Director of Human Resources with Director of
Administrative Services in the City of Reading Home Rule Charter (§§
607 and
705).
November 2014 — Deleting the requirement that the City Auditor be a CPA with a
minimum of five years’ experience in business administration, accounting,
management or municipal government (§
502).
November 2014— Requiring appointment of a Charter Review Commission at least
every five years but no sooner than every three years and prohibiting City
officials or employees from serving on the Commission (§
1203).
November 2014 — Providing authority to the Mayor to issue administrative
regulation and procedure [§§
215,
601,
602 and
908(c)].
November 2014 — Removing duplicative language and clarifying the relationship
between the Mayor and the Managing Director (§§
308 and
406).
November 2014 — Requiring an amendment to the annual position ordinance to
authorize hiring of City personnel when such hiring exceeds the authorized
number of employees [§
904(d)].
November 2014 –– Adding a new section for Council submission for initiative of
certain proposals (§
1113).
June 2020 — Amending Home Rule Charter Section
503 to provide the elected City Auditor with the ability to hire their
employees, as fixed by the annual budget.
June 2020 — Amending Home Rule Charter Section
225 of the Reading City Charter to provide City Council with the ability to
hire their employees, as fixed by the annual budget.
June 2020 — Amending Home Rule Charter Section
226 of the Reading City Charter to provide City Council with the ability to
appoint their own Solicitor, as fixed by the annual budget.
June 2020 — Amending Home Rule Charter Section
607 to eliminate the Department of Administrative Services and adding a
separate Department of Finance and adding Section 707 to include a separate
Department of Human Resources.
June 2020 — Amending Home Rule Charter Section
104 to provide term limits prohibiting City Council members, City Council
President, the Mayor, and the Auditor from serving more than two consecutive
four-year terms.
November 2020 — Amending Home Rule Charter Section
705 to eliminate the residency requirement for the heads of its departments,
offices, and agencies.
November 2020 — Amending Home Rule Charter Section
705 to eliminate the residency requirement for the Managing Director.
July 2021 — Amending Home Rule Charter to eliminate recall of elected officials
Section
1110.
July 2021 — Amending Home Rule Charter Section
1204 to correct the manner in which the Charter may be amended.
March 2022 — Amending Council Districts in Section
1312 as recommended by the Redistricting Advisory Commission.
May 2022 — Amending Home Rule Charter to eliminate Section
907 Appropriation and Revenue due to the limitations imposed on Home Rule
Municipalities.
November 2022 — Amending Home Rule Charter Section
912 by allowing the capital budget public hearing to be held on the same date
as the operating budget public hearing.
November 2022 — Amending Home Rule Charter by amending Sections
1102 and
1103 and repealing and reserving Sections
1104 through
1109.
November 2023 — Amending Home Rule Charter by amending Section
606 and eliminating the requirement for the City’s Public Works Director to be
an engineer.
Enforcement of Charter
Section 1. Supremacy of Charter
a.) Governing law of the City. This Charter is the governing law of the City of
Reading. No action or inaction by City Council, the Administration, or any
other body created by this Charter shall be taken contrary to it, whether
individually or collectively, by ordinance, resolution, practice, executive
order or decision, or any other means. The wording of the Charter, and acts
pursuant to it, shall in all cases be strictly construed so as to effectuate
its clear intent.
b.) Required orientation for elected officials. Every elected City official, at
the commencement of his or her initial full term of office, shall be required
to satisfactorily complete a basic orientation on Home Rule Law, the Charter,
the Administrative Code, and the Ethics Code. Such course shall be directed and
administered by the Charter Board, with assistance from the Pennsylvania DCED,
the Bar Association, the Ethics Board, and any other resources the Charter
Board deems appropriate. City Council shall provide sufficient funds to ensure
a thorough and professional orientation. Any elected official who, in the
determination of the Charter Board, completes this course within four months of
the commencement of their initial full term will receive a bonus of $250.
Section 2. Charter Board. 1
a.) Composition. Within three months of the effective date of this Amendment
City Council, by ordinance, shall establish an independent Charter Board
consisting of five members who shall be City residents. Members shall be
appointed by the Mayor with the consent of Council and shall hold five-year
terms, with the exception of 4 of the 5 original appointees who shall hold
terms of one, two, three, and four years respectively. No member of the Board
may hold elective or appointed office under the City or any other government,
any compensated position for the City, or hold any political office.
b.) Jurisdiction. The Charter Board shall hear and decide all cases alleging
violations of the Charter or Administrative Code, except that its jurisdiction
shall not extend to any case arising under the Ethics Code or the Personnel
Code. Insofar as permitted by state law the Board shall issue binding opinions,
impose penalties and administrative fines, refer cases for prosecution, and
conduct investigations on its own initiative and on referral or complaint. City
Council shall appropriate sufficient funds to enable the Board to perform the
duties assigned to it, including expenses for independent counsel and other
necessary staff
The Charter Board shall, in addition, be responsible on an ongoing basis for
educating the public and members of City government as to their rights, duties,
and obligations under the Charter and Administrative Code.
c.) Process. Within 12 months of the effective date of this Amendment City
Council shall, by ordinance, adopt regulations implementing this Section. Such
ordinance shall provide penalties and other enforcement mechanisms, as well as
procedures by which the Charter Board shall operate in accordance with Local
Agency and other applicable law.
Any taxpayer, or any aggrieved person, may file a complaint with the Charter
Board alleging a violation of the Charter or Administrative Code. The Board
shall commence proceedings within 30 days of receipt of a complaint, but shall
first attempt informal resolution either through the Administration or Council,
as may be appropriate to the case. The Board shall issue a final decision no
later than eight months from receipt of a complaint.
From the time of its appointment until the first Monday of January, 2004 the
Charter Board shall, with the assistance of the Transition Committee, draft its
implementing ordinance and educate itself and others as to the Charter and
Administrative Code, but it shall not receive, hear, or decide any cases within
its jurisdiction.
Section 3. Costs of Charter Enforcement
Any person who prevails in any legal action against the City, its officers, or
agents to enforce this Charter or the Administrative and Ethics Codes pursuant
to it, shall be entitled to recover all reasonable attorneys’ fees and costs
incurred in such action.
Section 4. Transition Committee and Effective Date
a.) Transition Committee. No later than the first Monday of January, 2003 there
shall be established a Transition Committee of 11 members, three of whom shall
be appointed by the current Mayor, three by the current City Council, and five
by the chairman of the Charter Review Commission from among its members. City
Council shall provide appropriations for the reasonable expenses of the
Transition Committee. The Transition Committee shall: (1) educate the public
and members of City government as
to the changes required by this Amendment, (2) together with the Charter Board,
prepare for the initial educational course for elected officials to be
conducted in the beginning of year 2004, and (3) together with the Charter
Board, draft the implementing ordinances required by Section 2 of this
Amendment.
If Amendment II, entitled “Mayor and City Manager”, is approved at the same
time as this Amendment, the Transition Committees established by both
Amendments shall be the same body.
b.) Effective date. The effective date of this Amendment shall be the first
Monday of January, 2003, except for the provisions of this Section which shall
become effective upon adoption.
1   Editor’s Note: Refer to Ch. 23, Part 6, Charter Board, for current
legislation regarding the Charter Board.
Chapter 1
GENERAL PROVISIONS
Part 1
Adoption of Code
§
1-101.   Approval, adoption and enactment of Code.
§
1-102.   Effect of Code on previous provisions.
§
1-103.   Repeal of legislation not contained in Code.
§
1-104.   Legislation saved from repeal; matters not affected by repeal.
§
1-105.   Inclusion of new legislation prior to adoption of Code.
§
1-106.   Nonsubstantive changes.
§
1-107.   Interpretation of provisions.
§
1-108.   Titles and headings; editor's notes.
§
1-109.   Filing of copy of Code.
§
1-110.   Amendments to Code.
§
1-111.   Code books to be kept up-todate.
§
1-112.   Publication of notices.
§
1-113.   Altering or tampering with Code; penalties for violation.
§
1-114.   Severability.
§
1-115.   Effective date.
Part 2
Amendments During Codification
§
1-201.   Amendments to ordinances made during codification.
[HISTORY: Adopted by the City Council of the City of Reading as indicated in
part histories. Amendments noted where applicable.]
Part 1
Adoption of Code
[Adopted 8-26-2013 by Ord. No. 36-2013]
§ 1-101. Approval, adoption and enactment of Code.
Pursuant to 11 Pa.C.S. § 11018.15, the codification of a complete body of
legislation for the City of Reading, County of Berks, Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania, as revised, codified and consolidated into titles, chapters and
sections by General Code, and consisting of Chapters 1 through 600, together
with an Appendix, are hereby approved, adopted, ordained and enacted as a
single ordinance of the City of Reading, which shall be known and is hereby
designated as the "Code of the City of Reading," hereinafter referred to as the
"Code."
§ 1-102. Effect of Code on previous provisions.
The provisions of this Code, insofar as they are substantively the same as
those of ordinances and resolutions in force immediately prior to the enactment
of this ordinance, are intended as a continuation of such ordinances and
resolutions and not as new enactments, and the effectiveness of such provisions
shall date from the date of adoption of the prior ordinance or resolution. All
such provisions are hereby continued in full force and effect and are hereby
reaffirmed as to their adoption by the City Council of the City of Reading, and
it is the intention of said City Council that each such provision contained
within the Code is hereby reenacted and reaffirmed as it appears in said Code.
Only such provisions of former ordinances as are omitted from this Code shall
be deemed repealed or abrogated by the provisions of §
1-103 below, and only new or changed provisions, as described in §
1-106 below, shall be deemed to be enacted from the effective date of this
Code, as provided in §
1-115 below.
§ 1-103. Repeal of legislation not contained in Code.
   A.   All ordinances or parts of ordinances of a general and permanent nature
adopted by the City of Reading and in force on the date of the adoption of this
Code and not contained in the Code are hereby repealed as of the effective date
given in §
1-115 below, except as hereinafter provided. Included in such repealed
legislation is the 2001 Code of Ordinances.
   B.   The following items from the 2001 Code of Ordinances are specifically
repealed:
      (1)   Ch. 1, Part J, Building Inspector Civil Service Board, and Part K,
Recreation Committee.
      (2)   Ch. 3, Bicycle Regulations.
      (3)   Ch. 5, Part 10, Citizens Inspection Program.
      (4)   Ch. 7, Part 2, Space Heaters.
      (5)   Chapter 10, Part 13, City Outdoor Air Policy.
      (6)   Ch. 13, Part 5, Food Vending Machines and Businesses, Part 6, Milk
and Milk Products, Part 7, Frozen Desserts, Part 8, Meat and Meat Products,
Part 9, Poultry, and Part 11, Ambulances.
      (7)   Chapter 23, Swimming Pools, Part 1, Private Swimming Pools.
§ 1-104. Legislation saved from repeal; matters not affected by repeal.
The adoption of this Code and the repeal of ordinances provided for in §
1-103 of this ordinance shall not affect the following ordinances, rights and
obligations, which are hereby expressly saved from repeal; provided, however,
that the repeal of ordinances pursuant to §
1-103 or the saving from repeal of ordinances pursuant to this section shall
not be construed so as to revive any ordinance previously repealed, superseded
or no longer of any effect:
   A.   Any ordinance adopted subsequent to December 17, 2012.
   B.   Any right or liability established, accrued or incurred under any
legislative provision of the City prior to the effective date of this ordinance
or any action or proceeding brought for the enforcement of such right or
liability or any cause of action acquired or existing.
   C.   Any offense or act committed or done before the effective date of this
ordinance in violation of any legislative provision of the City or any penalty,
punishment or forfeiture which may result therefrom.
   D.   Any prosecution, indictment, action, suit or other proceeding pending
or any judgment rendered prior to the effective date of this ordinance, brought
pursuant to any legislative provision of the City.
   E.   Any franchise, license, right, easement or privilege heretofore granted
or conferred by the City or any lawful contract, obligation or agreement.
   F.   Any ordinance appropriating money or transferring funds, promising or
guaranteeing the payment of money or authorizing the issuance and delivery of
any bond of the City or other instruments or evidence of the City's
indebtedness.
   G.   Any ordinance adopting an annual budget or establishing an annual tax
rate.
   H.   Any ordinance providing for the levy, imposition or collection of
special taxes, assessments or charges.
   I.   Any ordinance authorizing the purchase, sale, lease or transfer of
property or acquiring property by acceptance of deed, condemnation or exercise
of eminent domain.
   J.   Any ordinance annexing land to the City.
   K.   Any ordinance providing for or requiring the construction or
reconstruction or opening of sidewalks, curbs and gutters.
   L.   Any ordinance or part of an ordinance providing for laying out,
opening, altering, widening, relocating, straightening, establishing grade,
changing name, improvement, acceptance or vacation of any right-of-way,
easement, street, road, highway, sidewalk, park or other public place or
property or designating various streets as public highways.
   M.   Any ordinance establishing water, sewer or other special purpose
districts and designating the boundaries thereof; providing for a system of
sewers or water supply lines; or providing for the construction, extension,
dedication, acceptance or abandonment of any part of a system of sewers or
water supply lines.
   N.   Any ordinance providing for the making of public improvements.
   O.   Any ordinance providing for the salaries and compensation of officers
and employees of the City or setting the bond of any officer or employee.
   P.   Any ordinance concerning changes and amendments to the Zoning Map.
   Q.   Any ordinance relating to or establishing a pension plan or pension
fund for municipal employees.
   R.   Any ordinance or portion of an ordinance establishing a specific fee
amount for any license, permit or service obtained from the City.
§ 1-105. Inclusion of new legislation prior to adoption of Code.
All ordinances and resolutions of a general and permanent nature adopted
subsequent to the date given in §
1-104A and/or prior to the date of adoption of this ordinance are hereby deemed
to be a part of the Code and shall, upon being printed, be included therein.
Attested copies of all such ordinances and resolutions shall be temporarily
placed in the Code until printed supplements are included.
§ 1-106. Nonsubstantive changes.
In compiling and preparing the ordinances and resolutions of the city for
adoption and revision as part of the Code, certain nonsubstantive grammatical
and style changes were made in one or more of said ordinances and resolutions.
It is the intention of the City Council that all such changes be adopted as
part of the Code as if the ordinances and resolutions so changed had been
previously formally amended to read as such.
§ 1-107. Interpretation of provisions.
In interpreting and applying the provisions of the Code, they shall be held to
be the minimum requirements for the promotion of the public health, safety,
comfort, convenience and general welfare. Where the provisions of the Code
impose greater restrictions or requirements than those of any statute, other
ordinance, resolution or regulation, the provisions of the Code shall control.
Where the provisions of any statute, other ordinance, resolution or regulation
impose greater restrictions or requirements, the provisions of such statute,
other ordinance, resolution or regulation shall control.
§ 1-108. Titles and headings; editor's notes.
   A.   Chapter and article titles, headings and titles of sections and other
divisions in the Code or in supplements made to the Code are inserted in the
Code and may be inserted in supplements to the Code for the convenience of
persons using the Code and are not part of the legislation.
   B.   Editor's notes indicating sources of sections, giving other information
or referring to the statutes or to other parts of the Code are inserted in the
Code and may be inserted in supplements to the Code for the convenience of
persons using the Code and are not part of the legislation.
§ 1-109. Filing of copy of Code.
At least one copy of the Code in a post-bound volume shall be filed with the
Ordinance Book in the office of the City Clerk and shall remain there for use
and examination by the public. Upon adoption, such copy or copies shall be
certified to by the City Clerk, as provided by law, and such certified copy or
copies shall remain on file in the office of the City Clerk, available to
persons desiring to examine the same during all times while said Code is in
effect.
§ 1-110. Amendments to Code.
Any and all additions, deletions, amendments or supplements to the Code, when
passed and adopted in such form as to indicate the intention of the City
Council to be a part thereof, shall be deemed to be incorporated into such Code
so that reference to the Code shall be understood and intended to include such
changes. Whenever such additions, deletions, amendments or supplements to the
Code shall be adopted, they shall thereafter be printed and, as provided
hereunder, inserted in the post-bound book containing said Code as amendments
and supplements thereto.
§ 1-111. Code books to be kept up-to-date.
It shall be the duty of the City Clerk or someone authorized and directed by
him or her to keep up-to-date the certified copy or copies of the book
containing the Code required to be filed in the office of the City Clerk for
the use of the public. All changes in said Code and all legislation adopted by
the City Council subsequent to the effective date of this codification which
the City Council shall adopt specifically as part of the Code shall, when
finally adopted, be included therein by reference until such changes or new
legislation are printed as supplements to said Code books, at which time such
supplements shall be inserted therein.
§ 1-112. Publication of notices.
The City Clerk, pursuant to law, shall cause to be published in the manner
required a notice of the introduction and of the adoption of the Code in a
newspaper of general circulation in the City. The enactment and application of
this ordinance, coupled with the publication of the notices of introduction and
adoption, as required by law, and the availability of a copy or copies of the
Code for inspection by the public, shall be deemed, held and considered to be
due and legal publication of all provisions of the Code for all purposes.
§ 1-113. Altering or tampering with Code; penalties for violation.
It shall be unlawful for anyone to improperly change or amend, by additions or
deletions, or to alter or tamper with the Code or any part or portion thereof,
in any manner whatsoever, which will cause the law of the City to be
misrepresented thereby. Anyone violating this section of this ordinance shall,
upon conviction thereof, be punished by a fine not exceeding $1,000, plus costs
of prosecution, and, in default of payment thereof, by imprisonment for a term
not exceeding 90 days.
§ 1-114. Severability.
The provisions of this ordinance and of the Code adopted hereby are severable,
and if any clause, sentence, subsection, section, article, chapter or part
thereof shall be adjudged by any court of competent jurisdiction to be illegal,
invalid or unconstitutional, such judgment or decision shall not affect, impair
or invalidate the remainder thereof but shall be confined in its operation and
application to the clause, sentence, subsection, section, article, chapter or
part thereof rendered illegal, invalid or unconstitutional. It is hereby
declared to be the intent of the City Council that this ordinance and the Code
would have been adopted if such illegal, invalid or unconstitutional clause,
sentence, subsection, section, article, chapter or part thereof had not been
included therein.
§ 1-115. Effective date.
This ordinance shall become effective 10 days after its adoption, in accordance
with Sections
219 and
221 of the City of Reading Home Rule Charter.
Part 2
Amendments During Codification
[Adopted 8-26-2013 by Ord. No. 35-2013]
§ 1-201. Amendments to ordinances made during codification.
In conjunction with the adoption of the Code of the City of Reading, Berks
County, Pennsylvania, 2013 ("Code"), the City Council determined that certain
sections and subsections of the Code of the City of Reading required amendment.
These substantive changes and revisions as set forth in Schedule A attached
hereto and made a part hereof are hereby made to various ordinances included in
the Code.1 All such changes and revisions shall be deemed to be in effect as of
the effective date of the Code Adoption Ordinance.
1.   Editor's Note: In accordance with §
1-201, the chapters, parts and sections which were added, amended, adopted or
deleted by this ordinance are indicated throughout the Code by a footnote
referring to
Chapter 1, General Provisions, Part 2. During routine supplementation,
footnotes indicating amendments, additions or deletions will be replaced with
the following history: "Amended (added, deleted) 8-26-2013 by Ord. No. 35-
2013." Schedule A, which contains a complete description of all changes, is on
file in the City offices.
Chapter 5
ADMINISTRATIVE CODE
Part 1
Short Title and Definitions.
§
5-101.   Short title.
§
5-102.   Definitions.
Part 2
Council Organization and Procedures.
§
5-201.   Role of Charter.
§
5-202.   General provisions.
§
5-203.   Organization meeting; election of officers.
§
5-204.   Meetings.
§
5-205.   Meetings to be public; electronic recording devices.
§
5-206.   Agenda.
§
5-207.   Conduct of business.
§
5-208.   Rules of procedure.
§
5-209.   Public participation.
§
5-210.   Committees of the Council.
§
5-211.   Official actions of Council.
§
5-212.   Ordinances.
§
5-213.   Independent legal counsel.
§
5-214.   Redistricting process; Redistricting Advisory Commission.
§
5-215.   Council districts.
§
5-216.   Council staff evaluations.
Part 3
Mayor; Chief Executive Officer
§
5-301.   General provisions.
§
5-302.   Power and duties.
§
5-303.   Independent legal counsel.
§
5-304.   Termination of department directors.
Part 4
Managing Director; Chief Administrative Officer
§
5-401.   Power and duties.
Part 5
City Auditor
§
5-501.   General provisions.
§
5-502.   Power and duties.
Part 6
City Clerk
§
5-601.   Duties.
Part 7
City Health Officer
§
5-701.   Duties of City Health Officer.
Part 8
Department Organization
§
5-801.   Administrative organization.
§
5-802.   Organization Charts.
§
5-803.   Department directors.
§
5-804.   Duties.
§
5-805.   Department of Finance.
§
5-806.   Fiscal provisions.
§
5-807.   Budget and Capital Program.
§
5-808.   Reserved.
§
5-809.   Purchasing Policy and Procedure.
§
5-810.   Repository sale bids.
§
5-811.   Department of Public Works.
§
5-812.   Reserved.
§
5-813.   Economic Development Manager.
§
5-814.   Department of Human Resources.
§
5-815.   Department of Police.
§
5-816.   Department of Fire and Rescue Services.
§
5-817.   Department of Law.
§
5-818.   Planning Division of the Department of Community Development.
Part 9
Boards and Commissions
§
5-901.   Membership.
§
5-902.   Organization.
§
5-903.   Boards, commissions and councils.
§
5-904.   Authorities.
Part 10
Code of Ethics
§
5-1001.   Declaration of policy.
§
5-1002.   Board of Ethics.
§
5-1003.   Definitions.
§
5-1004.   Statement of financial interests.
§
5-1005.   Disclosure of confidential information.
§
5-1006.   Prohibited behaviors.
§
5-1007.   Violations and penalties; restitution.
§
5-1008.   Advisory opinions.
§
5-1009.   Complaint and investigation procedure.
§
5-1010.   Confidentiality of Board information.
§
5-1011.   Wrongful use of Board of Ethics.
§
5-1012.   Campaign contributions and reporting requirements.
Exhibit A. Purchasing Policy and Procedures Manual Organization Charts
[HISTORY: Adopted by the City Council of the City of Reading 6-24-1996 by Ord.
No. 17-1996 (Ch. 1, Part 1, of the 2001 Code of Ordinances). Amendments noted
where applicable.]
Part 1
Short Title and Definitions.
§ 5-101. Short title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Administrative Code of the
City of Reading."
§ 5-102. Definitions.
[Amended 4-9-2001 by Ord. No. 9-2001]
   A.   The following words, when used in this chapter, shall, unless the
context clearly indicates otherwise, mean or indicate as follows:
      ADMINISTRATIVE MANUAL — Those documents specifying operational matters of
municipal units including, but not necessarily limited to, descriptions of the
duties and responsibilities of subordinate units, rules, and regulations and
appropriate administrative procedures, records, and reports.
      ADMINISTRATIVE SERVICE — All personnel in those units of the City which
are under the authority of the Managing Director.
      CHARTER — The Home Rule Charter for the City of Reading approved by the
voters of the City of Reading, November 1993.
      CHIEF ADMINISTRATIVE OFFICER — The Managing Director.
      CHIEF EXECUTIVE OFFICER — The Mayor.
      CITY — The City of Reading, Pennsylvania.
      COUNCIL — The City Council of the City of Reading, Pennsylvania.
      HOME RULE LAW — The Home Rule Charter and Optional Plans Law, Act of
1996, December 19, No. 177, §§ 101 et seq. 1
      LAW — All applicable laws of the United States of America and the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
      ORDINANCE — All ordinances of the City of Reading, including this
Administrative Code.
      PERSON — Any individual, partnership, association or corporation.
      PRESIDENT — The President of Council.
      PUBLISH — To print in a newspaper of general circulation in the City the
entire document or a brief summary thereof with a listing of places where
copies have been filed and times when they are available for public inspection.
This may include exposure on local TV stations.
      RESIDENCE — Domicile, a person's legal home; that place where a person
has his true, fixed and permanent home or principal establishment, and to which
whenever he has been absent he has the intention of returning. If an employee
fails to establish his or her permanent residence as defined in this Part by
the time specified, his or her employment within the City of Reading is
terminated as of that date.
      THIRD CLASS CITY CODE - Act 67, 11 Pa.C.S. §§ 10101 et seq.2
      UNIT — All official components of the City government.
   B.   In this Part, the singular shall include the plural and the plural
shall include the singular.
1.   Editor's Note: See 53 Pa.C.S. § 2901 et seq.
2.   Editor's Note: See 11 Pa.C.S. §§ 10101 et seq.
Part 2
Council Organization and Procedures.
§ 5-201. Role of Charter.
The role of the Charter in interpreting this Administrative Code shall be as
follows: In the event there is any inconsistency or conflict in the Charter and
the provisions of this Administrative Code, the provisions of the Charter shall
take precedence.
§ 5-202. General provisions. 
[Amended 1-24-2022 by Ord. No. 9-2022; 5-9-2022 by Ord. No. 44- 2022; 2-27-2023
by Ord. No. 21-2023]
The number of Council members, their terms, election and qualifications and the
filling of Council vacancies shall be as provided in the Charter.
As part of the process to qualify to take office, as prescribed by Charter
Section 203, an elected Council member commencing a new term must take and
subscribe the oath of office pursuant to 53 Pa.C.S. § 1141 (relating to form of
oaths of office) at the Council organization meeting or within 14 days of the
date of the Council organization meeting. Failure to take the oath of office
within 14 days of the organization meeting shall result in ineligibility to
qualify to take office and cause the seat to be declared vacant and filled by
Council in accordance with Charter Section 207. Any person appointed to fill a
vacancy and succeed the term of a current Council member, shall take and
subscribe to the oath of office within 14 days of the appointment.
No member of City Council, whether elected or appointed, shall have the use of
a City-owned or leased vehicle or a City-owned gas card. All expenses
associated with required travel for official business, shall be reimbursed to
the Council member via the Standard Mileage Rate set by the Internal Revenue
Service (IRS) and/or reimbursed by following § 5-809 Purchasing Policy and
Procedure, Section 12 Petty Cash procedures.
§ 5-203. Organization meeting; election of officers.
   A.   The organization meeting of the Council shall be the first meeting in
each year following a municipal election. [Amended 10-28-2013 by Ord. No. 52-
2013]
   B.   At the organization meeting following a municipal election, Council
shall elect a Vice President and other such officers as the Council may deem
appropriate to serve a two-year term. [Amended 4-9-2001 by Ord. No. 7-2001]
§ 5-204. Meetings.
[Amended 12-18-2017 by Ord. No. 109-2017]
   A.   Public notice. Provisions governing public notice of meetings shall be
provided by Sunshine Act, 1998, P.L. 729, No. 93 (65 Pa.C.S.A. § 701 et seq.),
as amended. [Amended 8-26-2013 by Ord. No. 35-2013]
   B.   Regular meetings. See Charter, §
212(b).
   Editor's Note: Section 212(b) of the Charter provides:
   (b)   Meetings. Council shall hold a regular meeting at least twice each
month in the evening on a day and place as the Council may prescribe by rule.
   C.   Special meetings. Special meetings may be called by the President of
the Council or upon the written request of a majority of the members of the
Council. A written notice shall be delivered by electronic communications to
each Council member at least 24 hours before a special meeting is held. Such
notice shall specify the time and place of the special meeting and the business
to be transacted. No other business shall be considered at such meeting by the
Council. Special meetings may also be called by citizens’ petition as
referenced in the Charter, §
1112. [Amended 1-27-2014 by Ord. No. 7-2014]
   Editor's Note: Section 1112 of the Charter provides:
   § 1112. Citizens rights to call a special meeting of City Council.
   (a)   The qualified voters of the City of Reading, upon filing a signed
petition with the City Clerk, may require the City Council to hold a special
meeting.
   (b)   The petition filed with the City Clerk must contain the signatures and
addresses of 200 duly qualified voters of the City and the purpose for which
the meeting is being called. Upon receipt of such petition and a two-day
review/certification period of the petition by the City Clerk, the President of
City Council must convene the special meeting on an evening within 14 days of
the certification.
   (c)   The public notification process will adhere to the special meetings
provisions of this charter.
   D.   Emergency meetings. The Mayor may call an emergency meeting of Council
for the purpose of taking action on an emergency by contacting the President or
Vice President of Council who shall then notify the remaining members of
Council about the purpose of the meeting and the time and location of the
meeting. No action shall be taken at the emergency meeting unless a quorum of
Council is present as provided in the Charter. In the event five Council
members determine that the emergency meeting is unnecessary, the meeting shall
not be held. [Amended 1-27-2014 by Ord. No. 7-2014]
   E.   Executive sessions. The Council may hold executive sessions as
permitted by law. No official action shall be taken by the Council on any
matter in executive session as provided for by the Sunshine Act, 1998, P.L.
729, No. 93 (65 Pa.C.S.A. § 701 et seq.), as amended. [Amended 8-26-2013 by
Ord. No. 35-2013]
   F.   In the absence of the President, the Vice President shall exercise the
duties of the President. In the absence of both the President and the Vice
President, the Council shall appoint a President pro-tem who shall have all the
powers of the President.
   G.   In the event a regular or special meeting needs to be postponed because
of a weather emergency or similar circumstances, the Council President may
determine the date and time of the postponed meeting. Reasonable efforts to
fulfill the notice requirements (see Subsections A and C above) shall be made,
but broadcast announcements and telephone calls to members shall be deemed to
meet minimum requirements. [Amended 1-27-2014 by Ord. No. 7-2014]
§ 5-205. Meetings to be public; electronic recording devices.
[Amended 1-23-2012 by Ord. No. 7-2012; 3-12-2012 by Ord. No. 27-2012]
All meetings of the Council shall be open to the public as provided by law and
the Charter, §
212. Those using electronic recording devices, including but not limited to
video cameras, to record meeting in Council Chambers shall stay behind the
podium area in Council Chambers. Those recording meetings in any room other
than the Penn Room shall position themselves or position the recording device
no closer than the entry door to the room where the meeting is being held. No
person may begin recording before the meeting is called to order by the chair
of the meeting, and the recording must be terminated at the time when the
meeting is adjourned.
   Editor's Note: Section 212 of the Charter provides:
   § 212. Procedures.
      (a)   Rules. The Council shall determine its own rules and order of
business.
      (b)   Meetings. Council shall hold a regular meeting at least twice each
month in the evening on a day and place as the Council may prescribe by rule.
      (c)   Special meetings. Special meetings may be held on the call of the
President of Council or at least four members of Council at such time and place
and under such conditions as the Council may prescribe by rule.
      (d)   Meetings open to the public. All meetings shall be open to the
public, except executive sessions as authorized by law. The chambers shall be
arranged in such a way as to have all members of Council facing the public.
      (e)   Voting. All action shall be at a public session; shall require a
majority full vote of Council, except in the case of a vote to override a veto,
which shall require an affirmative vote of five members and in the case of
passage of an ordinance which shall require a majority vote of Council as a
whole unless otherwise specified in this Charter; voting shall be by roll-call
vote, and the vote of each member of the Council shall be entered in the
minutes of the meeting.
      (f)   Journal. The Council shall provide for keeping of a journal of its
proceedings. The journal shall be a public record, and shall be maintained in
City Hall and a copy in the Reading Public Library and the Berks County Law
Library.
§ 5-206. Agenda.
   A.   The proposed agenda for a regular or special meeting of the Council
shall be prepared by the City Clerk in consultation with the President or
committee of Council created for that purpose.
   B.   The proposed agenda for an emergency meeting of the Council shall be
prepared by the City Clerk in consultation with the President.
   C.   The proposed agenda for any regular meetings shall be forwarded to all
members of the Council at least two days prior to the stated meeting and shall
be posted two days prior to the meeting on the City's web site. Sufficient
copies of the agenda must be available prior to the beginning of the meeting.
[Amended 1-22-2007 by Ord. No. 1-2007]
   D.   The title of any ordinance or resolution to be considered shall be
published as part of the agenda.
   E.   The published agenda may be amended at the meeting by a majority of
members present, plus one, immediately after roll call. No matters other than
those on the agenda as amended shall be acted upon by the Council.
§ 5-207. Conduct of business.
[Amended 4-9-2001 by Ord. No. 7-2001; 12-18-2017 by Ord. No. 109-2017; 8-8-2022
by Ord. No. 72-2022]
   A.   At the time appointed for any meeting of the Council, the President
shall take the Chair and call the meeting to order. If a quorum is present, as
provided in the Charter, §
214, the President shall proceed with the order of business prescribed for the
meeting. If, upon the call of the roll, a quorum is not present, the President
shall order a recess for a reasonable period of time and if a quorum has not
developed by that time, the President shall declare the meeting adjourned.
   Editor's Note: Section 214 of the Charter provides:
      § 214. Quorum.
      A quorum of Council shall consist of four Council members.
   B.   The President shall deal firmly with enforcing these rules and the
rules guiding participation including, but not limited to, commotion, frivolous
behavior or delaying debate and motions. The President shall see that Council
debate is confined to the merits of the question and that personal comments
and/or statements are avoided.
   C.   In the absence of the President, the Vice President shall serve as the
presiding officer. If both the President and Vice President are absent, the
meeting shall not be called to order unless the President has designated a
member of Council, in writing, to serve as the pro tem and presiding officer of
that session.
   D.   No legislative or special legislative session of the Reading City
Council shall be called to order and conducted in the absence of the Council
Solicitor or its designee including either a staff attorney from its firm or
the City Solicitor or a staff attorney from the City's Law Department to
provide proper legal advice and avoid possible serious or potentially
devastating consequences. Either the Council Solicitor, City Solicitor or a
staff attorney from the City's Law Department or Council Solicitor's firm shall
also be required to attend all other working sessions and committee meetings.
§ 5-208. Rules of procedure.
[Amended 4-9-2001 by Ord. No. 7-2001; 3-8-2010 by Ord. No. 7-2010; 7-26-2021 by
Ord. No. 55-2021]
   A.   The standard reference of Council shall be Robert’s Rules unless not
specifically provided for by the Rules of Procedure herein.
      (1)   Quorum. A quorum of Council shall be four members present for the
conduct of business. Council members participating by telecommunications device
shall be counted to constitute a quorum.
         (a)   The telecommunication device used permits the member or members
of Council not physically present at the meeting to:
            (i)   Speak to and hear the comments and votes, if any, of the
members of Council who are physically present, as well as other members of
Council who may not be physically present and are also using a
telecommunication device to participate in the meeting; and
            (ii)   Speak to and hear the comments of the public who are present
at the meeting.
         (b)   The telecommunication device used permits the members of Council
and the members of the public who are present at the meeting or participating
remotely to speak to and hear the comments and the vote, if any, of the member
or members of Council who are not present at the meeting.
         (c)   Physical absence of a Council member. Council members can choose
to participate remotely for four regular business meetings per year. The
Council President can authorize additional remote participation at regular
business meetings by telecommunication device for one or more of the following
reasons:
            (i)   Illness or disability of the member of Council;
            (ii)   Care for the ill or child in the member's immediate family;
            (iii)   Emergency or inclement weather;
            (iv)   Family or business travel; and
            (v)   Schedule conflicts.
         (d)   There is no limit on Council's ability to participate remotely
in committee meetings, Committee of the Whole (COW) meetings, and other
sessions that are held.
         (e)   Nothing in this subsection shall be construed to limit the
protections and prohibitions contained in any law or regulation relating to the
rights of the disabled.
   B.   Business is conducted by acting on motions. Once a matter has been
moved and seconded, no other matter shall be taken up until the main issue is
disposed of.
      (1)   Rule No. 1. Disclosure of interest. A member who has personal or
private interest in any question, measure, bill proposed or pending before the
Council shall disclose that fact to Council and shall not vote thereon. If such
interested person shall vote without disclosing his interest in such question,
measure or bill, Council may avoid the enactment or transaction or not, as it
deems best.
      (2)   Rule No. 2. Proposed amendments to these rules. Amendments to these
rules must be presented in writing at a nonlegislative meeting of the Council
held at least one week prior to the date when the same are to be finally
considered. Amendments shall be adopted by the affirmative vote of the majority
of all members of Council.
      (3)   Rule No. 3. Suspension of rules. These rules may be suspended by
the affirmative vote of the majority of all members of Council present, but the
suspension shall not extend beyond the adjournment. No rule of Council, which
is also subject of legislative enactment, shall be suspended.
      (4)   Rule No. 4. Legislation.
         (a)   No rule, matter, bill or resolution shall be considered by
Council unless a written memorandum, brief, resolution or bill is delivered to
the City Clerk by 12:00 noon on the Wednesday preceding the meeting where the
matter or legislation is to be considered, introduced or enacted/adopted by
Council. The City Clerk shall furnish to the Mayor and all members of Council
copies of all proposed resolutions and ordinances by posting the agendas on the
website. [Amended 10-28-2013 by Ord. No. 51-2013]
         (b)   Legislation referred to or being considered by a Council
Committee must be returned to the full body of Council for consideration with
either a positive or negative recommendation. If the legislation is not
returned in this manner, any three Council members may request that the full
body, at a regular business meeting, consider the legislation.
      (5)   Rule No. 5. Voting.
         (a)   The vote upon any motion, resolution or ordinance will be taken
by roll call. The City Clerk will clarify by reading aloud the content of the
parliamentary motion, amendment, of the award of contract, ordinance or
resolution before the roll call is taken.
         (b)   The yeas and nays of each Councilperson will be entered into the
minutes. On the call of yeas and nays, no member shall be excused from voting
as such, unless by the consent of the Council and the Solicitor, or if a bona
fide conflict of interest exists as defined in Part 10, Code of Ethics, or
other provisions of general law. Unless a member of Council is so excused or
prevented from voting, the failure to vote shall be recorded as an affirmative
vote.
         (c)   The City Clerk will rotate the order in which the roll is called
after every vote with the exception of amendments to the main question.
      (6)   Rule No. 6. Duties of the presiding officer. The President of
Council shall decide all questions subject to appeal by any two members of
Council and have general supervision of the meeting. He shall determine the
appropriate committee to which legislation and other matters shall be referred.
The President of Council shall be the designated representative of the body and
shall communicate the intentions of Council, with respect to professional
service, contracts, legislative action and other matters, as needed.
      (7)   Rule No. 7. Reconsideration. A motion to reconsider a question
shall be entertained only at the next legislative meeting following the one at
which vote was taken. No second motion to reconsider the same motion shall be
entertained.
      (8)   Rule No. 8. Motions to be entertained.
         (a)   All motions must be moved and seconded. When a question (or main
motion) is under consideration, no motion shall be entertained except for:
            [1]   Adjournment.
            [2]   Previous question (2/3 vote).
            [3]   Lay on the table.
            [4]   To postpone.
            [5]   To commit.
            [6]   To amend.
            [7]   End debate.
            [8]   Call for the question.
         (b)   These questions have preference in the order given. The first
three must be decided without debate. A motion to adjourn is always in order
when the main question has been ordered put, when a member has the floor, or
during a call of the yeas and nays.
         (c)   Motions for the previous questions to postpone or commit shall
preclude amendment or debate upon the original subject. Motion to postpone
shall preclude commitment.
      (9)   Rule No. 9. Rules of debate.
         (a)   Prior to debate, a bill or resolution must be placed on the
table by a first and second motion of the body. The sponsor of the bill or the
referring committee will have the first opportunity to make a statement. After
which, each member of Council shall be entitled to make one statement on the
proposed legislation. President of Council may also invite the Mayor and
Managing Director to comment. All first statements shall be no longer than
three minutes in length.
         (b)   Second statements or comments shall be entertained after each
member present has been given the opportunity to speak one time and shall be no
longer than two minutes in length. In the event no other Council member wishes
to address the issue and no one moves to end debate or call for the question,
debate will be allowed to continue. In general, it is expected that the body
will make their remarks concise and focused on matter or issue proposed.
Amendments or statements not relating to the question shall not be made. All
such matters not relating to agenda items will be entertained after the Council
business portion of the agenda.
         (c)   President of Council or presiding officer may, at his
discretion, choose to limit debate time on each agenda item to 10 minutes, as
stated in Roberts' Rules of Order.
         (d)   Members wishing to speak shall request recognition from the
presiding officer, at which time other Council members shall not engage in
dialogue or interrupt except for the following:
            [1]   Call for the orders of the day (when they are not being
conformed to).
            [2]   Raising a question of privilege.
            [3]   Point of order (calling the member who has the floor to order
or calling his attention to the fact that he is not observing the rules).
            [4]   Call for a separate vote on one or more subjects that are
included in a single motion.
            [5]   Request or inquiry that requires an immediate response.
   C.   The body may override the presiding officer's decision on any
procedural rule through the passage of a motion.
§ 5-209. Public participation.
[Amended 3-23-1998 by Ord. No. 10-1998; 6-24-2002 by Ord. No. 29-2002; 1-26-
2004 by Ord. No. 1-2004; 1-23-2006 by Ord. No. 6-2006; 1-23-2012 by Ord. No. 6-
2012; 4-9-2012 by Ord. No. 43-2012; 8-26-2013 by Ord. No. 35-2013; 1-27-2014 by
Ord. No. 6-2014; 1-27-2016 by Ord. No. 2-2016; 7-26-2021 by Ord. No. 56-2021;
4-24-2023 by Ord. No. 38-2023]
These rules are intended to promote an orderly system of public comment, to
give every person an opportunity to be heard, and to ensure that no individual
is embarrassed by exercising his right of free speech. Public comment is
permitted at the regular meetings of Council which occur on the second and
fourth Mondays of each month and public hearings. Public comment is not
permitted at the City Council work sessions, committee meetings or Committee of
the Whole meetings.
   A.   Regular meetings. Except as otherwise set forth in Section D. below,
citizens desiring to address the Council at its regular meetings may do so by
providing notice verbally or in writing by providing their name, address and
the subject matter to be discussed to the City Clerk any time before 5:00 p.m.
on the day of the scheduled meeting or by printing their name, address and the
subject matter to be discussed on a sign-up sheet found on the podium in
Council Chambers between 5:00 p.m. and 7:00 p.m. on the day of the scheduled
meeting. Citizens may also choose to submit written public comment via letter
or email by sending a letter or email clearly marked “public comment” by 4:00
p.m. on the day of the meeting.
   B.   Special meetings. Except as otherwise set forth in Section D. below,
citizens desiring to address the Council at its special meeting may do so by
providing notice verbally or in writing by providing their name, address and
the subject matter to be discussed to the City Clerk any time before 5:00 p.m.
on the day of the scheduled meeting or by printing their name, address and the
subject matter to be discussed on a sign-up sheet found on the podium in
Council Chambers before the special meeting is called to order. Citizens may
also choose to submit written public comment via letter or email by sending a
letter or email clearly marked “public comment” by 4:00 p.m. on the day of the
meeting.
   C.   Public hearings. Except as otherwise set forth in Section D. below,
citizens desiring to address the Council at a public hearing may do so by
providing notice verbally or in writing by providing their name, address and
the subject matter to be discussed to the City Clerk any time before 5:00 p.m.
on the day of the scheduled hearing. Any person who fails to sign in with the
City Clerk shall not be permitted to speak until all those who signed in have
done so. Those testifying must limit their comments to three minutes. No person
who has previously spoken during the public hearing on a particular item may
speak again unless all other persons desiring to give testimony at the public
hearing have spoken. A person speaking for a second time shall limit his
comments to not more than one minute. Citizens may also choose to submit
written public comment via letter or email by sending a letter or email clearly
marked “public comment” by 4:00 p.m. on the day of the meeting.
   D.   Public Comment Rules for Regular Meetings, Special Meetings and Public
Hearings.
      (1)   Residents and/or taxpayers of the City who wish to make or submit
public comment must preregister utilizing one of three (3) following options:
         (a)   By calling (610-655-6205) or emailing (council@readingpa.gov)
the City Clerk's Office by 4:00 p.m. on the day of the meeting/hearing with
your name, address and the subject matter or topic to be discussed. If you are
not able to attend in-person, instructions to access the virtual meeting/
hearing app or dial-in telephone number will be provided.
         (b)   By submitting written public comment to be read into the record
at the meeting/hearing by submitting an email to council@readingpa.gov by 4:00
p.m. on the day of the meeting/hearing. The email message must clearly be
marked as Public Comment.
         (c)   By registering in-person at the Council Chambers on the sign-up
sheet found on the podium in Council Chambers on the day of the scheduled
meeting/hearing, with your name, address and the subject matter or topic to be
discussed.
      (2)   No person shall be permitted to speak who is not a resident or
taxpayer of the City, except upon permission of the President of Council or a
majority of City Council.
      (3)   Public comment will occur only during the Public Comment period
listed on the meeting/hearing agenda at which time the Presiding Officer will
recognize speakers and written comment that properly registered in the order
received.
      (4)   All public comment shall be delivered from the podium and speakers
may not approach the Council tables at any time.
      (5)   Those individuals registered to speak on agenda matters will be
allotted no more than 5 minutes and those individuals registered to speak on
non-agenda matters will be allotted no more than 3 minutes. The City Clerk will
control a timer to monitor these time periods. When the alarm rings, a speaker
must immediately end their comment. If a speaker refuses to comply, the
microphone at the podium will be turned off and the next speaker will be given
the floor. These time periods also apply to written comments that are being
read into the record such that any written comment may only be read into the
record for a 5-minute period for agenda items and a 3-minute period for non-
agenda items. The President of Council or a majority of Council may grant an
additional period of time in their discretion.
      (6)   No speaker shall register for an "agenda" matter and then utilize
the extra-allotted time for "non-agenda" matters. If a speaker registers for
both "agenda" and "non-agenda" matters, the individual will be allotted no more
than 3 minutes.
      (7)   If anyone is present in a group or association, each such group
should designate a spokesperson to address the City Council on the group's
collective behalf in order to avoid repetitive public comments.
      (8)   Comments posted in Zoom Chat and on Facebook are not considered
public comment and will not be read into the record of the meeting/hearing or
addressed by City Council.
      (9)   All public comment must be directed to Council as a body and not to
any individual Council member or public or elected official in attendance.
Public comment is an opportunity to make a statement only. It is not designed
for questioning and there is no guarantee or requirement for a question
presented during public comment to be answered or responded to.
      (10)   Each speaker shall speak clearly and slowly so that accurate
minutes may be recorded.
      (11)   No speaker shall register or speak more than once at a meeting.
      (12)   A speaker shall not comment in a manner that is disruptive,
scandalous, impertinent, redundant, rude, unruly, personally offensive,
irrelevant to the registered topic, done for the purpose of preventing the
conduct of the business of the meeting or promotion of candidates at an
upcoming election, or otherwise in disregard to the rules of order or decorum.
Any such comment will not be accepted or read into the record.
      (13)   In the event that a speaker or written comment violates any of
these rules, that speaker or written comment will be deemed to have forfeited
their right to public comment and the President of Council or a majority of
City Council may direct the City Clerk to turn off the microphone or cease
reading the comment into the record, recess the meeting/hearing, have the
individual removed from Council Chambers and/or cited.
      (14)   All persons in attendance are expected to conduct themselves in a
responsible and respectful manner that does not disrupt the meeting. Clapping,
calling out, cheering or interrupting speakers or the discussions of City
Council during or after a public comment is not permitted. Those wishing to
have conversations should do so in the hall outside Council Chambers in a low
speaking voice.
§ 5-210. Committees of the Council.
[Amended 4-9-2001 by Ord. No. 7-2001]
   A.   The Council may, at any time, provide for standing or ad-hoc committees
to assist with the carrying out of its functions. Any such committee shall
thereafter report to the Council at the regularly stated meetings of that body.
   B.   Committees of Council may include:
      (1)   Finance, to include community development funds, capital
improvements, audits and budget. The Chair of this Committee, or his
representative, shall be a member of the City of Reading Audit Committee as per
§
5-903, Boards, commissions and councils, Subsection V (see
Chapter 23, Part 13, Audit Committee). [Amended 5-14-2012 by Ord. No. 50-2012]
      (2)   Public Property/Public Works to include parks, buildings, vehicles,
streets and sewage.
      (3)   Public Safety to include fire, police, codes, health and traffic.
      (4)   Administrative and Land Use Oversight to include legal, personnel,
housing zoning, planning and other related land use issues. [Amended 2-11-2008
by Ord. No. 14-2008]
      (5)   Research Committee to research issues requested by Council.
      (6)   Rules Committee to establish rules of conduct for Council.
   C.   Each committee shall consist of a minimum of three members of Council.
Each member shall serve as appointed unless excused by a majority of the
members of Council.
   D.   Council members shall submit their committee preferences to the City
Clerk in November of a municipal election year. The President of Council will
assign Council members to committees and assign committee chairs on a biennial
basis. The recommendation of the President will be approved by resolution of
Council at the first regular meeting of Council following a municipal election.
   E.   Ad-hoc committees may be appointed from time to time by motion of
Council. The number of committee members and its duties shall be stated in the
motion of appointment.
   F.   All members of Council will be informed of the committee meeting
schedule and will be provided with committee agendas and any attachments
thereto. All members of Council not on a given committee may attend any
committee meeting and are encouraged to participate in committee discussions,
but may not vote on any matter considered.
§ 5-211. Official actions of Council.
Official actions of the Council shall be taken by ordinance, resolution or
motion, as provided in the Charter. An ordinance is defined as law, a rule made
by authority or decree, while a resolution is policy or an expression of
opinion.
§ 5-212. Ordinances.
[Amended 8-26-1996 by Ord. No. 24-1996]
A.   Action requiring an ordinance. In addition to requirements provided by law
or the Charter, §§
215 through
224, acts of the Council shall be by ordinance which:
Editor's Note: Sections 215 through 224 of the Charter provide:
§ 215. Ordinances in general.
Council may legislate by passage of an ordinance. All ordinances introduced
shall be kept in a place accessible to the public at all reasonable times.
Final action on all ordinances shall take place during public meetings.
§ 216. Form of ordinance.
Every ordinance shall have a title clearly expressing its subject and every
ordinance shall contain only one subject.
§ 217. Procedures.
(a)   The first reading of an ordinance may be introduced by any member at any
regular or special meeting of the Council without vote.
(b)    After the first reading, the City Clerk shall distribute a copy of the
proposed ordinance to each Council member and to the Mayor and shall file and
make available a reasonable number of copies in the office of the City Clerk.
§ 218. Final passage of ordinance resolutions.
A minimum of 14 days must intervene between introduction and passage of an
ordinance unless Council finds and declares a public emergency posing a sudden,
clear and present danger to life or property.
§ 219. Effective date of legislation.
Every adopted ordinance except emergency legislation shall become effective at
the expiration of 30 days after passage by Council and approval by the Mayor,
or repassage by Council over the Mayor's veto, or at a date specified therein,
but not less than 10 days after adoption.
§ 220. Emergency ordinance.
An emergency ordinance may be adopted to meet a public emergency posing a
sudden, clear and present danger to life or property. An emergency ordinance
shall be introduced in the form and manner prescribed for ordinance generally,
except that it shall be plainly designated as an emergency ordinance and shall
describe in clear and specific terms the nature of the emergency. Every
emergency ordinance shall automatically stand repealed as of the 91st day
following the date on which it was adopted, but this shall not prevent
reenactment of the ordinance if the emergency still exists.
§ 221. Submission to Mayor and veto power.
Before any ordinance takes effect, it must first be submitted to the Mayor for
approval. The Mayor shall sign the ordinance within 10 days, if approved, but
if not, shall return it to Council stating objections. Council shall, at its
next meeting, reconsider the ordinance and may pass it over the Mayor's veto by
the affirmative vote of five members of City Council.
If the Mayor fails within 10 days after any ordinance is submitted to him to
sign the ordinance and/or return it to Council, such ordinance shall be
considered adopted at the expiration of the ten-day period.
The veto power of the Mayor shall not apply to ordinances adopted by initiative
or referendum.
§ 222. Recording of ordinances.
All ordinances shall be contained in permanent separate record books. The
ordinance book and all other actions taken by Council at a public meeting shall
be open and available for public inspection at normal business hours in the
office of the City Clerk, and a copy in the Reading Public Library.
§ 223. Codification of ordinances.
Within three years after the effective date of this Charter, the Council shall
provide for a codification with an index of ordinances of the City. No later
than three months after the close of each year, Council, with the assistance of
the City's legal department, shall classify ordinances according to the
division and subdivision of the Code for insertion in the Code during said
year.
§ 224. Action by resolution or motion.
Nothing in the article is intended to preclude Council from taking appropriate
action by resolution or motion.
      (1)   Adopt or amend the codes or establish, alter, or abolish any unit
of the City.
      (2)   Provide for a fine or other penalty or establish a rule or
regulation for which a fine or other penalty is imposed.
      (3)   Levy taxes and provide for service charges, permit fees and
assessments.
      (4)   Grant, renew or extend a franchise.
      (5)   Adopt and amend the annual budget and capital program budget (see
Charter, §§
905,
912 and
913).
Editor's Note: Sections 905, 912 and 913 of the Charter provide:
§ 905. City Council action on budget.
   (a)   Notice and hearing. Council shall publish in one or more newspapers of
general circulation in the City the general summary of the budget with a notice
stating:
      (1)   The times and places where copies of the budget message and budget
document are available for inspection by the public.
      (2)   The time, place and date, not less than 15 days or more than 30
days after such publication, for a public hearing on the budget. The public
hearing shall not be on the date of a regular Council meeting.
      (3)   The proposed budget shall be available for public inspection at
City Hall and copies shall be available for the public at a reasonable fee to
be set by the Council.
   (b)   Amendment before adoption.
      After the public hearing, the City Council may adopt the budget, with or
without amendment. In amending the budget, it may add or increase programs or
amounts and may delete or decrease any programs, or amounts, except
expenditures required by law or for debt service or for an estimated cash
deficit, provided that no amendment to the budget shall increase the authorized
expenditures to an amount greater than total estimated income and thereby
allowing for line item changes by the City Council.
      If the amended budget increases, decreases or readjusts funding
requirements by more than 5%, or adds or deletes a program, the Budget shall be
returned to the Mayor immediately for comment and resubmission to the Council
within three normal City work days.
      Council shall provide for another public hearing to be held within five
days after the Mayor has resubmitted the budget.
   (c)   Adoption. Council must adopt an annual budget by no later than
December 15 of the fiscal year currently ending. If Council fails to adopt a
budget by December 15, then the Mayor's original proposed balanced budget shall
become the official budget of the City for the ensuing fiscal year.
§ 912. City Council action on capital program.
   (a)   Notice and hearing. Council shall publish in one or more newspapers of
general circulation in the City the general summary of the capital program with
a notice stating:
      (1)   The times and places where copies of the capital program message
and capital program document are available for inspection by the public.
      (2)   The time, place and date, not less than 15 days or more than 30
days after such publication, for a public hearing on the capital program. The
public hearing shall not be on the date of a regular Council meeting or on
hearing date of the operating budget.
      (3)   The proposed capital program shall be available for public
inspection at City Hall and copies shall be available for the public at a
reasonable fee to be set by the Council.
   (b)   Adoption. Council must adopt an annual capital program by no later
than December 15 of the fiscal year currently ending. If Council fails to adopt
a capital program by December 15, then the Mayor's original capital program
shall become the official capital program of the City for the ensuing fiscal
year.
§ 913. Public records.
Copies of the budget, capital program and appropriation and revenue ordinances
shall be public records and shall be made available to the public at suitable
places in the City
      (6)   Repeal or amend any ordinance.
      (7)   Adopt procedures for purchasing of products, goods, or services,
for the making of contracts and for the sale or lease of personal or real
property of the City, as required by the Administrative Code,
Chapter 5, Exhibit A, 3  Part 13, Sale of Property. (See Charter, §
915.) [Amended 11-23-2015 by Ord. No. 81-2015]
3. Editor's Note: Exhibit A is included as an attachment to this chapter.
Editor's Note: Section 915 of the Charter provides:
§ 915. Bidding process.
   (a)   Whenever the estimated cost of any construction, erection,
installation, completion, alteration, repair of, or addition to, any project
subject to the control of the City shall exceed $10,000, it shall be the duty
of the City to have such work performed pursuant to a contract, awarded to the
lowest responsible bidder [subject to Subsection (2)(d)] hereof, after
advertisement for bids. Every such contract shall contain a provision
obligating the contractor to the prompt payment of all material furnished,
labor supplied or performed, rental for equipment employed, and services
rendered by public utilities in or in connection with the prosecution of the
work, whether or not the said material, labor, equipment or service enter into
and become component parts of the work or improvement contemplated. Such
provision shall be deemed to be included for the benefit of every person,
copartnership, association or corporation who, as subcontractor or otherwise
has furnished material supplied or performed labor, rented equipment or
services in or in connection with the prosecution of the work as aforesaid, and
the inclusion thereof in any contract shall preclude the filing by any such
person, copartnership, association or corporation of any mechanics' lien claim
for such material, labor or rental of equipment.
   (b)   Whenever the estimated costs of any purchase of supplies, materials or
equipment or the rental of any equipment, whether or not the same is to be used
in connection with the construction, erection, installation, completion,
alteration, repair of, or addition to, any project subject to the control of
the City, shall exceed $10,000, it shall be the duty of the City to have such
purchase or rental made pursuant to a contract awarded to the lowest
responsible bidder [subject to Subsection (2)(d)] hereof, after advertisement
for bids, such advertisement to be inserted in a newspaper of general
circulation in Berks County.
      (1)   The City shall not evade the provisions of Subsection (a) or (b) as
to advertising for bids by purchasing materials or contracting for services
piecemeal for the purpose of obtaining prices under $10,000 upon transactions
which should, in the exercise of reasonable discretion and prudence, be
conducted as one transaction amounting to more than $10,000. This provision is
intended to make unlawful the practice of evading advertising requirements by
making a series of purchases or contracts, each for less than the advertising
requirement price, or by making several simultaneous purchases or contracts,
each below said price, when, in either case, the transactions involved should
have been made as one transaction for one price.
      (2)   Written or telephonic price quotations from at least three
qualified and responsible contractors shall be requested for all contracts that
exceed $4,000 but are less than the amount requiring advertisement and
competitive bidding or, in lieu of price quotations, a memorandum shall be kept
on file showing that fewer than three qualified contractors exist in the market
area within which it is practicable to obtain quotations. A written record of
telephonic price quotations shall be made and shall contain at least the date
of the quotation, the name of the contractor and the contractor's
representative, the construction, reconstruction, repair, maintenance or work
which was the subject of the quotation and the price. Written price quotations
and written records of telephonic price quotations and memoranda shall be
retained for a period of three years.
   (c)   The City shall require as a condition of the award of any contract,
pursuant to Subsection (a) or (b) of this section, that the contractor give to
the City any bond or letter of credit (including bonds for the performance of
the contract, and for the prompt payment by the contractor for material,
supplies, labor, services and equipment) which are prescribed by law for
contracts awarded by cities of the third class.
   (d)   Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in this section,
City Council may, in those cases where an individual or company with
headquarters in the City submits a bid which is within 10% of the lowest bid,
award the contract to said individual or company. In acting pursuant to this
provision, City Council shall find that such an award will be in the best
interests of the citizens of the City. The City Council must show just cause
for the awarding of such contracts to locally owned companies who provide local
labor, materials or produced goods.
   (e)   All contracts shall be on file in the office of the City Auditor and
shall be available for public inspection during normal business hours.
      (8)   Adopt other actions which are legislative in nature.
      (9)   Authorize the borrowing of money.
      (10)   Purchase, convey or lease lands or buildings.
      (11)   Adopt zoning, subdivision or other land use controls.
      (12)   Adopt the annual position ordinance, the official listing of all
authorized City employment positions, which authorizes the Administration to
hire and compensate all employees, defined in §
70-201, Categories of employment. [Added 10-26-2009 by Ord. No. 60-2009]
   B.   Ordinance form and procedure.
      (1)   Every proposed ordinance shall be introduced in writing and in the
form required for final adoption. No ordinance shall contain more than one
subject which shall be clearly expressed in its title. The enacting clause
shall be "The City of Reading, Pennsylvania ordains . . . " Any ordinance which
repeals or amends an existing ordinance shall set out the full ordinance,
sections or subsections to be repealed or amended, and shall indicate matter to
be omitted by enclosing it in brackets or by strikeout type and shall indicate
new matter by underscoring or by italics.
      (2)   An ordinance may be introduced by any member of the Council at any
regular or special meeting of the Council without vote. After introduction of
any ordinance, a copy shall be distributed to each Council member and to the
Mayor, and a reasonable number of copies shall be filed in the office of the
City Clerk and in such other public places such as the Council may designate by
resolution. (See the Charter, §§
216 and
217.)
Editor's Note: Sections 216 and 217 of the Charter provide:
§ 216. Form of ordinance.
Every ordinance shall have a title clearly expressing its subject and every
ordinance shall contain only one subject.
§ 217. Procedures.
   (a)   The first reading of an ordinance may be introduced by any member at
any regular or special meeting of the Council without vote.
   (b)   After the first reading, the City Clerk shall distribute a copy of the
proposed ordinance to each Council member and to the Mayor and shall file and
make available a reasonable number of copies in the office of the City Clerk.
   C.   Ordinance requiring prior public notice and hearing. No final action
shall be taken on the following types of ordinances and amendments thereto
without public hearing thereon and at least 10 days' published notice in a
newspaper of general circulation in the City:
      (1)   Zoning ordinance and amendments thereto.
      (2)   Adoption of the Zoning Map and amendments thereto.
      (3)   Subdivision regulations.
      (4)   Land development and land use regulations.
      (5)   New taxes, or increases in the rate of existing taxes.
      (6)   Adopt and/or amend the annual budget and capital program.
   D.   Enactment of ordinance.
      (1)   Emergency ordinance, refer to the Charter, §
220.
Editor's Note: Section 220 of the Charter provides:
§ 220. Emergency Ordinance.
An emergency ordinance may be adopted to meet a public emergency posing a
sudden, clear and present danger to life or property. An emergency ordinance
shall be introduced in the form and manner prescribed for ordinance generally,
except that it shall be plainly designated as an emergency ordinance and shall
describe in clear and specific terms the nature of the emergency. Every
emergency ordinance shall automatically stand repealed as of the 91st day
following the date on which it was adopted, but this shall not prevent
reenactment of the ordinance if the emergency still exists.
      (2)   An action on any ordinance bill shall be at a public meeting of
Council and shall be by majority vote of the Council as a whole, and attested
by the City Clerk who shall affix the municipal seal and insert the dates of
the Council actions.
      (3)   Five votes shall be required to:
         (a)   Override a mayoral veto.
         (b)   Approve capital projects.
   E.   Recording.
      (1)   Within two weeks of the enactment of an ordinance, the City Clerk
shall send an electronic copy of the enacted ordinance to the IT Division, who
shall post the ordinance on the City's website and link it to the applicable
section of the City Code posted on the website. By May 31 annually, the City
Clerk shall cause to be recorded in the Municipal Ordinance Book a verbatim
copy of each enacted ordinance, which shall contain a notation of the date of
enactment and the name of the newspaper and date, if any, on which publication
was made. (see Charter, §
222.) [Amended 4-9-2012 by Ord. No. 42-2012]
Editor's Note: Section 222 of the Charter provides:
§ 222. Recording of ordinances.
All ordinances shall be contained in permanent separate record books. The
ordinance book and all other actions taken by Council at a public meeting shall
be open and available for public inspection at normal business hours in the
office of the City Clerk, and a copy in the Reading Public Library.
      (2)   It shall not be necessary to record in the Ordinance Book the full
text of any ordinance where there is a specific provision in the laws of
Pennsylvania permitting adoption and recording by reference or in the case of
an ordinance adopting, with or without amendment or modification, any standard
building, plumbing, electrical, housing, or other technical code complete in
itself, for the regulation of trade, occupation or line of activity or
undertaking, but in the latter cases, it shall be necessary only to record the
ordinance adopting the same by reference and indicating the municipal office
where the complete code or ordinances shall be available.
      (3)   Whenever an ordinance shall be specifically amended or repealed,
the City Clerk shall cause a notation to that effect to be made in the
Ordinance Book at the location where the recording of such ordinance shall
commence.
      (4)   Whenever an ordinance shall prescribe a condition to its becoming
effective, in the nature of an acceptance by a party thereto, the meeting of
such condition or the failure to meet the same shall likewise be noted by the
appropriate place in the Ordinance Book.
   F.   Codes of technical regulations. (See the Charter, §
216.) The Council may adopt any standard Code of Technical Regulations by
reference thereto in an adopting ordinance as prescribed for ordinances
generally, except that:
Editor's Note: Section 216 of the Charter provides:
§ 216. Form of ordinance.
Every ordinance shall have a title clearly expressing its subject and every
ordinance shall contain only one subject.
      (1)   The procedures and requirements governing such adopting ordinances
shall be construed to include copies of technical regulations as well as the
adopting ordinance.
      (2)   A copy of each adopted Code shall be attached to the adopting
ordinance shall be authenticated and recorded.
   G.   Availability of ordinances and copies thereof. The Ordinance Book shall
be open and available for public inspection during office hours, and copies of
ordinances shall be obtainable upon payment of a reasonable reproduction
charge.
   H.   Enforcement of ordinances, procedures and penalties. Unless otherwise
prescribed by City ordinance or other applicable law, any violation of an
ordinance shall constitute a civil violation, as defined by the laws of the
commonwealth, and shall be prosecuted in accordance with the laws of the
commonwealth and the Rules of Civil Procedure adopted by the Pennsylvania
Supreme Court.
      (1)   Penalties. Except where specific penalties are provided elsewhere
by ordinance or other applicable law, any person or entity who shall violate
any ordinance or any provision of any code or other regulation adopted by
reference in an ordinance shall, upon adjudication and finding of a violation,
pay a civil penalty not to exceed $1,000 for each offense, plus costs of
prosecution and attorney's fees where authorized; all such penalties shall be
collected as provided by law.
      (2)   Continuing violations. Each day any violation continues shall
constitute a separate offense and the person or entity responsible for such
violation shall be punished as provided above for each separate offense.
      (3)   Abatement of nuisances. In addition to the penalties and other
remedies herein provided, any condition caused or permitted to exist in
violation of any ordinance will be deemed a public nuisance and may be abated
by the City with the costs of such abatement borne by the person or entity
owning the property upon which condition exists. Such costs will be collected
for the use of the City as debts by law are collected or by a municipal claim
or lien filed as provided by law. Each day that such condition continues shall
be regarded as a separate offense.
      (4)   Action at law or in equity. In addition to the enforcement of
provisions herein provided, the City may institute an appropriate action or
proceeding at law or in equity against a person or entity responsible for
violation of any ordinance and request either or both of the following
remedies:
         (a)   To cease, correct or remove the violation.
         (b)   To enforce the penalty provisions of the ordinance or seek other
remedies as are just and reasonable.
      (5)   Cumulative penalties. Whenever the Administrative Code or any
ordinance provides alternative penalties or remedies, they shall be cumulative.
The imposition of any such penalty or remedy shall not prevent the City from
invoking any other penalty or remedy provided therefor.
   I.   Actions of Council other than ordinance adoption. (See Charter, §
224.) Other business of Council may be undertaken by adoption of resolutions,
enactment of proclamations, or the approval of motions which shall require a
simple majority vote of Council unless otherwise required by law.
Editor's Note: Section 224 of the Charter provides:
§ 224. Action by resolution or motion.
Nothing in the article is intended to preclude Council from taking appropriate
action by resolution or motion.
§ 5-213. Independent legal counsel.
[Added 7-13-1998 by Ord. No. 22-1998; amended 1-26-2015 by Ord. No. 3-2015]
The Solicitor, as chief legal advisor to the City of Reading, has authority to
determine whether a conflict exists between the Mayor/Administration and City
Council. In the event a conflict does exist, the Mayor/Administration and City
Council shall begin and complete a mediation process within 10 business days
from the date the conflict was identified by the Solicitor, facilitated by a
neutral third party that shall be selected by the Solicitor and agreed to by
the Mayor/ Administration and City Council. If at the conclusion of the
mediation process the conflict still exists, each party shall have the right to
seek and retain independent legal counsel, separate and apart from the advice
of the Office of the Solicitor. Section 8 of the Purchasing Policies shall
apply.
§ 5-214. Redistricting process; Redistricting Advisory Commission.
[Added 5-28-2002 by Ord. No. 23-2002]
   A.   After each decennial census, Council shall, within 60 days after the
receipt of the census information from the federal government, appoint a
Redistricting Advisory Commission. Each Council member shall appoint one person
from his/her respective district. The President of Council shall select one
member to represent the at-large community. The Planning Commission will be
asked to assign two current members to the Advisory Commission.
   B.   This Redistricting Advisory Commission shall review and compare the new
and old census information with the current Council District configuration.
This group shall prepare and present a redistricting proposal(s) to the full
body of Council in no less than 120 days after their appointment.
   C.   The district proposals shall give strong consideration to the
combination of neighborhoods that are continuous but that share similar
quality-of-life issues. This configuration will support the principle of
electing representatives that can easily represent the voice of the community
they represent. The Advisory Commission shall also consider the federal
redistricting laws.
   D.   Council shall hold a minimum of one public hearing to get public input
on the redistricting proposal(s), within 45 days of their receipt of the
proposals from the Redistricting Advisory Commission, and shall adopt by
ordinance a redistricting plan, either new or status quo, at their next regular
business meeting.
§ 5-215. Council districts.
[Added 1-23-2012 by Ord. No. 3-2012; amended 3-28-2022 by Ord. No. 25-2022]
   A.   The boundaries of the existing Council districts, created in 1993 by
the Charter Commission, as recommended by the Redistricting Committee, are
amended as follows:
      (1)   District 1.
         (a)   1st Ward - 1st precinct.
         (b)   2nd Ward - 1st precinct.
         (c)   3rd Ward - 1st precinct.
         (d)   5th Ward - 1st precinct.
         (e)   18th Ward - 1st, 2nd, 3rd and 4th precincts.
      (2)   District 2.
         (a)   3rd Ward — 2nd precinct.
         (b)   8th Ward — 1st precinct.
         (c)   10th Ward — 1st precinct.
         (d)   16th Ward — 1st, 2nd, 4th and 5th precincts.
      (3)   District 3.
         (a)   9th Ward — 2nd and 5th precincts.
         (b)   11th Ward — 2nd and 3rd precincts.
         (c)   12th Ward — 1st, 3rd and 5th precincts.
         (d)   13th Ward — 1st precinct.
      (4)   District 4.
         (a)   13th Ward — 2nd and 5th precincts.
         (b)   17th Ward — 1st, 2nd, 5th, 7th and 8th precincts.
      (5)   District 5.
         (a)   14th Ward — 6th precinct.
         (b)   15th Ward — 1st, 2nd, 6th and 7th precincts.
         (c)   19th Ward — 1st and 2nd precincts.
      (6)   District 6.
         (a)   4th Ward - 1st precinct.
         (b)   6th Ward - 1st and 3rd precincts.
         (c)   7th Ward - 1st precinct.
         (d)   14th Ward - 1st, 4th and 5th precincts.
   B.   Governing body members in office at the time of the reapportionment
shall retain their offices until the end of their respective terms.
   C.   The election of members of the governing body under the reapportionment
shall be held in accordance with law relating to the entity and the act of June
3, 1937 (P.L. 1333, No. 320), known as the Pennsylvania Election Code. 4
4.   Editor's Note: See 25 P.S. § 2600 et seq.
§ 5-216. Council Staff Evaluations.
[Added 7-11-2022 by Ord. No. 69-2022; amended 10-14-2024 by Ord. No. 64-2024]
   A.   Charter §
225(a) states that City Council shall appoint all assistants and employees of
the Council office, whose number and compensation shall be fixed by budgetary
provisions.
   B.   On or before October 1 of each year, City Council shall appoint a
committee consisting of a minimum of three members to perform evaluations of
Council staff on forms utilized by the City's Human Resources Department. City
Council shall have the ability to adopt and utilize its own evaluation forms
provided that the appraisal forms clearly provide performance ratings on
categories involving essential job duties and general work ethic.
   C.   City Council may delegate the City Clerk to perform the evaluations of
staff serving under the City Clerk.
   D.   Performance evaluations may provide a basis for salary changes,
promotions or other changes at the discretion of City Council. Any pay
increases are subject to the annual budget and position ordinance and shall
require the approval of the body of Council by majority vote. The following
factors are the basis for awarding merit pay increases:
      (1)   The employee's performance as reported in the annual performance
review.
      (2)   The appropriate pay level within the range for the employee
considering the employee's performance and the performance of others within
that range.
      (3)   Pay increase funds available in the City budget in light of the
fiscal health of the City's finances. Performance evaluations shall not be used
to initiate corrective disciplinary personnel actions such; however, such
evaluations may serve as supporting documentation for personnel actions.
      (4)   The City Council Committee is hereby authorized to promulgate
policies from time to time to implement this section.
Part 3
Mayor; Chief Executive Officer
[Amended 2-27-2023 by Ord. No. 22-2023]
§ 5-301. General provisions.
The term of office, election and the qualifications and eligibility and the
filling of vacancies for the Mayor shall be as provided in the Charter.
As part of the process to qualify to take office, a Mayor, newly elected or
commencing a new term, must take and subscribe to the oath of office pursuant
to 53 Pa. C.S. § 1141 (relating to form of oaths of office) within 14 days of
the date of the first Monday in January after the election. Failure to take the
oath of office within 14 days of the first Monday in January after the election
shall result in ineligibility to qualify to take office and cause the seat to
be declared vacant and filled by Council in accordance with Charter Section 304
Vacancy. Any person appointed to fill a vacancy and succeed the term of the
current Mayor, shall take and subscribe to the oath of office within 14 days of
the appointment.
In addition, no Mayor, whether elected or appointed, shall have the use of a
City-owned or leased vehicle, or a City-owned gas card. All expenses associated
with required travel for official business, shall be reimbursed to the Council
member via the Standard Mileage Rate set by the Internal Revenue Service (IRS)
and/or reimbursed by following § 5-809 Purchasing Policy and Procedure, Section
12 Petty Cash procedures.
§ 5-302. Power and duties.
The Mayor shall be the Chief Executive Officer of the City of Reading and shall
have those powers and duties prescribed by law, the Charter (see §
301, The Mayor), and ordinance and include but not be limited to the following.
The Mayor is ultimately responsible to the people of Reading for the
administration of the government. This does not mean, however, that the Mayor
need perform each activity mentioned below. Rather, the Mayor as the chief
executive officer may assign duties as he/she deems necessary.
Editor's Note: Section 301 of the Charter provides:
§ 301. The Mayor.
The executive, administrative and law enforcement powers of the City shall be
vested in the Mayor. The Mayor shall control and be accountable for the
executive branch of City government, as provided by this Charter.
   A.   Section
308(a) through (n) of the Charter, "Powers and duties of the Mayor."
   Editor's Note: Section 308 of the Charter provides:
   § 308. Powers and duties of the Mayor.
   The Mayor shall have the following powers and duties:
      (a)   Execute, enforce, and obey the ordinances of the City and laws of
the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania and the United States of America.
      (b)   Prepare and present a budget to City Council in accordance with the
provisions of this Charter.
      (c)   Inform City Council and the public each January of the financial
and general condition of the City.
      (d)   Provide Council with all information concerning finances and
general conditions of the City as may be requested by Council.
      (e)   Introduce proposed legislation to Council and make recommendations
to City Council concerning the affairs of the City.
      (f)   Be responsible for the hiring, with the approval of Council, of the
City Managing Director.
      (g)   Direct and supervise the administration of all departments, offices
and agencies of the City, except as otherwise provided by the Charter or by
law.
      (h)   Ensure that all laws, provisions of this Charter and acts of City
Council, subject to enforcement by the Managing Director, are faithfully
executed by the Managing Director.
      (i)   Be responsible for the establishment and development of
administrative policy to be implemented by the Managing Director.
      (j)   Be present or represented at all public Council meetings. The Mayor
may participate in all public discussions but shall have no vote.
      (k)   Execute all bonds, notes, contracts and written obligations of the
City.
      (l)   Issue subpoenas and compulsory processes, under the Official Seal
of the Mayor, for the attendance of such persons and the production of such
books and records as deemed necessary by the Mayor, and seek enforcement of
such subpoenas by the Court of Common Pleas of Berks County.
      (m)   Unless otherwise provided, be responsible for the employment of
personnel necessary for the effective operation of City government.
      (n)   Perform such other duties and exercise such other powers as stated
in this Charter, by law or ordinance.
   B.   Section
221 of the Charter, Submission to Mayor and veto power.
   Editor's Note: Section 221 of the Charter provides:
   § 221. Submission to Mayor and veto power.
   Before any ordinance takes effect, it must first be submitted to the Mayor
for approval. The Mayor shall sign the ordinance within 10 days, if approved,
but if not, shall return it to Council stating objections. Council shall at its
next meeting reconsider the ordinance and may pass it over the Mayor's veto by
the affirmative vote of five members of City Council.
   If the Mayor fails within 10 days after any ordinance is submitted to him to
sign the ordinance and/or return it to Council, such ordinance shall be
considered adopted at the expiration of the ten-day period.
   The veto power of the Mayor shall not apply to ordinances adopted by
initiative or referendum.
   C.   Section
309 of the Charter, Appointment by the Mayor.
   Editor's Note: Section 309 of the Charter provides:
   § 309. Appointment by the Mayor. The Mayor shall appoint:
      (a)   One City Solicitor. Any person so appointed shall hold office
unless removed during the term for which the Mayor is elected and until a
successor is appointed and qualified. Four affirmative votes of Council shall
be necessary for confirmation.
      (b)   All members of boards, authorities and commissions over which he
has the power to appoint. Four affirmative votes of Council shall be necessary
for confirmation.
   D.   Section
310 of the Charter, Removals by Mayor.
   Editor's Note: Section 310 of the Charter provides:
   § 310. Removals by Mayor.
   The Mayor may remove from office anyone appointed pursuant to § 309(b),
unless otherwise provided by law.
   E.   Section
311 of the Charter, Managing Director.
   Editor's Note: Section 311 of the Charter provides:
   § 311. Managing Director.
   The Mayor, pursuant to the provisions of this Charter, shall appoint a full-
time officer of the City who shall have the title of Managing Director and who
shall receive compensation comparable to that received by a person in a
position of similar responsibilities.
   F.   Section
401 of the Charter, Appointment; qualifications; compensation.
   Editor's Note: Section 401 of the Charter provides:
   § 401. Appointment; qualifications; compensation.
      (a)   Within 90 days of taking office, the Mayor, with the approval of
City Council, shall appoint a Managing Director for an indefinite term, subject
to at least a biennial review, and fix the Managing Director's compensation.
The Managing Director need not be a resident of the City at the time of
appointment, but after appointment, shall reside in the City. The Managing
Director shall establish such City residency within 12 months of being
appointed.
      (b)   Any candidate for Managing Director shall:
         (1)   Have a master's degree in public administration, business
administration, or its equivalent, and have at least three years' experience at
an executive or administrative level.
         (2)   Have a bachelors degree in public administration, or its
equivalent, and have at least five years of experience at an executive or
administrative level.
      (c)   City Council may, by ordinance, establish additional qualifications
for the position of Managing Director, prior to advertisement for the hiring of
the Managing Director.
      (d)   In the event that the position of Managing Director cannot be
filled by the Mayor, the Mayor may appoint a temporary Managing Director for a
period of time not to exceed 90 days. During this period of time, the Mayor
shall continue to use all available means to fill the position.
      (e)   In the event the Mayor has not filled the position of Managing
Director within 180 days of taking office, City Council shall, within 90 days
thereafter, hire a Managing Director. Any person hired by City Council shall
hold the qualifications for said position prescribed by this Charter. The Mayor
shall not have the power of veto over any candidate hired by City Council in
accordance with the provisions of this Charter.
   G.   Section
404(a), (b) of the Charter, Removal.
   Editor's Note: Section 404(a) and (b) of the Charter provide:
   § 404. Removal.
      (a)   The Managing Director may be removed from office by the Mayor at
any time, without cause.
      (b)   At least 15 days prior to the removal from office, the Mayor shall
notify the Managing Director and City Council in writing of such removal.
   H.   Section
603 of the Charter, Heads of department, offices, and agencies.
   Editor's Note: Section 603 of the Charter provides:
   § 603. Heads of departments, offices, and agencies.
      (a)   Appointment. Except as otherwise provided by this Charter, the
Mayor shall appoint and remove the head of any department, office and agency.
An appointment shall not be effective unless City Council by resolution
confirms it or fails to reject it within 60 days after the appointment. The
appointee shall serve unless rejected by City Council or until removal from
office, whichever is sooner.
      (b) Removal. The Mayor shall have the power at any time to remove the
head of any department, office or agency immediately under the Managing
Director's direction and supervision, but the Mayor shall within 14 days notify
in writing City Council of the removal and the reason for it.
   I.   Section
705 of the Charter, Compensation of heads of departments, offices, and
agencies.
   Editor's Note: Section 705 of the Charter provides:
   § 705. Compensation of heads of departments, offices and agencies.
   The compensation of all heads of departments, offices and agencies under the
direction of the Mayor shall be proposed by the Mayor and approved by
ordinance. Compensation of all other employees shall be set in accordance with
the uniform pay plan established by City Council in the Personnel Code. All
such heads of departments, offices and agencies need not be residents of the
City at the time of appointment, but after appointment, shall reside in the
City. City residency shall be required within 12 months of being appointed.
   J.   Section
801 of the Charter, City Solicitor, Qualifications and Responsibilities. There
shall be one full-time City Solicitor. Temporary solicitors may be engaged as
the need arises. That need may be in areas such as labor relations and tax
administration (to mention but a few), or for specific cases. The Mayor will
make that determination.
   Editor's Note: Section 801 of the Charter provides:
   § 801. Qualifications and responsibilities.
      (a)   The Mayor shall appoint, with the approval of Council, a Solicitor
who shall be a member of the Bar of the Supreme Court of Pennsylvania and
experienced in municipal law. The Solicitor, as head of the Legal Department,
shall serve as chief legal advisor to the Mayor, the Council, and all City
departments and agencies; and shall represent the City in all legal proceedings
and shall perform such other duties prescribed by law, by this Charter, by the
City Administrative Code or action of Council. It is the intent of this Charter
that only one person shall be the legal advisor of the City except as may be
otherwise required by law.
      (b)   The Mayor, with the approval of Council, shall have the power, if
needed, to engage other temporary Solicitors to represent the City as the need
may be. Such appointments shall be temporary and shall be for the purpose of
representing the City in specific individual legal matters. Such representation
shall be secured by requests for proposal.
   K.   Section
902 of the Charter, Submission of balanced budget and capital program.
   Editor's Note: Section 902 of the Charter provides:
   § 902. Submission of balanced budget and capital program.
   On or before 90 days prior to the ensuing fiscal year, the department heads
will submit proposed budget and capital program to the Managing Director. On or
before 90 days prior to the ensuing fiscal year, the Mayor will submit to the
City Council a balanced budget, capital program, and an accompanying message.
The proposed balanced budget and capital program shall be in such form as the
Mayor deems desirable, unless otherwise required by Council.
   L.   Section
904 of the Charter, Budget.
   Editor's Note: Section 904 of the Charter provides:
   § 904. Budget.
   The budget shall provide a complete financial plan of all City funds and
activities for the ensuing fiscal year in accordance with all generally
accepted accounting principles and, except as required by this Charter, shall
be in such form as the Mayor deems desirable or the Council may require. In
organizing the budget, the Mayor shall utilize the most feasible combination of
expenditure classification by fund, organization unit, program, purpose or
activity, and object. The budget shall contain, among other things, the
following:
      (a) It shall begin with a general summary of its contents.
      (b)   It shall show in detail all estimated income, indicating the
existing and proposed tax levies, as well as other assessments, fees and
charges.
      (c)   It shall show all proposed expenditures, including debt service,
for the ensuing fiscal year.
      (d)   It shall show the number of proposed employees in every job
classification.
      (e)   It shall be so arranged as to show comparative figures for actual
and estimated income and expenditures for the current fiscal year and actual
income and expenditures of the preceding four fiscal years.
      (f)   It shall indicate proposed expenditures during the ensuing fiscal
year, detailed by offices, departments and agencies, in terms of their
respective work programs and the methods of financing such expenditures.
      (g)   It shall indicate proposed capital expenditures during the ensuing
fiscal year, detailed by offices, departments and agencies when practicable,
and the proposed method of financing each such capital expenditure. The Mayor
will include this separate capital program section in the annual budget and
submit to Council with appropriate supporting information as to the necessity
for such programs.
      (h)   It shall indicate anticipated net surplus or deficit for the
ensuing fiscal year of each utility owned or operated by the City and the
proposed method of its disposition; subsidiary budgets for each such utility
giving detailed income and expenditure information shall be attached as
appendices to the budget.
   The total of proposed expenditures shall not exceed the total of estimated
income.
   M.   Section
905(b) of the Charter, Amendment (budget) before adoption.
   Editor's Note: Section 905(b) of the Charter provides:
   § 905. City Council action on budget.
      (b)   Amendment before adoption. After the public hearing, the City
Council may adopt the budget with or without amendment. In amending the budget,
it may add or increase programs or amounts and may delete or decrease any
programs or amounts, except expenditures required by law or for debt service or
for an estimated cash deficit, provided that no amendment to the budget shall
increase the authorized expenditures to an amount greater than total estimated
income and thereby allowing for line item changes by the City Council.
   N.   Section
908 of the Charter, Amendments (Budget) after adoption.
   Editor's Note: Section 908 of the Charter provides:
   § 908. Amendment after adoption.
      (a)   Emergency appropriations may be made by the Council to meet a
public emergency posing a sudden, clear and present danger to life or property.
Such appropriations may be made by emergency ordinance in accordance with the
provisions of § 220 of this Charter.
      (b)   Supplemental appropriations may be made by the Council by ordinance
upon certification by the Mayor that there are available for appropriate
revenues in excess of those estimated in the budget.
      (c)   Transfer of appropriations may be made in accordance with provision
of the Administrative Code [
Chapter 5].
   O.   Section
910 of the Charter, Administration of the budget and capital program.
   Editor's Note: Section 910 of the Charter provides:
   § 910. Administration of the budget and capital program.
   The Mayor shall be responsible for and with the assistance of the Managing
Director shall supervise the administration of the annual and capital budgets.
   P.   Section
911 of the Charter, Capital program.
   Editor's Note: Section 911 of the Charter provides:
   § 911. Capital program.
      (a)   Submission to City Council. The Mayor shall prepare and submit to
the City Council a five-year capital program no later than the final date for
submission of the budget.
      (b)   Contents of capital program. The capital program shall include:
         (1)   A clear general summary of its contents.
         (2)   A list of all capital improvements and other capital
expenditures which are proposed to be undertaken during the five fiscal years
next ensuing, with appropriate supporting information as to the necessity for
each.
         (3)   Cost estimates and recommended time schedules for each
improvement of other capital expenditure.
         (4)   Method of financing, upon which each capital expenditure is to
be reliant.
         (5)   The estimated annual cost of operating and maintaining the
facilities to be constructed or acquired.
         (6)   All capital projects must be included in the capital program
budget.
   The above shall be revised and extended each year with regard to capital
improvements still pending or in process of construction or acquisition.
      (c)   Financing capital projects. Bonds required for financing capital
projects shall be secured by competitive bidding.
      (d)   Capital projects approved. Proposed capital projects in the capital
programs must be considered on their own individual merits by the Finance
Manager, the City Auditor and the proposer of the project. The procedures to
approve the individual capital projects are:
         (1)   Preliminary feasibility study. The capital project preliminary
feasibility study shall include:
            (i)   A clear general summary of its purpose and justification.
            (ii)   The cost estimates and time schedule for the capital project
including the cost of the post project completion audit.
            (iii)   The method of financing and sources upon which this capital
project is reliant.
            (iv)   The annual cost of operating and maintaining the project to
be constructed or acquired. The Council approval of capital projects in this
preliminary feasibility study will require a simple majority vote in order to
move on to a final approval and funding acceptance.
         (2)   Final proposal and financing. The final capital project proposal
and financing shall include:
            (i)   A clear general summary of its purpose and justification.
            (ii)   The cost estimates and time schedule for the capital
project, including the cost of the post-project-completion audit.
            (iii)   The method of financing and sources upon which this capital
project is reliant.
            (iv)   The annual cost of operating and maintaining the project to
be constructed or acquired.
            (v)   This final capital project proposal will be published and
made available for the public to review (Use Notice and Hearing Notice, § 912).
Capital project replaces capital program. The final Council approval of capital
projects will require five votes to approve.
         (3)   Capital project reporting.
            (a)   Current projects. All capital projects in process must be
reported on a quarterly basis and provide an update on cost, completion date
and estimated revised operating costs. This information is to be supplied by
the Finance Manager and the Project Manager to the City Council in such a form
that it is available to the public.
            (b)   Extended projects. If commencement of a capital project does
not begin by end of the fiscal year following the year in which final approval
is obtained, the project must go through § 911(d)(1) and (2).
      (e)   Post-project-completion audit. Following completion of the capital
project, a complete and detailed audit must be published and made available to
the public. This post audit is to be completed by an independent auditor
appointed by the Council. The purpose of the post audit is to confirm the
estimates of costs and explain any deviation between actual and estimated
costs.
   Q.   Section
914 of the Charter, Independent audit.
   Editor's Note: Section 914 of the Charter provides:
   § 914. Independent audit.
   The Council shall provide for an annual independent audit to be completed
and submitted to the Mayor within 180 days of the close of the fiscal year. It
shall include City receipts, expenditures, accounts and reports by a
Pennsylvania certified public accountant or a certified public accounting firm,
experienced in municipal finance, having no personal interest, direct or
indirect, in the fiscal affairs of the City or any of its elected or appointed
personnel. The Council may provide for more frequent audits at its discretion.
Within 30 days of completion, the Mayor shall present to the Council the
results of the annual audit and a financial statement of the fiscal affairs of
the City, with the results of the independent auditor's survey of internal
control and any recommendations thereon. The evaluation of the internal control
shall take the form of a management letter. This management letter shall be
submitted to the City Council after every audit. A summary of the annual audit
of the independent auditor shall be published at least once in one or more
newspapers of general circulation in the City within 30 days after submission
to the Mayor. The annual audit shall be conducted in accordance with generally
accepted auditing standards. The financial report shall be prepared in
accordance with generally accepted accounting principles, and shall include a
balance sheet for each fund, and on a consolidated fund basis reflecting all
current assets, current liabilities and fund balances. The Council shall
designate such accountant or firm annually or for a period not exceeding three
years.
   R.   Section
1201(c) of the Charter, Board of Ethics.
   Editor's Note: Section 1201(c) of the Charter provides:
   § 1201. Conflict of interest and Code of Ethics.
      (c)   Board of Ethics. The Mayor, with the approval of City Council,
shall establish an independent Board of Ethics consisting of five City
residents holding terms of three years, to administer and enforce the conflict
of interest provision § 1201 of this charter and the prohibition sections of
this charter. No member of the Board may hold elective or City office under the
City or any other government or hold any political party office. Insofar as
possible under state law, the Mayor shall authorize the Board to issue binding
opinions, conduct investigations on its own initiative and on referral or
complaint, refer cases for prosecution, impose administrative fines, and to
consult with independent counsel. City Council shall appropriate sufficient
funds to the Board of Ethics to enable it to perform the duties assigned to it.
Members of the Board of Ethics may be removed by the Mayor with the consent of
City Council.
   S.   Section
1203 of the Charter, Review of Charter.
   Editor's Note: Section 1203 of the Charter provides:
   § 1203. Review of Charter.
   At least every 10 years, except for the initial Charter review which shall
take place under this provision no sooner than five years but no later than 10
years after the effective date of this Charter, City Council and the Mayor
shall appoint a Charter Review Commission composed of 11 members, the majority
of whom shall not be City officials or employees. Seven members of this
Commission shall be appointed by City Council and four members shall be
appointed by the Mayor. All appointees shall be current residents and
registered voters of the City. The Charter Review Commission shall review the
current Charter, submit a report to City Council, the Mayor, and the citizens
of the City, within six months of its appointment, and recommend any proposed
amendments to the Charter. All proposed amendments shall be placed on the
ballot no later than the next municipal election. City Council shall provide
appropriations for the reasonable expenses incurred by the Charter Review
Commission.
   T.   Section
1307(c) of the Charter, Personnel Action.
   Editor's Note: Section 1307(c) of the Charter provides:
   § 1307. Personnel.
      (c)   Personnel action. Until approval by City Council of the Personnel
Code required by § 703, the Mayor, in consultation with the Managing Director,
shall have the power to establish by written directive a personnel system for
all employees. All appointments and promotions, except additions to the exempt
service, shall be made on the basis of merit and fitness. All personnel actions
shall be in accordance with the provisions of a personnel system established by
such written directive. Copies of all such directives shall be forwarded by the
Mayor to City Council within 24 hours after being issued.
   U.   Shall have the authority to administer oaths and affirmations in
relation to any matter regarding the authentication of an account or claim or
demand of or against the City, but shall not be entitled to receive any fee
therefor.
§ 5-303. Independent legal counsel.
[Added 7-13-1998 by Ord. No. 22-1998; amended 1-26-2015 by Ord. No. 3-2015]
The Solicitor, as chief legal advisor to the City of Reading, has authority to
determine whether a conflict exists between the Mayor/Administration and City
Council. In the event a conflict does exist, the Mayor/Administration and City
Council shall begin and complete a mediation process within 10 business days
from the date the conflict was identified by the Solicitor, facilitated by a
neutral third party that shall be selected by the Solicitor and agreed to by
the Mayor/ Administration and City Council. If at the conclusion of the
mediation process the conflict still exists, each party shall have the right to
seek and retain independent legal counsel, separate and apart from the advice
of the Office of the Solicitor. Section 8 of the Purchasing Policies shall
apply.
§ 5-304.   Termination of department directors.
[Added 12-27-1999 by Ord. No. 42-1999; Amended May 19, 2020 by Referendum]
   A.   Definitions. As used in this section, the following terms shall have
the meanings indicated:
      CITY COUNCIL — The elected or appointed City Council persons of the City
of Reading.
      DEPARTMENT DIRECTOR — Any person employed by the City of Reading as the
Finance Director, Human Resources Director, Managing Director, Public Works
Director, Chief of Police, Chief of the Department of Fire and Rescue Services,
Director of Community Development or City Solicitor. A department director
shall also include any such person who is employed by the City of Reading as
the acting director of any of the aforementioned departments for a period of
more than six months.
      MAYOR — The chief executive officer of the City of Reading.
      TERMINATION — Action taken by the Mayor or the City Council which ends
the employment of one or more of the aforementioned department directors.
      TERMINATION FOR CAUSE — An act of the Mayor or the City Council which
ends the employment of any of the aforementioned department directors for the
following reasons: violation of the City of Reading's residency requirement,
conviction of any criminal act relating to employment with the City, conviction
of a felony, conduct which violates the City's established work rules or for
inability to perform the tasks associated with one's employment.
   B.   Severance package. [Amended 10-23-2006 by Ord. No. 70-2006]
      (1)   Termination for reasons other than just cause. Any department
director terminated for reasons other than just cause shall receive a payment
for three months of salary payments the department head would have received,
plus the director shall earn one month of severance for every year above three
years. Any department director receiving a payment equal to six months' worth
of pay at the rate he was receiving on the day prior to his/her termination
shall not receive any other monetary compensation from the City of Reading at
the time of his/her termination including, but not limited to, payment for any
accrued vacation time or compensatory time which had been earned prior to
termination.
      (2)   Termination for just cause. Any department director terminated for
just cause shall receive a payment equal to any accrued and unused vacation
days as tabulated by the Human Resources Department on the day prior to the
date of termination.
      (3)   Compensatory time. Upon termination for any reason, no department
director of the City of Reading shall receive a payment for any unused or
accrued compensatory time.
      (4)   Health benefits. Any department director terminated for a reason
other than just cause shall receive medical benefits provided for by the City
of Reading at the same level he/she was receiving on the date prior to his/her
termination for a period not to exceed 180 days. Local benefits provided by the
City of Reading shall cease on the 180th day following the termination of the
department director or when the department director secures health and medical
insurance through attainment of other employment, etc., whichever comes first.
Any department director terminated for just cause shall only receive the
medical benefits which the City of Reading is required to provide any employee
at the time of his/her termination.
   C.   Information hearing following termination for just cause.
      (1)   Notice of termination for just cause. Any department director
terminated for just cause shall be provided with a written notice of proposed
termination which contains the reasons and factual basis for such action.
      (2)   Hearing. Within seven days of receiving notice of termination, the
department director may request an opportunity to respond to the reasons
provided by the Mayor for his/her termination. If a request for such a hearing
is made, the Mayor shall conduct a meeting, which may be in form or nature,
that which the department director may respond to the reasons given for his
proposed termination. At such meeting, the department director may be
represented by an attorney of his choosing and present evidence or information
relevant to the reasons and factual basis set forth in the notice of proposed
termination. After such hearing, the Mayor may do one of three things: he may
rescind the notice of proposed termination which was served upon the department
director, he may convert the department director's termination into a
termination for reasons other than just cause or he may maintain the
termination for just cause.
Part 4
Managing Director; Chief Administrative Officer
§ 5-401. Power and duties.
[Amended 10-11-2004 by Ord. No. 42-2004; 5-9-2022 by Ord. No. 44- 2022; 2-27-
2023 by Ord. No. 22-2023]
The Managing Director shall be the Chief Administrative Officer of the City of
Reading responsible to the Mayor for the administration of all City affairs
placed in the Managing Director’s charge pursuant to the Charter. The power and
duties prescribed by law, the Charter and ordinance shall include but not be
limited to the following.
   A.   Section
406 of the Charter, Power and duties.
      Editor's Note: Section 406 of the Charter provides:
      § 406. Powers and duties.
      The Managing Director shall be the chief administrative officer of the
City, responsible to the Mayor for the administration of all City affairs
placed in the Managing Director's charge pursuant to this Charter. In addition
to other powers and duties prescribed by this Charter, the Managing Director
shall:
         (1)   Execute and enforce the provisions of this Charter and all
ordinances, resolutions, and motions of City Council.
         (2)   Direct and supervise the administration of all departments,
offices, and agencies of the City, except as otherwise provided by this Charter
or by law.
         (3)   Appoint, suspend, or remove any City employee, except as
otherwise provided by this Charter or by law.
         (4) Prepare and submit to the Mayor on an annual basis a five-year
financial plan and a budget.
         (5)   Supervise and direct the negotiation and administration of any
collective bargaining agreements with City employees.
         (6)   Submit to the Mayor a complete report of the finances and
administrative activities of the City within 30 days of the end of each fiscal
year.
         (7)   Assure that the laws of the commonwealth relating to the affairs
and government of the City are faithfully executed and enforced.
         (8)   Present to the Mayor from time to time such information
concerning the business and affairs of the City as the Managing Director may
deem necessary, or as City Council by motion may request; and recommend such
measures for legislative action as are believed to be in the best interests of
the City.
         (9)   Perform such other duties as are specified in this Charter or
may be required by the Mayor or City Council.
   B.   Section
402 of the Charter, Approval by Council.
      Editor's Note: Section 402 of the Charter provides:
      § 402. Approval by Council.
      City Council approval shall be necessary for the hiring of the Managing
Director appointed by the Mayor. Such approval shall be made within 30 days
from the date of the appointment. If no action is taken by City Council within
such period, the approval of the hiring of the candidate shall be automatic.
   C.   Section
312 of the Charter, Deputy Mayor.
      Editor's Note: Section 312 of the Charter provides:
      § 312. Deputy Mayor.
      In the event of the Mayor's temporary absence from the City, or temporary
disability, the Managing Director shall act as Deputy Mayor. The Deputy Mayor
shall exercise all the duties of the Mayor, except the power of appointment or
removal from office.
   D.   Section
902 of the Charter, Submission of balanced budget and capital budget.
      Editor's Note: Section 902 of the Charter provides:
      § 902. Submission of balanced budget and capital program.
      On or before 90 days prior to the ensuing fiscal year, the department
heads will submit proposed budget and capital program to the Managing Director.
On or before 90 days prior to the ensuing fiscal year, the Mayor will submit to
the City Council a balanced budget, capital program, and an accompanying
message. The proposed balanced budget and capital program shall be in such form
as the Mayor deems desirable, unless otherwise required by Council.
   E.   Section
910 of the Charter, Administration of the budget and capital program.
      Editor's Note: Section 910 of the Charter provides:
      § 910. Administration of the budget and capital program.
      The Mayor shall be responsible for and with the assistance of the
Managing Director shall supervise the administration of the annual and capital
budgets.
   F.   Designate himself or some other officer or employee to perform the
duties of any office or position in the administrative service under the
supervision of the Managing Director during a vacancy, absence, or disability
of an incumbent.
   G.   Prescribe such rules and regulations as shall be deemed necessary or
expedient for the conduct and operation of administrative departments and
revoke, suspend, or amend any rule or regulation of the administrative service.
   H.   Investigate or inquire either personally or through a person designated
by the Managing Director into the operation of any department, division, or
office under the Managing Director's authority.
   I.   Establish committees and appoint its members within the administrative
service for the purpose of considering and resolving administrative problems.
   J.   Consult with department directors before initiating new policies and
procedures.
   K.   Assign any employee of the administrative service to any department
requiring the services of that employee; provided, however, that such
assignment is appropriate to and consistent with the personnel system's
classification of the employee and applicable personnel rules and regulations.
   L.   Investigate and dispose of, or to designate an officer to investigate
and dispose of all complaints regarding City services and report to the Mayor
thereon. All complaints regarding City services shall be referred to the Office
of the Managing Director.
   M.   Responsibility for oversight and management of all administrative
support services relating to:
      (1)   Developing, designing and administering the City computer system,
which includes records management, software needs and coordinating technology
application; and
      (2)   Administering the internal communication system and providing
liaison support to boards, authorities and commissions.
   N.   Information technology.
      (1)   Function. The Division of Information Technology shall be
responsible for developing, designing, and administering the City computer
system, which includes records management, software needs, and coordinating
technology application. Additionally, it shall administer the internal
communication system. Finally, it shall provide liaison support to boards,
authorities and commissions.
      (2)   Division Manager. The Division of Information Technology shall be
headed by a Manager who shall be responsible to the Managing Director for the
performance of the Division, and for all other responsibilities and obligations
that the Managing Director may from time to time assign consistent with the
law, Charter or ordinance.
   Editor's Note: Sections 604 and 705 of the Charter provides:
   § 604. Qualifications.
   The heads of departments, offices, and agencies shall be selected solely on
the basis of education, training, experience and professional, executive and
administrative abilities; and such other qualifications as may be set forth in
this Charter. (See §
705.)
   § 705. Compensation of heads of departments, offices and agencies.
   The compensation of all heads of departments, offices and agencies under the
direction of the Mayor shall be proposed by the Mayor and approved by
ordinance. Compensation of all other employees shall be set in accordance with
the uniform pay plan established by City Council in the Personnel Code. All
such heads of departments, offices and agencies need not be residents of the
City at the time of appointment, but after appointment shall reside in the
City. City residency shall be required within 12 months of being appointed.
      (3)   Divisions manager qualifications. Charter §§
604 and
705 speak to general qualifications. The minimum requirements for this position
are a bachelor's degree or its equivalent plus three years of management
technology experience.
      (4)   Division manager duties. The duties and responsibilities of the
Manager shall include but not be limited to the below. He/she shall direct
personally and through subordinates the performance of these duties and
responsibilities:
         (a)   Develop and administer computer system services for City
departments.
         (b)   Assist department directors in designing and implementing
computer systems for record management and in developing software needs.
         (c)   Communicate appropriate new technologies, products and software
and hardware systems to department directors.
         (d)   Develop and administer communication system for departments that
includes e- mail, telephone, mail and duplication services.
         (e)   Provide liaison services to those boards, authorities, and
commissions that are not directly linked to other departments.
Part 5
City Auditor
[Amended 2-27-2023 by Ord. No. 23-2023]
§ 5-501. General provisions.
The term of office, election and the qualifications and eligibility and the
filling of vacancies for the City Auditor shall be as provided in the Charter.
As part of the process to qualify to take office, a City Auditor, newly elected
or commencing a new term, must take and subscribe to the oath of office
pursuant to 53 Pa. C.S. § 1141 (relating to form of oaths of office) within 14
days of the date of the first Monday in January after the election. Failure to
take the oath of office within 14 days of the first Monday in January after the
election shall result in ineligibility to qualify to take office and cause the
seat to be declared vacant and filled by Council in accordance with Charter
Section
505 Vacancy. Any person appointed to fill a vacancy and succeed the term of the
current City Auditor, shall take and subscribe to the oath of office within 14
days of the appointment
§ 5-502. Power and duties.
[Amended 5-9-2022 by Ord. No. 44-2022]
The City Auditor shall have financial oversight of the City of Reading finances
and shall have those powers and duties prescribed by law, Charter or ordinance
and include but not be limited to the following.
In addition, no City Auditor, whether elected or appointed, shall have the use
of a City-owned or leased vehicle, or a City-owned gas card. All expenses
associated with required travel for official business, shall be reimbursed to
the Council member via the Standard Mileage Rate set by the Internal Revenue
Service (IRS) and/or reimbursed by following §
5-809 Purchasing Policy and Procedure, Section 12 Petty Cash procedures.
   A.   Section
503(a) through (l) of the Charter, Responsibilities.
   Editor's Note: Section 503(a) through (l) of the Charter provides:
   § 503. Responsibilities. The City Auditor shall:
      (a)   Have financial oversight of City finances, independent of the
executive and legislative branches and shall review all expenditures of the
Mayor, City Council, and City boards, commissions and agencies.
      (b)   Review the annual budget before approval by City Council, and make
nonbinding recommendations to City Council for consideration.
      (c)   Be present or represented at all Council meetings.
      (d)   Perform specific audits of City finances from time to time as
determined by the City Auditor or City Council.
      (e)   Report to Council on the progress of the implementation of any
recommendations as found in the annual audit and management letter.
      (f)   Assist in all audits conducted by independent auditors.
      (g)   Assure the accurate and timely completion and submittal of audit
reports along with appropriate follow-up recommendations.
      (h)   Furnish to City Council, the Mayor, the Managing Director, and
others, as appropriate, periodic reports of audits conducted.
      (i)   Interpret and communicate audit policies and procedures to all City
management and staff.
      (j)   Direct internal financial security and loss investigation
activities.
      (k)   Prepare an annual budget for the office of City Auditor and operate
the office of City Auditor within approved budget limitations.
      (l)   Issue any subpoenas in order to fulfill the duties and
responsibilities of the office of City Auditor.
   B.   Section
911(d) of the Charter, Capital projects approved.
   Editor's Note: Section 911(d) of the Charter provides:
      (d)   Capital projects approved. Proposed capital projects in the capital
programs must be considered on their own individual merits by the Finance
Manager, the City Auditor and the proposer of the project. The procedures to
approve the individual capital projects are:
         (1)   Preliminary feasibility study. The capital project preliminary
feasibility study shall include:
            (i)   A clear general summary of its purpose and justification.
            (ii)   The cost estimates and time schedule for the capital project
including the cost of the post-project-completion audit.
            (iii)   The method of financing and sources upon which this capital
project is reliant.
            (iv)   The annual cost of operating and maintaining the project to
be constructed or acquired. The Council approval of capital projects in this
preliminary feasibility study will require a simple majority vote in order to
move on to a final approval and funding acceptance.
         (2)   Final proposal and financing. The final capital project proposal
and financing shall include:
            (i)   A clear general summary of its purpose and justification.
            (ii)   The cost estimates and time schedule for the capital project
including the cost of the post-project-completion audit.
            (iii)   The method of financing and sources upon which this capital
project is reliant.
            (iv)   The annual cost of operating and maintaining the project to
be constructed or acquired.
            (v)   This final capital project proposal will be published and
made available for the public to review (Use Notice and Hearing Notice, § 912).
Capital project replaces capital program. The final Council approval of capital
projects will require five votes to approve.
         (3)   Capital project reporting.
            (a)   Current projects. All capital projects in process must be
reported on a quarterly basis and provide an update on cost, completion date
and estimated revised operating costs. This information is to be supplied by
the Finance Manager and the Project Manager to the City Council in such a form
that it is available to the public.
            (b)   Extended projects. If commencement of a capital project does
not begin by end of the fiscal year following the year in which final approval
is obtained, the project must go through § 911(d)(1) and (2).
   C.   Conduct audits of petty cash funds as appropriate.
   D.   Shall sit as Chair of the City of Reading Audit Committee, as per §
5-903, Boards and commissions/councils, Subsection V. [Added 5-14-2012 by Ord.
No. 52-2012]
Part 6
City Clerk
§ 5-601. Duties.
[Amended 10-26-1998 by Ord. No. 28-1998]
   A.   The duties of this position will include but are not limited to the
following:
      (1)   Serves as Director of the legislative branch.
      (2)   Performs general oversight and coordination of the legislative
action of City Council.
      (3)   Makes recommendations to City Council on policy, regulations,
practices and issues concerning the City of Reading.
      (4)   Serves as liaison between City Council and other officials.
      (5)   Acts as representative of Council at meetings and events when so
directed by City Council.
      (6)   Explains City Council procedures and answers questions on City
Council business from the public, press and administration.
      (7)   Performs varied public relations activities for City Council and
the City of Reading to promote City issues and initiatives.
      (8)   Shall be a member of the City of Reading Audit Committee, as per §
5-903, Boards, commissions and councils, Subsection V (see
Chapter 23, Part 13, Audit Committee). [Added 5-14-2012 by Ord. No. 51-2012]
   B.   The City Clerk shall attest to the signature of the Mayor on all
appropriate City documents and contracts. In the event of an emergency and the
City Clerk should be absent, a notary employed by the City of Reading may
attest to the Mayor's signature. A photocopy of the document shall be provided
to the City Clerk.
   C.   The City Clerk authorizes the validity of various documents for use in
court. In the event of the City Clerk's absence, the President or Vice
President of Council may authorize the validity of any Council-related
document, code or ordinance.
Part 7
City Health Officer
Publisher's Note: This Section has been AMENDED by new legislation (Ord. 33-
2023, enacted 3-27-2023). The text of the amendment will be incorporated below
when the ordinance is codified.
§ 5-701. Duties of City Health Officer.
[Amended 8-10-2009 by Ord. No. 44-2009; 7-27-2015 by Ord. No. 39-2015; 5-28-
2019 by Ord. No. 19-2019; 3-27-2023 by Ord. No. 33-2023]
The City Health Officer is appointed by the Mayor and reports to the Community
Development Director or his/her designee. Qualifications for this position are
experience and training in public health work or an equivalent field. This
person shall be or shall become certified by the Pennsylvania Department of
State within six months of taking the oath of office.
Within 30 days of appointment, the Health Officer shall take the oath required
by members of the Board and shall be the agent of the Board but shall not serve
as a member of the Board.
Mayor may appoint, as the principal Health Officer, the manager or chief
administrator employed and compensated by a non-profit corporation which may be
appointed as a Board of Health. The manager or chief administrator must be a
reputable physician with at least five years' experience in the practice of the
physician's profession or in public health work, or an equivalent practice or
field of medicine, and shall have all the powers, authority and duties
prescribed by law upon principal health officers. The Health Officer may
delegate any of the responsibilities herein to a physician's assistant, nurse
practitioner, or registered nurse within their practice.
The appointed City Health Officer shall have the following powers, duties and
responsibilities as prescribed by applicable law, Charter and ordinance, and
include but not be limited to the following:
A.   Perform the obligations and functions of the City Health Administrator.
B.   Perform and/or assign responsibility for restaurant inspections, review
inspections, issue citations, and close if necessary.
C.   Perform and/or assign responsibility for tattoo parlor inspections, review
inspections, issue citations, and close if necessary.
D.   Provide inoculations as required.
E.   Collaborate with Human Resources Director in workers’ compensation, sick
leave, family leave, and/or any other health-related issues.
F.   Provide required reports to the state/federal governments.
G.   Provide monthly reports to the Board of Health.
H.   Assess the health implications in hoarding situations as requested.
I.   Attend all regular and special meetings of the Board of Health at the
request of the Board, City Council or the Administration.
J.   Be available for the prompt performance of the health officer's official
duties.
K.   Quarantine places of communicable diseases in accordance with law and with
the rules and regulations of the Department of Health or of the city board of
health.
L.   Execute all laws, rules and regulations for the disinfection of
quarantined places.
M.   Serve written notice on teachers and persons in charge of public,
parochial, Sunday and other schools requiring the exclusion of children from
school who are suffering from or who reside with individuals who are suffering
from communicable diseases.
N.   Make sanitary inspections subject to constitutional standards in a similar
manner as provided in section 12308 (relating to powers of board of health).
O.   Execute the orders of the board of health and all other laws, rules,
regulations and orders pertaining to the health officer's office.
P.   The Health Officer shall have the power to issue citations for the
violation of applicable laws or ordinances.
Q.   Serve as the liaison for the City of Reading with the Berks County Health
Officer or Health Department or its equivalent, if established by County of
Berks.
Part 8
Department Organization
§ 5-801. Administrative organization.
[Amended 5-29-2001 by Ord. No. 14-2001]
A.   The administrative service of the City of Reading shall be under the
Managing Director (with the exception of the City Solicitor) and be comprised
of the following departments and directors thereof:
 
Department of Finance                  Director
Department of Public Works             Director/Engineer
Department of Community Development    Director
Department of Police                   Chief
Department of Fire and Rescue Services Chief
Department of Human Resources          Director
 
B.   The Department of Law is headed by the City Solicitor who reports to the
Mayor and is not considered a part of the administrative service.
§ 5-802. Organization Charts.
[The Organization Charts are included at the end of this chapter.]
§ 5-803. Department directors.
[Amended 1-13-1997 by Ord. No. 51-1996; 11-27-2000 by Ord. No. 24-2000; 11-13-
2001 by Ord. No. 38-2001; 4-22-2002 by Ord. No. 15-2002; 11-13-2018 by Ord. No.
70-2018; 10-26-2020 by Ord. No. 70-2020]
All Department Directors shall be appointed by the Mayor with the approval of
Council as stipulated in the Charter. They shall be selected solely on the
basis of education, training, experience, professional, executive and
administrative abilities pertinent to the function, duties, and operations of
their respective departments and as prescribed by law. Department directors,
with the exception of the City Solicitor who reports to the Mayor, serve under
the Managing Director's direction and supervision.
   A.   The Managing Director shall appoint acting department directors and
temporary managers within 10 days of the date the position becomes vacant.
Acting department directors appointed by the Managing Director may serve no
more than 180 days. Council may agree to extend said term for additional
ninety-day period by resolution upon request by the Mayor and upon satisfactory
proof that the Mayor and/or Managing Director have made a diligent effort to
recruit and hire a department director.
   B.   An acting department director or temporary manager who has been
appointed to serve as department director or temporary manager but who fails to
be confirmed by vote of Council shall continue to serve as acting director or
temporary manager no longer than a period of 30 days from the date of the
negative vote by Council, unless Council agrees to extend for ninety-day period
(s) as set forth in the preceding subsection.
   C.   No appointed person shall serve as acting department director or
temporary manager unless employed by the City of Reading prior to such
appointment or approved by City Council resolution. Council shall, within 30
days, approve the acting director/manager appointment or the appointment shall
be deemed approved.
   D.   Whenever the acting department director or temporary manager is absent
due to vacation, illness or injury, the person filling that position shall
designate a qualified employee from the existing department staff to head the
department until the acting department director or temporary manager returns to
duty. (See also
Chapter 70, Personnel, §
70-708, Temporary reassignment.)
   E.   Whenever the department director or manager position is vacant due to
removal, resignation, retirement, permanent disability or death, the Managing
Director shall appoint a qualified employee from the department to the acting
director or temporary manager position, as is required in §
5-401F of this chapter, until such time as the Mayor nominates a replacement to
City Council and City Council approves the nomination. (See also
Chapter 70, Personnel, §
70-708, Temporary reassignment.)
   F.   All department directors and managers shall have an annual performance
review within 45 days of their anniversary date, or one year after their
previous increase date, completed by the Managing Director and reviewed by the
Mayor. No director or manager will receive more than one increase per year in
any calendar period. The performance evaluations shall be made available for
Council members to review. Any salary increase for department directors and
managers shall be based on the performance evaluations and the criteria
specified in the salary range policies, where applicable, for each position.
The Solicitor shall have an annual performance review completed by the Mayor
and members of Council. Any salary increase for the Solicitor shall be based on
the performance review and the criteria specified in the salary range for the
Solicitor position.
§ 5-804. Duties.
   A.   Direct personally and through subordinates the performance of all
functions, duties and operations assigned to and required of the department and
its subordinate units by law, the Charter or ordinance and such other
activities as may be required by the Mayor and/or the Managing Director that
are not in conflict with law, the Charter or ordinance.
   B.   Develop and prescribe the internal organization of the department and
its subordinate units, subject to the approval of the Managing Director, and in
accordance with applicable provisions of law, the Charter, or ordinance.
   C.   Assign duties and responsibilities, to subordinate officers and
employees within the department and modify those assignments consistent with
and in response to the changing exigencies of service, subject to the approval
of the Managing Director.
   D.   Develop and prescribe, in written form, an administrative manual of
policies and procedures for the department subject to the approval of the
Managing Director.
   E.   Prepare and submit departmental budget requests in accordance with
schedules, forms, and policies as prescribed by the Managing Director and in
accordance with the Charter.
   F.   Prepare and submit reports prescribed by the Managing Director.
   G.   Cooperate with and furnish to any department or unit of the City any
information (except confidential information), service, labor, material, and
equipment that may be necessary to perform a municipal function.
   H.   Be aware of and coordinate the activities of the department with
appropriate area wide regional and intergovernmental programs; keep the
Managing Director informed of the activities and policies of such programs as
they affect the department or the City and make analyses and recommendations
regarding such activities and policies when appropriate.
   I.   Administer and evaluate intergovernmental contracts and agreements as
they relate to departmental functions.
   J.   Develop and maintain internal administrative and budgetary controls and
productivity and performance standards to assure maximum levels of quality and
quantity of service within budgetary limitations.
   K.   Keep abreast of developments in administrative policies, management
techniques, technological advances and make recommendations to the Managing
Director concerning actions of Council or administrative regulations for the
utilization of those policies, techniques and technologies deemed to be in the
best interests of the department and the City.
   L.   Keep abreast of all state and federal laws and municipal ordinances and
administrative regulations relating to the functions of the department.
   M.   Serve as a member of any committee or as a staff officer or provide
staff services to any authority, board, or commission to which the department
director may be assigned by the Managing Director.
   N.   Develop personnel planning and employee development plans annually for
the department, including the planning and execution of appropriate training
and education programs.
   O.   Establish and enforce rules and regulations for the use of municipal
facilities and services and issue such licenses and permits as may be required
by ordinance where applicable.
   P.   Develop and recommend to the Managing Director uniform rate structures
for those services for which user fees are charged where applicable.
§ 5-805. Department of Finance.5
   A.   Function. The Department of Finance shall be responsible for the
administration of City’s financial management, Information technology, and
purchasing functions. In addition, the Department shall direct the operation of
the Citizen’s Service Center.
      (1)   Specific financial management responsibilities assigned to the
department Include: budget preparation, pension administration, and the
receipt, accounting, expenditure, investment, custody, and control of the
City’s funds except to the extent that such activities are expressly charged by
the law, Charter, or ordinance to any other City unit.
   B.   Department Director. The Department Director shall be responsible to
the Managing Director for the function and performance of the Department.
5.   Editor's Note: Added 8-26-2013 by Ord. No. 35-2013; this section replaced
original § 1-185, Department of Finance.
§ 5-806. Fiscal provisions.
[Amended 8-26-1996 by Ord. No. 24-1996; 2-24-1997 by Ord. No. 4-1997A; 1-24-
2000 by Ord. No. 1-2000; 2-26-2000 by Ord. No. 36-2000; 4-9-2001 by Ord. No.
11-2001; 4-23-2001 by Ord. No. 16-2001; 10-11-2004 by Ord. No. 42-2004; 1-26-
2009 by Ord. No. 3-2009; 2-9-2009 by Ord. No. 4-2009; 11-9-2009 by Ord. No. 54-
2009; 10-12-2009 by Ord. No. 55-2009; 10-26-2009 by Ord. No. 60-2009; 4-11-2011
by Ord. No. 17-2011; 9-26-2011 by Ord. No. 45-2011; 2-27-2012 by Ord. No. 14-
2012; 8-27-2012 by Ord. No. 86-2012; 10-22-2012 by Ord. No. 98-2012; 8-26-2013
by Ord. No. 35-2013; 5-26-2015 by Ord. No. 25-2015; 8-22-2016 by Ord. No. 34-
2016; 12-18-2017 by Ord. No. 108-2017]
   A.   Fiscal year.
   Editor's Note: Provisions of the Charter are set forth below:
   § 901. Fiscal year.
   The fiscal year of the City shall be the calendar year. If not prohibited by
law, the Council may, by ordinance, adopt a different fiscal year, specifying
an orderly procedure for financial and budgetary controls in making such
transition.
   B.   Finance Director.
      (1)   Bonding. The Finance Director shall be bonded in such amount as
determined by the Administrative Code. He/she shall assist the Managing
Director in determining which personnel in the Finance Department shall be
bonded.
      (2)   Policies and procedures. The Finance Director shall be responsible
for preparing policies and procedures as required by the Administrative Code.
These policies and procedures shall be available to the public for inspection.
Copies may be made for the public at a reasonable cost not in excess of
reproduction which may include both direct and indirect costs of such
reproduction.
      (3)   Securities. The Finance Department is authorized and empowered on
behalf of the City to establish and maintain accounts with those banks and
brokers as are necessary and convenient for the purchase and sale of any and
all forms of securities which are in accordance with the City’s investment
policy as per Subsection D herein.
   C.   Regulations concerning appropriations and transfers.
      (1)   The authorization and expenditure of all funds and preparation of
department budgets shall be in accordance with a policy adopted by the Council
and a financial procedure manual to be prepared and periodically reviewed and
updated by the Finance Department. Expenditures shall be executed in a uniform
manner for every City Department.
      (2)   The Finance Director shall prepare and submit a monthly report to
the Mayor, the Managing Director, and Council. This monthly report shall
include all revenues, expenditures, borrowing, and any use for each City
department and each City Fund account, and status reports comparing those
expenditures with the adopted budget. The report shall include an estimate of
the fiscal year-end projections for both revenues and expenditures. All reports
shall also include the receipt or forecast of nonrecurring revenues. For the
purpose of this policy, nonrecurring revenues shall include land or asset
sales, use of fund balance, transfers from other funds that exceed ongoing and
sustainable levels, and transfers from other funds that exceed legal limits.
Nonrecurring revenues also include any revenue that is anticipated to be
received for only one year. In addition to these monthly reports, the Managing
Director shall also submit quarterly financial reports as outlined in
initiative FI04 of the City’s Act 47 Recovery Plan dated June 11, 2010.
      (3)   In order to allow flexibility in the administration of the City's
business, departments may transfer money between line items within the
department. A majority of Council may place a limit on the amount of additional
excess expenditure allowed for any program or line item. This is not intended
to restrict unduly the Mayor's and/or Managing Director's ability to manage and
administer the budget.
      (4)   Justification for transferring, borrowing or any use of funds
between departments and/ or City Fund accounts must be presented to and
approved by Council ordinance. The financial procedures manual will stipulate
the following:
         (a)   Expenditure procedures.
         (b)   Justification procedures for transferring money between line
items.
         (c)   Justification procedures for transferring money between
departments.
         (d)   Administration of petty cash funds.
         (e)   Justification procedures for transferring, borrowing, or any use
of money between City Fund accounts.
      (5)   Interfund borrowing: The City will limit its use of interfund
borrowing to obtain cash from one fund type or reserve to fund activities of
another fund type or reserve, and will apply the following conditions to limit
such borrowings:
          (a)   The borrowing deemed a lawful use of such funds;
         (b)   The Director of Finance has determined that the funds to be
borrowed will not be needed by the lending fund during the lending period;
         (c)   The borrowing is for a temporary period with repayment scheduled
during the same fiscal year;
         (d)   Any borrowing activity that cannot be repaid by the end of the
fiscal year, other than temporary lags in reimbursements, will be disclosed
along with a plan for replenishment within 10 calendar days of the transaction;
         (e)   No such borrowing shall cause the City to be in noncompliance
with its policy on structurally balanced budgets;
         (f)   No such borrowing shall cause the City to be in noncompliance
with applicable federal and/or state requirements or agreements; and
         (g)   For existing borrowings that are not in compliance with this
policy, the City shall adopt budgets and a plan to come into compliance by the
end of 2015.
      Any actions taken to borrow money under these conditions must be
separately disclosed in the City's periodic financial reports to City Council
with an anticipated repayment date. If the cumulative amount that one fund
borrows from another fund(s) during the calendar year is more than $500,000,
any amount in excess of $500,000 must be approved by Council. Similarly, if the
cumulative amount borrowed from one fund by any other fund(s) during the
calendar year is more than $500,000, any amount in excess of $500,000 must be
approved by Council.
      (6)   Fund transfers and subsidies. The City may make permanent, annual
transfers from other City funds into the General Fund under the following
conditions:
         (a)   Use a cost allocation method to allocate administrative and
overhead costs to other funds or programs receiving administrative services
from the City. The cost allocation method must be applied consistently across
funds and years. The cost allocated to each fund must be sustainable by those
other funds. A summary of cost allocation method for each allocated cost shall
be maintained in writing.
         (b)   There shall be an adopted schedule for transfers included in the
annual budget. Transfers that are not annual shall occur at least quarterly.
The City may also make transfers from enterprise funds according to the
following conditions:
            [1]   The transfer complies with all applicable federal and/or
state requirements and agreements.
            [2]   The transfer is based on an adopted calculation methodology
applied each year. This methodology may be based on percentage of revenues,
return on investment, percentage of net revenues, or other calculation adopted
by the City Council. The methodology should be adopted consistently each year.
      (7)   Requiring an amendment to the City's annual Budget Ordinance to
authorize any cumulative modification to any departmental overall budget or
line item exceeding $10,000 including fund transfers and subsidies. The request
for a budget amendment must be submitted to City Council with an agenda
memorandum explaining the justification for transfer and the proposed use for
the funds transferred, borrowed or used at least two weeks before the transfer
is required.
      (8)   Requiring City Council approval, via ordinance, for the following:
         (a)   Salary increases for Department Directors that were not approved
in or included in the budget for the fiscal year and fall outside the labor
contract for union employees. Please see Personnel Code Section 701 6  for
salary increases for other employees.
6.   Editor's Note: See
Ch. 70, Personnel, §
70-701, of the City Code.
         (b)   All expenditures not approved and listed in the operating or
capital budgets for the fiscal year prior to those expenditures occurring.
         (c)   All transfers and appropriations of $10,000 or more from and to
any and all line items falling in the Departmental and Nondepartmental area of
the General Fund.
      (9)   Any transfer from the reserve. [Added 10-12-2015 by Ord. No. 55-
2015; Amended 12-18-2017 by Ord. No. 108-2017]
      (10)   Report on policy compliance. The elected City Auditor will report
quarterly to City Council on the City's compliance with these policies. This
report shall be made available to the public.
   D.   Reserve. [Added 12-18-2017 by Ord. No. 108-2017]
      (1)   The City's objective is to achieve and maintain a structurally
balanced budget in all funds such that recurring revenues fund recurring
expenditures. The City shall maintain a reserve containing a minimum of 20% of
regular general fund operating expenditures based on the annual General Fund
budget of City or a minimum of $22,000,000 whichever is higher to allow for:
         (a)   Proper cash flow to fund operations and to allow for monthly
contributions to the pension fund.
         (b)   Worker Compensation Fund shall maintain the requirements
established by the Pennsylvania Worker Compensation Fund plus $750,000 to
manage catastrophic injuries.
         (c)   Insurance Casualty Fund shall maintain a minimum reserve of
$1,000,000.
         (d)   City Healthcare Fund shall develop a reserve of $3,000,000 to
allow for unexpectedly high claims during the budget year to allow a minimal
drawdown on the General Fund. Each year any surpluses from the healthcare
portion of the budget year shall be assigned to this fund.
      (2)   Should the level of the reserve fall below the value of two months
of regular general fund operating expenditures, nonrecurring revenues and
budget surpluses should replenish reserve levels to the above minimum level.
      (3)   Excess amounts above the minimum level may be used to pay down
outstanding long-term debt and fund capital budget projects, in that order.
      (4)   The City Administration and the City Council will review these fund
balance policies every five years to determine the need to amend these
policies.
      (5)   To that end, the Director of Finance shall report to the Managing
Director and City Council on the inclusion of any nonrecurring revenues in each
budget, forecast or actual report of financial results. That report should
include the amount and use of any nonrecurring revenues. For the purpose of
this policy, nonrecurring revenues shall include land or asset sales, use of
fund balance, transfers from other funds that exceed ongoing and sustainable
levels, and transfers from other funds that exceed legal limits. Nonrecurring
revenues also include any revenue that is anticipated to be received for only
one year. [Amended 10-12-2015 by Ord. No. 55-2015; 12-18-2017 by Ord. No. 108-
2017]
   E.   Bank and investment accounts.
      (1)   The City of Reading City Council shall, annually, authorize all
bank and investment accounts opened and used by the City by resolution on or
before the last day of January of the new calendar year.
      (2)   New bank and investment accounts shall only be opened under the
signature of the Director of Finance, the City Auditor, Mayor or the Managing
Director and shall be approved by Council resolution before any funds are
deposited.
   F.   Purchasing.
      (1)   Responsibility. The Finance Director, in consultation with the
Managing Director, shall develop a purchasing policy and procedure for the
purchase of supplies and materials and the sale of personal and real property;
such policy and procedure under these fiscal provisions is made a part hereof
in §
5-809 Purchasing Policy and Procedure.
      (2)   Purchasing policy. - See §
5-809.
         (a)   The overall authority and responsibility for City purchasing is
centralized within the Department of Finance.
         (b)   The purchasing policy and procedure is applicable to all
departments, offices and agencies and shall include the service function of the
disposal of surplus property or unused material supplies or equipment after
they have been declared as surplus by the Department Director, ordering and
buying goods and services. In addition, functions such as planning and
scheduling purchases, seeking competition, assuring the preparation of proper
specifications, and enforcing compliance with all purchasing regulations and
procedures shall be part of the purchasing policy and procedure.
      (3)   Purchasing Coordinator — See §
5-809.
      (4)   Emergency authority. In case of an emergency, purchase authority is
delegated to the individual department directors when the Purchasing Manager is
unavailable, i.e., after normal working hours. Such purchase authority shall be
exercised in the manner set forth in the policy and procedure.
      (5)   Department directors.
         (a)   The department directors have the authority to:
            [1]   Determine the need for all materials, supplies, equipment and
service for his/her department.
            [2]   Formulate specifications that are clear, concise and
descriptive of all the requirements for all intended purchases.
         (b)   The department directors have the responsibility to:
            [1]   Furnish the Purchasing Manager with all necessary information
to assure that the purchase will be correct in all details.
            [2]   Provide specifications that are clear and rated for the use
intended.
            [3]   Provide a justification when requesting a proprietary item.
            [4]   Provide a list of suggested vendors. This will assist the
Purchasing Manager in locating the item, although it does not restrict the
Manager in looking elsewhere.
            [5]   Notify Purchasing Manager when the material, supplies, or
equipment is delivered and if it is inferior in quality or unsatisfactory.
            [6]   Notify Purchasing Manager annually, by the date established
by the Purchasing Manager, of any surplus, obsolete or scrap materials or
equipment that exist in the department.
   G.   Investments.
      (1)    Responsibilities. The Finance Director shall be responsible for
identifying money (except monies belonging to pension funds) to be invested,
understanding the options available and for what time period, communicating
this information to the Managing Director, implementing the decision, and
making regular reports regarding these actions to the Mayor, Managing Director
and Council. All investments shall comply with PA Act 72 (72 P.S. § § 3836-1 et
seq.) as currently constituted.
      (2)   Types of investments. The Finance Director shall invest in these
types:
         (a)   Any obligations of the United States government for one year or
less.
         (b)   United States Treasury Bills.
         (c)   Short-term obligations of the United States government or its
agencies.
         (d)   Savings accounts or time deposits of Pennsylvania institutions
insured by the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation or the National Credit
Union Share Insurance Fund up to the amount covered by insurance with the
remainder covered by approved collateral pledged by the depository.
         (e)   Obligations of the United States, State of Pennsylvania, any
political subdivision of the state and any of their agencies or
instrumentalities, backed by their full faith credit.
         (f)   Prime commercial paper (unsecured promissory notes issued by any
industrial, common carrier, public utility or finance company or corporations
of $1,000,000,000 of assets or more) having no litigation pending or threatened
against the prime commercial paper, being not in default upon any of its
outstanding obligations, whose credit has been approved by the national credit
office, incorporated or its successor and the investments make up 10% or less
of the City's total portfolio.
         (g)   Certificates of deposit from institutions having their principal
place of business in the state and insured and collateralized as in Subsection
F(2)(d) above.
         (h)   Shares of investment companies properly registered investing
only in the investments in Subsection F(2)(a) through (g) above.
      (3)   Combining investments. Investment monies may be combined to
purchase investment(s), provided such funds are accounted for separately in all
respects and earnings from investments that are separately and individually
computed and recorded and credited to the accounts from which the investment
was purchased. Investment monies can be combined to purchase investment(s)
pooled with other political subdivisions and municipal authorities in
accordance with P.L. 180 of July 12, 1972, 53 Pa.C.S.A. § 2301 et seq.,
provided there is separate and equal computation, recording and distributions
of earnings. All investments shall comply with PA Act 72.
   H.   Signing checks.
      (1)   Documentation. The issuing and signing of all City checks shall be
in accordance with the following:
         (a)   The amount expressed in the request is allocated for in the
department budget.
         (b)   The person presenting the request shall provide evidence that
the amount due is for the payee in whose name it is drawn.
         (c)   Supplies, services or other consideration for payment has been
processed by purchasing regulations if required.
         (d)   Supplies, services or other consideration for payment has been
verified that they have been furnished or performed according to law or
contract.
      (2)   Check signatures.
         (a)   The Finance Director and the City Auditor shall sign all checks
drawn against the City Treasury. Facsimile signatures may be used.
         (b)   In the event of the absence of the Finance Director, the Mayor
shall have the authority to sign checks in his/her place and stead.
         (c)   In the event of the absence of the City Auditor, the auditing
coordinator in the office of the City Auditor or the City Solicitor shall have
the authority to sign checks in his/her place and stead.
         (d)   “Absence,” as used in this section, is hereby defined as failure
to be present in Reading City Hall for a period of three consecutive full
business days or more for any reason including, but not limited to, vacation,
illness, mental or physical incapacity or death.
      (3)   Limitations.
         (a)   No signed check shall be distributed, mailed, or released unless
there is sufficient money in the particular budget from which it is drawn, as
well as the checking account to cover it at the time the check has been issued.
         (b)   Exception is made for payroll as it is subject to FLSA and
federal wage and overtime regulations.
   I.   Record of assets. The Finance Director shall keep a complete record of
books and accounts under appropriate titles, to show separately and distinctly
all of the assets, property inventory, trusts, and indebtedness and all of the
receipts and expenditures of the various departments. He/she shall supervise
and control the accounts of all of the departments, and may require a written
statement of all money or property of that department.
   J.   Annual budget — See §
5-807.
   K.   Capital program — See §
5-807.
      (1)   Definitions.
         (a)   Capital improvement program (CIP). A five-year plan that shall
contain eligible capital projects listed in order of priority for funding
during the five-year period.
         (b)   Capital project. Any project funded or proposed to be funded by
public monies in part or whole to build, restore, retain, rehabilitate,
purchase or repurchase any equipment, property, facility, infrastructure,
vehicle, hardware for information technology, park facility, or building that
is to be used for the public benefit or is a public asset, and has minimum
total value of $50,000.
         (c)   Capital program budget. An annual budget that shall identify the
total funding and source of funding for each capital project adopted in the
capital improvement plan that to be executed during the fiscal year.
         (d)   Capital purchase. Any purchase of a vehicle or other motorized
equipment. Capital expenditure. An allocation from the capital budget for an
approved capital project.
         (e)   Capital expenditure. An allocation from the capital budget for
an approved capital project.
   L.   Capital priorities. Each year in the first week of May, the Mayor shall
provide an annual statement of CIP priorities to the Council and to the
departments funded by the CIP. The statement of priorities shall indicate
substantive outcomes that the City is seeking to achieve through projects
funded through the CIP and operational goals.
      (1)   Project and purchase proposals.
          (a)   Each year in the first week of June, the Finance Department
shall issue a formal request to each City department for capital project
proposals. The request shall be via a standard format set by the Finance
Director that includes an estimate of the aggregate size, in dollar figures, of
the proposed capital budget for the fiscal year.
         (b)   Each capital project and purchase proposal shall be submitted to
the Finance Director by the first week of July and shall include the following:
            [1]   For projects:
               [a]   A description of the geographic location of each proposed
capital project. If a capital expenditure is for a general Citywide project,
the description shall list anticipated locations, but note that the list may
not be exhaustive;
               [b]   An estimated timeline for the completion of the capital
project;
               [c]   An estimated total budget for the capital project;
               [d]   Any potential impact the capital project may have on the
City's operating budget;
               [e]   The estimated useful life of the capital project;
               [f]   For capital projects related to the general maintenance of
infrastructure, the total projected funds required to improve or rehabilitate
the infrastructure type citywide to an acceptable state of function of repair;
               [g]   The departmental priority for each capital project
submitted;
               [h]   A statement of whether the capital project will impact
public safety or public health;
               [i]   A statement of whether the project is CDBG eligible;
               [j]   A proposed source of financing;
               [k]   A statement of whether the capital project is consistent
with the City Comprehensive Plan.
            [2]   For purchases:
               [a]   A description of the proposed vehicle's use;
               [b]   A description of the condition of the vehicle being
replaced including mileage and age;
               [c]   The inventory of vehicles used by the department with a
statement of primary purpose and frequency of use;
               [d]   An estimated total budget for the capital purchases.
         (c)   Charter §
911(b)(6) states that all capital projects must be included in the Capital
Program Budget.
      (2)   Capital Improvement Program Committee, the CIPC.
         (a)   The Capital Improvement Program Committee (CIPC) shall advise
the Mayor and City Council on the selection and prioritization of all capital
projects and ensure that the CIP is properly administered. The membership of
the CIPC shall consist of the following seven members:
            [1]   Director of Finance;
            [2]   Director of Community Development;
            [3]   Director of Public Works;
            [4]   Chief of the Fire Department;
            [5]   Chief of the Police Department;
            [6]   City Auditor;
            [7]   One Member of City Council, appointed by the President of
City Council.
         (b)   The Chair or assignee of the CIPC shall provide a complete
listing of all capital project proposals for the CIPC members to review and
analyze prior to the meeting on the proposed projects.
         (c)   The Chair or assignee of the CIPC shall produce a report on the
findings of the committee.
      (3)   Contents of the CIPC report.
         (a)   Each year the CIPC shall produce a report, as required by
Section
911(d)(1) of the Home Rule Charter, Preliminary feasibility study, that details
the following:
            [1]   A clear general summary of its contents;
            [2]   Cost estimates and recommended time schedules for each
improvement of other capital expenditure;
            [3]   Method of financing, upon which each capital expenditure is
to be reliant; The annual cost of operating and maintaining the project to be
constructed or acquired;
            [4]   The percentage of total funds to be allocated to capital
purchases versus capital projects.
            [5]   Charter §
911(b)(2) also requires a list of all capital improvements and other capital
expenditures which are proposed to be undertaken during the five fiscal years
next ensuing, with appropriate supporting information as to the necessity for
each.
         (b)   Each capital project proposal shall be ranked by the CIPC
according to the following criteria:
            [1]   Projects that will resolve an imminent threat to public or
employee safety or health;
            [2]   Achieve compliance with federal or state statutory mandates;
            [3]   Reduce expenditures in the operating budget;
            [4]   Improve efficiency or effectiveness of service delivery;
            [5]   Comply with the City's Comprehensive Plan;
            [6]   Achieve community or economic revitalization;
            [7]   Any other criteria as determined by the Committee.
         (c)   The CIPC shall also evaluate the five-year CIP and propose any
changes that are necessary to ensure that the plan is consistent with the
City's capital needs.
         (d)   The CIPC report shall be provided to the Mayor by no later than
the first week of September of each year, and the Chair of the Committee or
assignee shall draft the report.
      (4)   Submission and approval.
         (a)   The Mayor shall prepare and submit to the City Council a five-
year capital program no later than the final date for submission of the budget.
The capital program shall include a capital budget. The proposed five-year
capital program and budget shall be posted on the City's website for public
review on the date the budget is submitted to Council.
         (b)   The Mayor, with the assistance of the Managing Director, Finance
Director and the Director of Community Development and in accordance with the
provision of the Municipalities Planning Code (53 P.S. § 10209.1), the Managing
Director shall be responsible for developing administering the capital budget.
The Mayor shall prepare and submit to the City Council a five-year capital
program no later than the final date for submission of the budget.
         (c)   The Council approval of capital projects in this preliminary
feasibility study will require a simple majority vote in order to move on to a
final approval and funding acceptance.
      (5)   Final proposal and financing. [Charter §
911(d)]
         (a)   The final capital project proposal and financing shall include:
            [1]   A clear general summary of its purpose and justification.
            [2]   The cost estimates and time schedule for the capital project,
including the cost of the post-project-completion audit.
            [3]   The method of financing and sources upon which this capital
project is reliant.
            [4]   The annual cost of operating and maintaining the project to
be constructed or acquired.
            [5]   This final capital project proposal will be published and
made available for the public to review (use notice and hearing notice, Charter
§
912). Capital project replaces capital program.
            [6]   The final Council approval of capital projects will require
five votes to approve.
         (b)   The contracts for capital projects shall be subject to the
procurement process established by the Charter and the Code.
      (6)   City Council action on the capital improvement program (Charter §
912).
         (a)   Notice and hearing. Council shall publish in one or more
newspapers of general circulation in the municipality the general summary of
the capital program with a notice stating:
            [1]   The times and places where copies of the capital program
message and capital program document are available for inspection by the
public.
            [2]   The time, place, and date, not less than 15 days or more than
30 days after such publication, for a public hearing on the capital program.
The public hearing shall not be on the date of a regular Council meeting or on
hearing date of the operating budget.
            [3]   The proposed capital program shall be available for public
inspection at City Hall and copies shall be available for the public at a
reasonable fee to be set by the Council.
      (7)   Adoption. [Charter §
912(b)] Council must adopt an annual capital program by no later than December
15 of the fiscal year currently ending. If Council fails to adopt a capital
program by December 15, then the Mayor's original capital program shall become
the official capital program of the City for the ensuing year.
      (8)   Capital project execution. [Charter §
911(d)(3), Capital project reporting]
         (a)   Current projects. All capital projects in process must be
reported on a quarterly basis and provide an update on cost, completion date,
and estimated revised operating costs. This information is to be supplied by
the Finance Director and the Project Manager to the City Council in such a form
that it is available to the public.
         (b)   Quarterly report. The quarterly report on all capital projects
approved for the current budget year shall be distributed to Council by the
last day of each fiscal quarter. The report shall include the following:
            [1]   A clear general summary of its purpose and justification.
            [2]   A statement of each project's status as of the date of the
report.
            [3]   A statement of whether the project is 50% more or less
completed.
            [4]   The cost estimates and time schedule for each capital
project, including the cost of the post-project-completion audit.
            [5]   The method of financing and sources upon which this capital
project is reliant.
            [6]   The annual cost of operating and maintaining the project to
be constructed or acquired.
   Also refer to Charter § 911(d)(3)(a):
   Current projects. All capital projects in process must be reported on a
quarterly basis and provide an update on cost, completion date, and estimated
revised operating costs. This information is to be supplied by the Finance
Manager and the Project Manager to the City Council in such a form that it is
available to the public.
         (c)   Extended projects. If commencement of a capital project does not
begin by end of the fiscal year following the year in which final approval is
obtained, the project must go through §
911(d)(1) and (2) of and as required by the Charter §
911(d)(3), and Subsection K(1), (2) and (3) of this section in the subsequent
year.
         (d)   Post-project-completion audit. [Charter §
911(d)(4)] Following completion of the capital project, a complete and detailed
audit must be published and made available to the public. This post audit is to
be completed by an independent auditor appointed by the Council. The purpose of
the post audit is to confirm the estimates of costs and explain any deviation
between actual and estimated costs.
   M.   Annual financial report.
      (1)   Section
308 of the Charter provides:
   § 308. Powers and duties of the Mayor.
   The Mayor shall have the following powers and duties:
   (c)   Inform City Council and the public each January of the financial and
general condition of the City.
      (2)   The Mayor, with the assistance of the Managing Director, Finance
Director and other appropriate department directors, shall:
         (a)   Inform Council and the public by the end of each January of the
financial and general condition of the City. This report shall be as complete
as possible but shall not be in the detail required under Subsection K(2)(b).
         (b)   Report (under oath) to the Council and appropriate state agency,
by the end of each March, a comprehensive financial report in accordance with
the standards set forth by GASB and GAAP.
         (c)   Prepare, review and update as necessary procedures necessary to
implement this section, which shall include the following:
            [1]   The format of the report (taking into consideration the
maximum standards of the GASB and the commonwealth).
            [2]   Dissemination to the public.
            [3]   A descriptive and textual analysis of the state of the City,
and the City's finances.
         (d)   When a new Mayor has been elected, the Mayor leaving office must
submit as comprehensive a report as possible by December 31 of the final year
of his/her term. The new Mayor shall review this report by January 31 of the
year he/she takes office and proposed comments and additions to the report in
preparing his/ her report pursuant to Subsection K(2)(a).
   N.   Risk management.
      (1)   Responsibility. The Finance Director shall collaborate with the
Managing Director in developing a risk management procedures manual.
Additionally, the Finance Director is responsible for joint reports to the
Mayor, Managing Director and Council.
      (2)   Reports. Reports issued by the Finance Director shall include the
following:
         (a)   Status of insurance (including self-insurance, requests for
proposals for insurances which shall be considered professional services under
this code), competitive bidding procedures.
         (b)   Claims.
         (c)   Bonds.
         (d)   Other items under risk management.
   O.   Contracts.
      (1)   Approval of contracts.
         (a)   Section
915 of the Charter provides:
   § 915. Bidding process.
   (a)   Whenever the estimated cost of any construction, erection,
installation, completion, alteration, repair of, or addition to, any project
subject to the control of the City shall exceed $10,000, it shall be the duty
of said City to have such work performed pursuant to a contract awarded to the
lowest responsible bidder [subject to Subsection(d)], after advertisement for
bids. Every such contract shall contain a provision obligating the contractor
to the prompt payment of all material furnished, labor supplied or performed,
rental for equipment employed, and services rendered by public utilities in or
in connection with the prosecution of the work, whether or not the said
material, labor, equipment or service enter into and become component parts of
the work or improvement contemplated. Such provision shall be deemed to be
included for the benefit of every person, co-partnership, association or
corporation who, as subcontractor or otherwise, has furnished material,
supplied or performed labor, rented equipment or service in or in connection
with the prosecution of the work as aforesaid, and the inclusion thereof in any
contract shall preclude the filing by any such person, co-partnership,
association or corporation of any mechanics' lien claim for such material,
labor or rental of equipment.
         (b)   The City may make contracts for carrying into execution the
provisions of the Code, ordinance and the laws of the State of Pennsylvania.
Council approval shall be required for all contracts with a value of $35,000
and over, and all collective bargaining agreements. Any contracts with a value
of $34,999.99 or less shall be entered into by the Mayor and Managing Director
without requirement of approval by Council as per § 5-809 Purchasing Policies.
         (c)   Ethics Code § 6, Prohibited Behaviors, Letter H, Awarding
Contracts:
   H.   Awarding Contracts.
      1.   To the extent that it is not inconsistent with federal or state law:
(i) a City Employee, (ii) a City Official, (iii) any Immediate Family of a City
Employee or City Official; or (iv) any for-profit business entity in which the
City Employee, City Official, or any Immediate Family has a Material Interest,
shall not enter into any Contract valued at Five Hundred Dollars ($500.00) or
more with the City or any City agency or instrumentality, unless the Contract
has been awarded through an open and public process, in accordance with
Pennsylvania law, including prior public notice and subsequent public
disclosure of all proposals considered and contracts awarded. In such a case,
the City Official or City Employee shall not have any supervisory or overall
responsibility for the implementation or administration of the Contract. Any
Contract or subcontract made in violation of this subsection may be subject to
further penalties, pursuant to the terms and provisions of the Pennsylvania
Public Official and Employee Ethics Act (65 Pa.C.S.A. § 1101.1 et seq.).
      2.   Prior to entering into or awarding any No-Bid Contract, the City
Employee, Official, agent or instrumentality entering into such No-Bid Contract
on behalf of the City, must immediately provide the Board of Ethics with the
following information:
         i.   The name and address of all contracting parties;
         ii.   A draft copy of the contract to be entered into;
         iii.   A report, in compliance with 25 P.S. § 3260a (Section 1641 of
the Pennsylvania Election Code), as amended, which shall provide the following:
            a.   An itemized list of all political contributions known to each
contracting party by virtue of the knowledge possessed by every officer,
director, associate, partner, limited partner, or individual owner that has
been made by:
               1.   Any officer, director, associate, partner, limited partner,
individual owner or members of the immediate family of the aforementioned
parties when the contributions exceed an aggregate of One Thousand Dollars
($1,000.00) by any individual during the preceding year; or
               2.   Any employee or members of his or her immediate family
whose political contribution exceeded One Thousand Dollars ($1,000.00) during
the preceding year.
         iv.   Any other information that the Board of Ethics may require.
      3.   In the event that the intended recipient of a City No-Bid Contract
or any officer, director, associate, partner, limited partner, individual
owner, member, employee, or Immediate Family of any of the aforementioned
parties has made a donation to a political committee of a City Employee, City
Official, agent or instrumentality, in excess of the contribution limitations
set forth in Section 1-199.22 during any of the preceding two (2) calendar
years from the date the draft copy of the proposed contract is submitted to the
Board of Ethics, then and in that event the City is prohibited from awarding
that No-Bid Contract to that intended party.
      4.   For purposes of this Section, the office that is considered to have
ultimate responsibility for the award of the Contract shall be as provided for
by the established purchasing policies of the City of Reading. 7
7.   Editor's Note: Original § 1-187, Department of Human Resources, which
immediately followed this section, was repealed 8-26-2013 by Ord. No. 35-2013.
§ 5-807. Budget and Capital Program.
[Added 8-22-2016 by Ord. No. 34-2016; amended 3-24-2025 by Ord. No. 22-2025]
   A.   General Fund Budget
      (1)   Submission and adoption.
         Section
902 of the Charter provides:
         § 902. Submission of Balanced Budget and Capital Program.
         On or before 90 days prior to the ensuing fiscal year the departments
heads will submit a proposed budget and capital program to the Managing
Director. On or before 90 days prior to the ensuing fiscal year the Mayor will
submit to the City Council a balanced budget, capital program, and an
accompanying message. The proposed balanced budget and capital program shall be
in such form us the Mayor deems desirable, unless otherwise required by
Council.
      (2)   Budget message
         (a)   Section
903 of the Charter provides:
         § 903. Budget message.
         The budget shall be accompanied by a message which shall include:
            A.   An explanation of the expenditures and revenues in the
proposed budget, indicating and explaining major changes from the current year
and the prior year.
            B.   An outline of proposed programs and an explanation of new,
expanded, or abolished programs or functions.
            C.   A summary of the City's debt position.
            D.   Such other material that will inform the Council and the
public of municipal goals.
      (3)   Budget organization and content.
         (a)   Section
904 of the Charter provides:
            § 904. Budget
            The budget shall provide a complete financial plan of all City
funds and activities for the ensuing fiscal year in accordance with all
generally accepted accounting principles and, except as required by this
Charter, shall be in such form as the Mayor deems desirable or the Council may
require. In organizing the budget, the Mayor shall utilize the most feasible
combination of expenditure classification by fund, organization unit, program,
purpose or activity, and object. The budget shall contain, among other things,
the following:
            A.   It shall begin with a general summary of its contents.
            B.   It shall show in detail all estimated income, indicating the
existing and proposed tax levies, as well as other assessments, fees and
charges.
               The estimated income shall mean the total of estimated revenue
plus the prior fiscal year's fund balance. If a deficit exists, a plan to
eliminate that deficit must be included in the budget.
            C.   It shall show all proposed expenditures, including debt
service, for the ensuing fiscal year.
            D.   It shall show the number of proposed employees in every job
classification and the proposed salaries of all exempt employees beginning in
2009.
               [Amended 1-26-2009 by Ord. No. 3-2009]
            The budget shall include the position ordinance, defined in §
5-212, Ordinances, which shows the number of all proposed employees in every
job classification, as defined in §
70-201, Categories of employment, highlighting changes and the proposed
salaries of all exempt employees beginning in 2009 (plain italic language
required by Bill No. 3-2009 enacted January 26, 2009, and approved by the Mayor
January 27, 2009).
            [Amended 10-26-2009 by Ord. No. 60-2009; 8-27-2012 by Ord. No. 86-
2012]
            [a]   In some cases, however, prudent succession management may
call for temporarily exceeding the position allowance in a particular
department. Some examples are:
            [i]   When there is a known planned retirement of an individual in
a highly technical position, smooth operations would call for an extended
period of knowledge transfer that would require hiring the replacement
individual prior to the retirement.
            [ii]   In the case of extended apprenticeships or training periods,
such as police and fire/paramedics, it would make sense to consider the
historic rate of attrition when determining the ideal class size. This would
provide a more consistent number of trained staff versus the current system
which can produce peaks and valleys.
         [b]   Therefore, in order to manage the operations of the City more
effectively, City Council may, by ordinance, authorize the Managing Director to
exceed the position ordinance for any department with the following conditions:
            [i]   No departmental position ordinance will be exceeded for a
period of time greater than 18 months.
            [ii]   The temporary addition of employees will not cause the total
wages of the City to exceed budgeted levels.
            [iii]   The Managing Director will report to Council on all planned
hires which will exceed any position ordinance and will report on the status of
all such hires on a regular basis.
            [iv]   At no time will the total number of City employees exceed
the total number of employees authorized under position ordinances by more than
10 employees.
            E.   It shall be so arranged as to show comparative figures for
actual and estimated income and expenditures for the current fiscal year and
actual income and expenditures of the preceding four fiscal years.
            F.   It shall indicate proposed expenditures during the ensuing
fiscal year, detailed by offices, departments and agencies, in terms of their
respective work programs and the methods of financing such expenditures.
            G.   It shall indicate proposed capital expenditures during the
ensuing fiscal year, detailed by office, departments and agencies when
practicable, and the proposed method of financing each such capital
expenditure. The Mayor will include this separate capital program section in
the annual budget and submit to Council with appropriate supporting information
as to the necessity for such programs.
            H.   It shall indicate anticipated net surplus or deficit for the
ensuing fiscal year of each utility owned or operated by the City and the
proposed method of its disposition; subsidiary budgets for each such utility
giving detailed income and expenditure information shall be attached as
appendices to the budget.
         The total of proposed expenditures shall not exceed the total of
estimated income.
         Editor's Note: Section
901 of the Charter provides:
            § 901. Fiscal year.
            The fiscal year of the City shall be the calendar year. If not
prohibited by law, the Council may, by ordinance, adopt a different fiscal
year, specifying an orderly procedure for financial and budgetary controls in
making such transition.
         (4)   Adoption.
            (a)   Section
905 of the Charter provides:
               § 905. City Council action on budget.
               I.   Notice and hearing. Council shall publish in one or more
newspapers of general circulation in the municipality the general summary of
the budget with a notice stating:
                  A.   The times and places where copies of the budget message
and budget document are available for inspection by the public.
                  B.   The time, place, and date, not less than 15 days or more
than 30 days after such publication, for a public hearing on the budget. The
public hearing shall not be on the date of a regular Council meeting.
                  C.   The proposed budget shall be available for public
inspection at City Hall and copies shall be available for the public at a
reasonable fee to be set by the Council.
         (5)   Amendments.
            (a)   Section
905 of the Charter provides:
               § 905 (b) Amendment before adoption.
               After the public hearing, the City Council may adopt the budget
with or without amendment. In amending the budget, it may add or increase
programs or amounts and may delete or decrease any programs or amounts, except
expenditures required by law or for debt service or for an estimated cash
deficit, provided that no amendment to the budget shall increase the authorized
expenditures to an amount greater than total estimated income and thereby
allowing for line item changes by the City Council.
               If the amended budget increases, decreases, or readjusts funding
requirements by more than 5%, or adds or deletes a program, the budget shall be
returned to the Mayor immediately for comment and resubmission to the Council
within three normal City workdays.
               Council shall provide for another public hearing to be held
within five days after the Mayor has resubmitted the budget.
            (b)   After the public hearing, the City Council may adopt the
budget with or without amendment. In amending the budget, it may add or
increase programs or amounts and may delete or decrease any programs or
amounts, except expenditures required by law or for debt service or for an
estimated cash deficit, provided that no amendment to the budget shall increase
the authorized expenditures to an amount greater than total estimated income
and thereby allowing for line item changes by the Council.
             (c)   If the amended budget increases, decreases, or readjusts
funding requirements by more than 5%, or adds or deletes a program, the budget
shall be returned to the Mayor immediately for comment and resubmission to the
Council within three normal business days.
               Three normal City work and/or business days ("normal business
days" shall mean weekdays and shall exclude Saturdays, Sundays and holidays).
            (d)   Council shall provide for another public hearing to be held
within five regular business days after the Mayor has resubmitted the budget.
               Five normal City work and/or business days ("normal business
days" shall mean weekdays and shall exclude Saturdays, Sundays and holidays).
         (6)   Adoption.
            (a)   Section
905 of the Charter states:
               § 905 (c) Adoption. Council must adopt an annual budget by no
later than December 15 of the fiscal year currently ending. If Council fails to
adopt a budget by December 15, then the Mayor's original proposed balanced
budget shall become the official budget of the City for the ensuing fiscal
year.
            (b)   The Council must adopt an annual budget by no later than
December 15 of the fiscal year currently ending. If Council fails to adopt an
annual budget by that date, the Mayor's original proposed balanced budget shall
become the official budget of the City for the ensuing fiscal year.
            (c)   Within 30 days after the adoption of a budget ordinance, the
Finance Director shall file a copy of the budget with the appropriate state
agency.
         (7)   Revised budget.
            (a)   Section
906 of the Charter provides:
               § 906. Revised budget. Notwithstanding any other provisions of
this article, when the fiscal year of the City is the calendar year, in any
year following a Municipal election year the Council may, within 45 days after
the start of the fiscal year, revise the budget and tax levies adopted by the
previous Council. The procedures for adopting a revised budget shall be in
accordance with §§ 905, 906, with the time periods adjusted to 45 days after
the start of the fiscal year. Ordinances adopting a revised budget shall be
effective as of the start of the fiscal year and shall rescind and replace the
budget ordinance of the previous Council. It is the intent of this Charter that
a new Council, in the year following a municipal election, shall have the power
to revise the budget and tax levies adopted by the previous Council.
            (b)   Within 15 days after the adoption of an amended budget
ordinance, the Finance Director shall file a copy with the appropriate state
agency.
         (8)   Amendments after adoption.
            (a)   Section
908 of the Charter provides:
               § 908. Amendments after adoption.
               1.   Emergency appropriations may be made by the Council to meet
a public emergency posing a sudden, clear and present danger to life or
property. Such appropriations may be made by emergency ordinance in accordance
with the provisions of § 220 of this Charter.
               2.   Supplemental appropriations may be made by the Council by
ordinance upon certification by the Mayor that there are available for
appropriation revenues in excess of those estimated in the budget.
               3.   Transfer of appropriations may be made in accordance with
provision of the Administrative Code.
            Editor's Note: Section
220 of the Charter provides:
               § 220. Emergency ordinance.
               An emergency ordinance may be adopted to meet a public emergency
posing a sudden, clear and present danger to life or property. An emergency
ordinance shall be introduced in the form and manner prescribed for ordinance
generally, except that it shall be plainly designated as an emergency ordinance
and shall describe in clear and specific terms the nature of the emergency.
Every emergency ordinance shall automatically stand repealed as of the 91st day
following the date on which it was adopted, but this shall not prevent
reenactment of the ordinance if the emergency still exists.
            (b)   Transfer of appropriations may be made in accordance with the
provision of the Administrative and Fiscal Codes in accordance with the
provisions of § 908 of the Charter.
   B.   Capital Program. [Amended 10-22-2012 by Ord. No. 98-2012]
      (1)   Definitions.
         (a)   Capital improvement program (CIP). A five-year plan that shall
contain eligible capital projects listed in order of priority for funding
during the five-year period.
         (b)   Capital project. Any project funded or proposed to be funded by
public monies in part or whole to build, restore, retain, rehabilitate,
purchase or repurchase any equipment, property, facility, infrastructure,
vehicle, hardware for information technology, park facility, or building that
is to be used for the public benefit or is a public asset, and has minimum
total value of $50,000.
         (c)   Capital program budget. An annual budget that shall identify the
total funding and source of funding for each capital project adopted in the
capital improvement plan that to be executed during the fiscal year.
         (d)   Capital purchase. Any purchase of a vehicle or other motorized
equipment.
         (e)   Capital expenditure. An allocation from the capital budget for
an approved capital project.
   C.   Capital priorities. Each year in the first week of May, the Mayor shall
provide an annual statement of CIP priorities to the Council and to the
departments funded by the CIP. The statement of priorities shall indicate
substantive outcomes that the City is seeking to achieve through projects
funded through the CIP and operational goals.
      (1)   Project and purchase proposals.
         (a)   Each year in the first week of June, the Finance Department
shall issue a formal request to each City department for capital project
proposals. The request shall be via a standard format set by the Finance
Director that includes an estimate of the aggregate size, in dollar figures, of
the proposed capital budget for the fiscal year.
         (b)   Each capital project and purchase proposal shall be submitted to
the Finance Director by the first week of July and shall include the following:
            [1]   For projects:
               [a]   A description of the geographic location of each proposed
capital project. If a capital expenditure is for a general citywide project,
the description shall list anticipated locations, but note that the list may
not be exhaustive;
               [b]   An estimated timeline for the completion of the capital
project;
               [c]   An estimated total budget for the capital project;
               [d]   Any potential impact the capital project may have on the
City's operating budget;
               [e]   The estimated useful life of the capital project;
               [f]   For capital projects related to the general maintenance of
infrastructure, the total projected funds required to improve or rehabilitate
the infrastructure type citywide to an acceptable state of function of repair;
               [g]   The departmental priority for each capital project
submitted;
               [h]   A statement of whether the capital project will impact
public safety or public health;
               [i]   A statement of whether the project is CDBG eligible;
               [j]   A proposed source of financing;
               [k]   A statement of whether the capital project is consistent
with the City Comprehensive Plan.
            [2]   For purchases:
               [a]   A description of the proposed vehicle's use;
               [b]   A description of the condition of the vehicle being
replaced including mileage and age;
               [c]   The inventory of vehicles used by the department with a
statement of primary purpose and frequency of use;
               [d]   An estimated total budget for the capital purchases.
         (c)   Charter §
911 (b) (6) states that All Capital Projects must be included in the Capital
Program Budget.
      (2)   Capital Improvement Program Committee, the CIPC.
         (a)   The Capital Improvement Program Committee (CIPC) shall advise
the Mayor and City Council on the selection and prioritization of all capital
projects and ensure that the CIP is properly administered. The membership of
the CIPC shall consist of the following seven members:
            [1]   Director of Finance;
            [2]   Director of Community Development;
            [3]   Director of Public Works;
            [4]   Chief of the Fire Department;
            [5]   Chief of the Police Department;
            [6]   City Auditor;
            [7]   One Member of City Council, appointed by the President of
City Council.
         (b)   The Chair or assignee of the CIPC shall provide a complete
listing of all capital project proposals for the CIPC members to review and
analyze prior to the meeting on the proposed projects.
         (c)   The Chair or assignee of the CIPC shall produce a report on the
findings of the committee.
      (3)   Contents of the CIPC Report.
         (a)   Each year the CIPC shall produce a report, as required by
Section
911 (1) of the Home Rule Charter, Preliminary feasibility study that details
the following:
            [1]   A clear general summary of its contents;
            [2]   Cost estimates and recommended time schedules for each
improvement of other capital expenditure;
            [3]   Method of financing, upon which each capital expenditure is
to be reliant;
            [4]   The annual cost of operating and maintaining the project to
be constructed or acquired.
            [5]   The percentage of total funds to be allocated to capital
purchases versus capital projects.
            Charter §
911 (b) (2) also requires a list of all capital improvements and other capital
expenditures which are proposed to be undertaken during the five fiscal years
next ensuing, with appropriate supporting information as to the necessity for
each;
         (b)   Each capital project proposal shall be ranked by the CIPC
according to the following criteria:
            [1]   Projects that will resolve an imminent threat to public or
employee safety or health;
            [2]   Achieve compliance with federal or state statutory mandates;
            [3]   Reduce expenditures in the operating budget;
            [4]   Improve efficiency or effectiveness of service delivery;
            [5]   Comply with the City's Comprehensive Plan;
            [6]   Achieve community or economic revitalization;
            [7]   Any other criteria as determined by the Committee.
         (c)   The CIPC shall also evaluate the five-year CIP and propose any
changes that are necessary to ensure that the plan is consistent with the
City's capital needs.
         (d)   The CIPC Report shall be provided to the Mayor by no later than
the first week of September of each year, and the Chair of the Committee or
assignee shall draft the report.
      (4)   Submission and approval.
         (a)   The Mayor shall prepare and submit to the City Council a five-
year capital program no later than the final date for submission of the budget.
The capital program shall include a capital budget. The proposed five-year
capital program and budget shall be posted on the City's website for public
review on the date the budget is submitted to Council.
         (b)   The Mayor, with the assistance of the Managing Director, Finance
Director and the Director of Community Development and in accordance with the
provision of the Municipalities Planning Code (53 P.S. § 10209.1), the Managing
Director shall be responsible for developing administering the capital budget.
The Mayor shall prepare and submit to the City Council a five-year capital
program no later than the final date for submission of the budget.
         (c)   The Council approval of capital projects in this preliminary
feasibility study will require a simple majority vote in order to move on to a
final approval and funding acceptance.
      (5)   Final proposal and financing Charter §
911 (d).
         (a)   The final capital project proposal and financing shall include:
            [1]   A clear general summary of its purpose and justification.
            [2]   The cost estimates and time schedule for the capital project,
including the cost of the post-project-completion audit.
            [3]   The method of financing and sources upon which this capital
project is reliant.
            [4]   The annual cost of operating and maintaining the project to
be constructed or acquired.
            [5]   This final capital project proposal will be published and
made available for the public to review (use notice and hearing notice, Charter
§
912). Capital project replaces capital program.
            [6]   The final Council approval of capital projects will require
five votes to approve.
         (b)   The contracts for capital projects shall be subject to the
procurement process established by the Charter and the Code.
      (6)   City Council action on the capital improvement program (Charter §
912)
         (a)   Notice and hearing. Council shall publish in one or more
newspapers of general circulation in the municipality the general summary of
the capital program with a notice stating:
            [1]   The times and places where copies of the capital program
message and capital program document are available for inspection by the
public.
            [2]   The time, place, and date, not less than 15 days or more than
30 days after such publication, for a public hearing on the capital program.
The public hearing shall not be on the date of a regular Council meeting or on
hearing date of the operating budget.
            [3]   The proposed capital program shall be available for public
inspection at City Hall and copies shall be available for the public at a
reasonable fee to be set by the Council.
      (7)   Adoption. [Charter §
912(3)(b)] Council must adopt an annual capital program by no later than
December 15 of the fiscal year currently ending. If Council fails to adopt a
capital program by December 15, then the Mayor's original capital program shall
become the official capital program of the City for the ensuing year.
      (8)   Capital project execution. [Charter §
911 (d) (3), Capital project reporting.]
         (a)   Current projects. All capital projects in process must be
reported on a quarterly basis and provide an update on cost, completion date,
and estimated revised operating costs. This information is to be supplied by
the Finance Director and the Project Manager to the City Council in such a form
that it is available to the public.
         (b)   Quarterly report. The quarterly report on all capital projects
approved for the current budget year shall be distributed to Council by the
last day of each fiscal quarter. The report shall include the following:
            [1]   A clear general summary of its purpose and justification.
            [2]   A statement of each project's status as of the date of the
report.
            [3]   A statement of whether the project is 50% more or less
completed.
            [4]   The cost estimates and time schedule for each capital
project, including the cost of the post project completion audit.
            [5]   The method of financing and sources upon which this capital
project is reliant.
            [6]   The annual cost of operating and maintaining the project to
be constructed or acquired.
            Also refer to Charter §
911 (d)(3)(a)
            Current projects. All Capital Projects in process must be reported
on a quarterly basis and provide an update on cost, completion date, and
estimated revised operating costs. This information is to be supplied by the
Finance Manager and the Project Manager to the City Council in such a form that
it is available to the public.
         (c)   Extended projects. If commencement of a capital project does not
begin by end of the fiscal year following the year in which final approval is
obtained, the project must go through §
911(d)(1) and (2) of and as required by the Charter §
911(d)(3), and Subsection K(l), (2) and (3) of this section in the subsequent
year.
         (d)   Post-project-completion audit. (Charter §
911(d)(4)) Following completion of the capital project, a complete and detailed
audit must be published and made available to the public. This post audit is to
be completed by an independent auditor appointed by the Council. The purpose of
the post audit is to confirm the estimates of costs and explain any deviation
between actual and estimated costs.
§ 5-808. Reserved.
§ 5-809. Purchasing Policy and Procedure.
[Added 8-22-2016 by Ord. No. 34-2016]
[Editor’s note: Ord. 34-2016, passed 8-22-2016, creates this new § 5-809,
Purchasing Policy and Procedure, previously an appendix to Ch. 5, as set forth
below. Appendices to Purchasing Policy and Procedure follow Ch. 5.]
Forward
The purpose of this manual is to provide all departments, divisions, offices
and agencies with the procedures and policies to be used in the procurement of
goods and services and to provide for the fair and equitable treatment of all
persons involved in public purchasing by the City of Reading; to maximize the
purchasing value of public funds; and to provide safeguards for maintaining a
procurement system of quality and integrity.
The purchasing function involves the procurement of materials, supplies,
equipment, and services at best value, consistent with the quality needed to
meet the required standards established and approved by the City of Reading.
Our goal is the promotion of the best interest of the City of Reading through
intelligent action and fair dealings, resulting in obtaining maximum savings
for the City.
Rules and regulations are necessary for the proper operation of the purchasing
function and it is essential that all who are involved in the purchasing
operation be well informed. This manual was developed to aid all employees
directly or indirectly associated with the function of purchasing.
The objectives of the Purchasing Division are as follows:
   1.   To deal fairly and equitably with all vendors wishing to do business
with the City of Reading.
   2.   To provide professional procurement services for all customers within
the City.
   3.   To assure adherence to all laws, regulations, and procedures related to
City procurement.
   4.   To maximize competition for all procurements of the City.
   5.   To purchase goods and services at the best value, if not lowest price,
consistent with quality performance and delivery requirements, from capable
vendors meeting the City's needs.
Section 1
Purchasing Division
Responsibilities, Function & Objectives
1.01 PURPOSE:
The purpose of this regulation is to formalize the City of Reading purchasing
policy by delineating the specific authorities and responsibilities that are
the components of the purchasing process.
1.02 APPLICABLE TO:
All departments, divisions, offices and agencies.
1.03 GENERAL PURCHASING POLICY:
   1.   Overall authority and responsibility for City Purchasing is centralized
in the Purchasing office within the Finance Department.
   2.   The purchasing policy is applicable to all offices and encompasses more
than just the service function of ordering and buying goods and services.
Functions such as planning and scheduling purchases, seeking competition,
assuring the preparation of proper specifications, and enforcing compliance
with all purchasing regulations and procedures are part of the purchasing
program.
1.04 PURCHASING COORDINATOR:
   1.   Authorities. The purchasing coordinator shall have the authority to:
      A.   Purchase or contract for all materials, supplies, equipment and
contractual services for all City departments with the exception of:
         •   Books, subscriptions
         •   Business meeting expenses
         •   Charitable contributions
         •   Dues
         •   Items that can legitimately be purchased via the petty cash
process
         •   Postage
         •   Tuition
         •   Travel - meals, mileage, transportation
         •   Utility services that are not regulated by the PUC
         (1)   In case of an emergency, purchase authority is delegated to the
individual departments, divisions, offices or agencies when the purchasing
coordinator is unavailable i.e., after normal working hours (see Administrative
Procedures, "Emergency Purchase Procedure").
         (2)   It is a violation of this regulation for any official or
employee of the City to purchase other than the commodities or services
exempted, as stated above, in a way that circumvents the purchasing
coordinator. Violation of this regulation will result in appropriate
disciplinary action, including reimbursement to the City for any payments made
for purchase in violation of this regulation.
      B.   The purchasing coordinator shall have the authority to review all
requisitions for the purchase of materials, supplies, equipment and services
not exempted from this regulation for quality and cost.
         (1)   The purchasing process begins with the user's formulation of
specifications that identify and describe the product or service to be
purchased.
         (2)   The purchasing coordinator will assure that the specifications
meet the user's needs, but do not call for features or a level of quality not
necessary for the item's use.
         (3)   If there is a lack of agreement between the purchasing
coordinator and the department, division, office or agency concerning any
specifications, the purchasing coordinator will refer the case and all
supporting documentation to the Finance Director for determination.
      C.   Prepare, in cooperation with departments, divisions, offices or
agencies, standard written specifications for supplies and/or services not
exempted by this regulation especially those common to various City
departments, divisions, offices or agencies.
      D.   Place orders for all supplies, materials, equipment or services, not
exempted by this regulation, by the issuance of a purchase order.
      E.   Dispose of surplus or unused materials, supplies or equipment after
they have been declared as surplus by the Finance Director.
         Disposal shall be on an annual or more frequent basis as deemed
necessary by the Managing Director in accordance with City purchasing
regulations. The sale of any surplus by a City employee, without the approval
of the Managing Director, constitutes a violation of this regulation and will
result in appropriate disciplinary action.
      F.   Enforce all purchasing regulations and procedures.
1.05 HEADS OF DEPARTMENTS, DIVISIONS, OFFICES AND AGENCIES:
   1.   Responsibilities. The individual head of a department, division, office
or agency or their designees have the responsibility to:
      A.   Furnish the purchasing coordinator with all necessary information to
assure that the purchase will be correct in all details.
      B.   Ensure that specifications are not restrictive and do not call for
features or a level of quality unnecessary for an item's use.
      C.   Provide a valid written justification when requesting a proprietary
item or issuing a restrictive specification.
      D.   Provide a list of suggested vendors. This may assist the purchasing
coordinator in finding the item requested. It does not limit the purchasing
coordinator to contacting those vendors.
      E.   Ensure that there is no commitment of the City to the purchase of
any item, except those covered by the Emergency Purchase Procedure and Section
1.04.1.A of this Policy.
      F.   Notify the purchasing coordinator immediately if any material,
supplies, or equipment is inferior in quality or in any way unsatisfactory.
      G.   Notify purchasing quarterly, of any surplus, obsolete or scrap
material or equipment that exist in their departments, divisions, offices and
agencies.
1.06 EXCEPTIONS TO PURCHASING POLICY:
Where these regulations conflict with requirements stipulated and/or mandated
for the use of federal or other grant funds, the requirements governing the
expenditure of those funds shall prevail.
Section 2
General Guidelines
2.01 REQUISITION PROCESS
   1.   Preparing a Requisition. User must determine the item/service needed
and communicate an accurate and complete description. The requisition process
is initiated by the user's completion of a requisition via the City's computer
system.
   2.   Dollar Limits Covering Vendor Solicitation7a .  With the exception of
professional services, the purchasing coordinator follows the following
guidelines concerning the dollar limits covering vendor solicitation.
      A.   Purchases up to $4,000.00 - Purchases in this category require one
(1) verbal quote.
      B.   Purchases of $4,000.01 to $9,999.99 - Purchases in this category
require three (3) verbal or written quotes.
      C.   Purchases of $10,000.00 and up - Purchases in this category require
a formal solicitation.
   3.   Dollar Limits Covering Professional Services Solicitation. For
professional services, the purchasing coordinator follows the following
guidelines concerning the dollar limits covering vendor solicitation:
      A.   Purchases up to $4,000.00 - Purchases in this category require one
(1) verbal quote.
      B.   Purchases of $4,000.01 to $9,999.99 - Purchases in this category
require three (3) verbal or written quotes.
7a Per Charter Section 915 B(1) and B(2)
      C.   Purchases of $10,000.00 to $34,999.99 - Purchases in this category
require three written quotes and keeping the formal bidding process as an
option unless otherwise required by law.
      D.   Purchases of $35,000.00 and up - Requires a formal solicitation
through advertising which requires a vendor to submit sealed bids accompanied
by a bid surety, unless surety is waived at the time the solicitation is
issued.
The Managing Director may waive formal bidding procedures only when purchases
must be made for an emergency declared by the Mayor and authorized by Council
resolution, professional services required via a list from an insurance company
or arbitration agreement; repair of any public work during an emergency;
patented or copyrighted property; public utilities under tariffs on file with
another governmental agency.
2.02 APPROVAL AUTHORITY
   1.   Contracts of up to $34,999.99 are approved by both the Managing
Director and the Mayor.
   2.   Purchases and contracts of $35,000.00 and higher must be approved by
City Council.
   3.   To place an item on the City Council agenda, the department will
forward all necessary documentation to the Purchasing Coordinator. The
Purchasing Coordinator will prepare the request and submit it to the City Clerk
for inclusion on the Council Consent Agenda.
   4.   All City contracts must be reviewed for form and content and signed by
the City Solicitor before any City funds may be paid for said contract.
   5.   All City contracts must utilize the City's standard contract terms and
conditions. This requirement may be waived on an individual basis if the
Managing Director determines that the use of alternate contract terms and
conditions are in the best interest of the City.
2.03 EXCLUSIONS
   The following purchases are excluded from competitive bidding requirements:
   1.   Procurement of dues and memberships in trade or professional
organizations; subscriptions for periodicals; advertisements; postage; used
equipment; abstracts of titles for real property; title insurance for real
property; real property; water, sewer, and electrical utility services;
copyrighted materials; patented materials; art and artistic services;
employment agreements; medical services; fees and costs of job- related travel;
seminars; tuition; registration; and training.
   2.   Purchases from State of Pennsylvania or Federal GSA Contracts as well
as contracts awarded by any local, state, or national government agency,
cooperative purchasing organizations or purchasing associations.
   3.   Items purchased for resale to the general public.
   4.   Weather related events or other undeclared emergency situations.
   Such purchases, transactions, and expenditures listed above shall be
authorized by the Purchasing Coordinator. Certain procurements within the above
categories may be obtained by competitive means when it is determined that
adequate sources for the goods or services required are available.
Section 3
Emergency Purchase Procedure
3.01 PURPOSE:
The purpose of this procedure is to establish the proper purchasing procedure
in times of emergency.
3.02 APPLICABLE TO:
All departments, divisions, offices and agencies.
3.03 DEFINITION:
   1.   An emergency is defined as an unanticipated situation requiring
immediate action to avoid the loss of life, limb or property.
3.04 POLICY:
   1.   There will be no commitment of City funds to purchase goods or services
outside the normal purchasing procedure, unless the need meets the criteria as
defined above in Section 3.03.1.
   2.   The Mayor has the authority to declare a State of Emergency as provided
for by Pennsylvania statutes and to subsequently suspend all standard operating
purchasing procedures, as per Title 35 Pennsylvania Emergency Management laws
and after the Declaration of Emergency has been adopted by Council.
3.05 EMERGENCY PURCHASING PROCEDURE DURING NORMAL WORK HOURS:
 
Responsibility Action
Department,    1.   If an emergency occurs during normal working hours, the department,
division,      division, office or agency receives permission from the Managing Director to
office or      request the purchasing coordinator to order the materials and/or services
agency         necessary. The department, division, office or agency may suggest a vendor with
representative whom he/she is familiar and considers reliable.
               2.   The purchasing coordinator, if time permits, will contact vendors and
               receive price quotes.
               3.   The purchasing coordinator obtains the price for each item, the total
               amount, the date, and location of delivery. The purchasing coordinator verbally
Purchasing     places the order with the vendor.
Coordinator    4.   The purchasing coordinator informs the vendor that a confirming purchase
               order will follow and that the vendor should send the invoice to accounts payable
               once the purchase order is received.
               5.   The purchasing coordinator informs the department, division, office or
               agency of the vendor, prices, total amount, etc., in order that a requisition can
               be prepared.
               6.   The department, division, office or agency prepares a confirming emergency
Department,    requisition for processing immediately upon notification of pertinent data by the
division,      purchasing coordinator.
office or      7.   The department, division, office or agency shall issue a memo referencing
agency         the purchase order and describing the nature of the emergency.
               8.   The department, division, office or agency shall not wait for an invoice
               from the vendor prior to completing a requisition form.
 
3.06 EMERGENCY PURCHASING PROCEDURE AFTER NORMAL WORK HOURS:
 
Responsibility Action
               1.   The department, division, office or agency, or if unavailable the on-site
               supervisor, is responsible for authorizing an order with a vendor if an emergency
               occurs after normal working hours.
Department,    2.   The department, division, office or agency shall call the purchasing
division,      coordinator the following work day with details of the emergency purchase.
office or      3.   The department, division, office or agency shall complete a confirming
agency         emergency requisition.
               4.   The department, division, office or agency's action is subject to review by
               the purchasing coordinator and the Managing Director to determine compliance with
               this regulation.
 
Section 4
Sole Source Purchases
4.01 DEFINITION
   Sole source purchases are defined as purchases of supplies, or equipment
that meet all of the following criteria:
   a)   General rule--A contract may be awarded for a supply, service, or
construction item without competition if the City Solicitor, Purchasing
Coordinator, Finance Director, and Managing Director first determine in writing
that the purchase is in the best interest of the City and one or more of the
following conditions exists:
      (1)   Only a single contractor is capable of providing the supply,
service or construction;
      (2)   A Federal or State statute or Federal regulation exempts the
supply, service or construction from the competitive procedure;
      (3)   It is clearly not feasible to award the contract for supplies or
services on a competitive basis;
      (4)   The services involve the repair, modification or calibration of
equipment and they are to be performed by the manufacturer of the equipment or
by the manufacturer's authorized dealer, provided the Purchasing Coordinator
determines that bidding is not appropriate under the circumstances; or
      (5)   The contract is for investment advisors or managers approved by the
Aggregate Pension Fund Board. [Amended 1-26-2015 by Ord. No. 4-2015; 5-13-2024
by Ord. No. 30-2024]
4.02 PROCEDURE
   (1)   Sole source purchases are exempt from competitive requirements upon
certification by the Purchasing Coordinator stating that an investigation was
conducted by the Purchasing Coordinator to determine that not more than one
qualified and responsible vendor exists and the other conditions and
circumstances necessitating the purchase via a Sole Source Justification Form.
This certification shall set forth the purpose and need in addition to why the
item is the only one that will produce the desired results. The Sole Source
Justification Form must be signed by the City Solicitor, the Purchasing
Coordinator, the Finance Director, and the Managing Director to be deemed
“approved.” Sole Source Justification Forms shall expire annually on December
31st. Sole Source contracts shall not be eligible for automatic renewal/
extension and must be re-certified by the Purchasing Coordinator before a
renewal/extension may occur.
   (2)   Advertisement. Prior to the award of a sole source purchase hereunder,
the City shall advertise its intent to award the contract as a sole source
purchase and allow for a 10-day notice and objection period from the date of
the advertisement for individual(s) or entity(s) to object in writing to the
proposed award because other qualified vendor(s) are available to bid or it
otherwise does not meet the criteria for a sole source purchase hereunder. Said
notice shall be published on the City website and a newspaper of general
circulation within the City of Reading. In the event that no objections are
timely filed, the award may proceed hereunder. In the event that objections are
timely received, the City shall review those objections and the City Solicitor,
Purchasing Coordinator, Finance Director, and Managing Director, in their sole
discretion, shall then determine if the proposed award still meets the criteria
for a sole source purchase hereunder in order to proceed hereunder or if it
should instead be put out for competitive bidding under the City's Purchasing
Policy.
   (3)   Sole source purchases shall be approved by City Council if the amount
of the purchase exceeds the threshold amount under the Purchasing Policy for
Council Approval. [Amended 5-13-2024 by Ord. No. 30-2024]
Section 5
Blanket Purchase Orders
5.01 PURPOSE:
   The purpose of this issuance is to explain the nature of blanket order
purchases and to define the specific procedures for establishing blanket
orders, making purchases with blanket orders, and renewing and closing blanket
orders.
5.02 APPLICABLE TO:
   All departments, divisions, offices or agencies.
5.03 BLANKET ORDER PURCHASE:
   1.   General. A blanket order purchase is a special type of purchase order
issued by the purchasing coordinator and designed to reduce the administrative
effort and costs of placing recurrent orders for necessary items or services,
such as heating fuel or repairs to office equipment.
      Blanket orders normally call for an undetermined quantity of a product to
be delivered or a service to be provided on a continuing basis from a single
vendor. In some cases, the quantity may be estimated at an agreed upon unit
price.
      Only one blanket order at a time may be issued to a specific vendor, from
a standard account. A single blanket order may however cover one or more types
of items or services.
      A blanket order may be issued any time during a calendar year, unless
otherwise determined by the Director of Finance. Blanket orders will be invalid
after December 31st of the year issued.
   2.   Types of Blanket Orders. Two types of blanket orders exist:
      A.   Regular Blanket Orders (B) - referred to as merely blanket orders,
are established with a vendor for a fixed dollar amount, but do not necessarily
indicate the specific items or services to be purchased, their quantity, or
unit price. The description is to state generally what is to be purchased,
i.e., "various automotive replacement parts such as but not limited to filters,
spark plugs, belts." Statements such as "Supplies as may be needed from time to
time" are unacceptable.
      B.   Blanket Orders with Price Agreements (BA) - Blanket orders with
price agreements are regular blanket orders where the unit price of the items
or services are agreed upon with the vendor for a stated period of time, i.e.,
fuel oil for the year. Items and prices should be clearly stated in the
description along with date of quote or contract award and period of agreement.
5.04 PROCEDURES FOR ESTABLISHING BLANKET ORDERS:
   The correct procedure to establish a blanket order is defined below. Blanket
order requisitions are initiated and forwarded via the City's computer system.
 
Responsibility Action
Department,
division,      1.   Determine the items or services to be purchased on a recurring basis;
office or      initiates a requisition
agency
               2.   Reviews the requisition; determines if sufficient funds are available in
Controller     specified account. If specified account has insufficient funds, notifies user to
               request a transfer from another account.
Director of    3.   Examines blanket order for budget authorization. If questions arise,
Finance        contacts the department, division, office or agency for clarification or
               explanation. If approved, forwards to purchasing.
Purchasing     4.   Distributes copies to appropriate offices and mails vendor copy.
Coordinator
 
5.05 PROCEDURES FOR BUYING ITEMS AGAINST A BLANKET ORDER:
   Once a blanket order is established, the department, division, office or
agency may approve the purchase of items covered by the blanket order.
   The correct procedure to buy items against a blanket order is defined below.
 
Responsibility Action
Department,    1.   Department, division, office or agency approves all blanket order purchases
division,      before they are made. Authorized employee must present proper City identification
office or      to vendor. Single item purchases over $500 must be pre-approved by the purchasing
agency         coordinator.
Accounts       2.   Upon receipt of invoice from vendor, a copy is forwarded to the using
Payable        department, division, office or agency.
Department,    3.   Confirms accuracy of invoice, including price and availability of funds.
division,      Ensures that purchase order number and code are on the invoice. Obtains signature
office or      from the department, division, office or agency and forwards with receiving slip
agency         to accounts payable for payment.
Accounts       4.    Pays bill from the account used to establish the blanket order. Confirms
Payable        accuracy of price with that listed on purchase or contained in contract or price
               agreement with vendor. Reduces blanket order amount accordingly.
 
5.06 PROCEDURES FOR RENEWING A BLANKET ORDER:
   When a purchase is desired against a blanket order and insufficient funds
are available from the blanket order, there are two options:
   •   If the purchase is the last one to be made against the blanket order,
the department, division, office or agency may request accounts payable to add
up to $1,000 additional funds to cover the last purchase. If more than $1,000
is required, the department, division, office or agency should issue a separate
requisition for the purchase.
   •   If more than $1,000 is required to make the purchase and additional
purchases are desired against a blanket order on a continuing basis, a renewal
must be made.
   In case of a renewal, the department, division, office or agency completes a
new requisition. The procedure, herein, is the same as previously stated for
requesting a new blanket order.
5.07 CLOSING A BLANKET ORDER:
   A department, division, office or agency may desire to close a blanket order
even though funds are still reserved.
   To close an existing blanket order the department, division, office or
agency contacts either purchasing or accounts payable with instructions to
cancel it. Accounts payable removes the reservation and transfers the remaining
funds into the same standard account of the department, division, office or
agency.
   A department, division, office or agency shall not have more than one
blanket order with the same vendor, in the same expenditure code, unless one
blanket order falls below $25.
Section 6
Payment for items and services without a purchase order
6.01 PURPOSE:
   The purpose of this administrative communication is to:
   1.   Define the categories of purchases for which payment is authorized by
use of the Accounts Payable Approval form.
   2.   Explain the procedure whereby payment to vendors is authorized by use
of the Accounts Payable Approval form.
6.02 APPLICABLE TO:
   All departments, divisions, offices or agencies
6.03 CATEGORIES OF PURCHASES MADE NOT REQUIRING A PURCHASE ORDER:
   Certain categories of purchases do not require the department, division,
office or agency to follow the requisition/purchase order process, and the
orders are not placed by the purchasing coordinator as outlined in
Administrative Procedure "Requisition and Purchase Order Process."
   Categories of purchases that do not require a purchase order are as follows:
   •   Arbitration costs
   •   Association dues
   •   Books and subscriptions
   •   Business meeting expenses
   •   Charitable contributions
   •   Debt service & related fees
   •   Insurance
   •   Items under one hundred dollars ($100) that can legitimately be
purchased via petty cash
   •   Postage
   •   Tuition
   •   Travel expenses for job related purposes - including meals, lodging and
transportation (travel policy must be followed)
   •   Utility services (e.g., heat, electricity, phone services regulated by
the PUC)
   •   Worker's compensation disbursements
   Only the expenses and services listed above may be purchased with payment
authorized by the Accounts Payable Approval form
6.04   SPECIFIC PROCEDURES FOR PAYMENT WITH AN ACCOUNTS PAYABLE APPROVAL FORM:
1.   Authorization to Pay by the Accounts Payable Procedure.
 
Responsibility Action
               1.    Determines if adequate funds are available in the appropriate account for the
               expense.
               a.   If adequate funds are not available in the appropriate account, initiates a
               budget transfer.
Department,    2.   Determines if items or services may be purchased by the accounts payable
division,      process. If so, contacts vendor directly and gives necessary information for
office or      purchase.
agency         3.   Receives goods or services.
               4.   After receiving goods or services and determining them to be satisfactory,
               completes an accounts payable approval form as an authorization for payment.
               5.   Forwards copy of the accounts payable approval form and vendor invoice to the
               Director of Finance for authorization.
Director of    6.   Reviews accounts payable approval form and if approves, signs accordingly and
Finance        forwards with the invoice to Accounts Payable. Additional signature authorizations
               as per City policy are applied during this step.
               7.   Audits accounts payable approval form to verify funds are available in the
               account(s) specified.
                  a.   Returns to the department, division, office or agency for transfer if funds
Accounts       are not available in account(s) specified.
Payable        8.   Insures that proper payment is made to vendor.
               9.   Notifies the department, division, office or agency of payment through
               issuance of monthly report of payments.
               10.   Forwards original copy plus vendor invoice to accounting for filing.
 
Section 7
Bid Solicitation, Evaluation and Award Procedure
7.01 PURPOSE:
   The purpose of this issuance is to define and explain the procedures
followed in the invitation/solicitation, opening, evaluation and award of bids
for purchases of $35,000 and greater.
7.02 APPLICABLE TO:
   The Purchasing office of the City of Reading and all departments, divisions,
offices or agencies.
7.03 DEFINITIONS:
   1.   Bid - the formal offering of a price by a vendor for a specific
construction project, commodity or product costing over $10,000.00 and
requiring bid surety.
   2.   Bid Solicitation - a type of vendor solicitation used that requires the
City to advertise for equipment, supplies and services desired and requires
vendors to submit sealed bids.
   3.   Invitation to Bid - a document prepared by purchasing and sent to
bidders for the purpose of soliciting bids on goods and services.
   4.   Mailing List - a current list of vendors offering supplies, equipment
and services maintained by purchasing.
   5.   Public Work of the City - includes any service provided by the City on
an ongoing basis for the welfare and protection of property and persons within
its political bounds.
   6.   Responsible Bidder - a type of vendor that possesses at least, but not
limited to, the following - adequate production facilities, sound financial
standing and a sufficient experience in the business of producing and/or
supplying goods or services.
   7.   Responsive Bidder - a type of vendor that complies with all
specifications put forth by the invitation to bid.
   8.   Sole Source Supplier - a supplier who is the only vendor able to
furnish a certain item that is copyrighted or patented, excluding any
professional services.
   9.   Specifications - requirements and/or instructions that must be properly
addressed and followed by bidders.
   10.   Vendor - a supplier of goods or services.
   11.   Verbal Solicitation - a type of vendor solicitation which involves an
oral price statement from a vendor to the purchasing coordinator for a
particular commodity or service.
   12.   Written Vendor Solicitation - a type of vendor solicitation that
requires a written price quotation from the vendor to the purchasing
coordinator.
7.04 GENERAL POLICY:
   1.   Central purchasing authority and responsibility in the City rests with
the City purchasing coordinator and the City purchasing office.
   2.   The bidding process is a public process that is subject to public
scrutiny and review. All purchasing procedures and regulations shall be written
and made available for public review.
   3.   Any deviation from normal operating practices shall require proper
documentation and approval by the Managing Director.
   4.   Projects or contracts which are federally funded must comply with
provisions set forth by the United States Department of Labor, the United
States Department of Housing and Urban Development, and the Office of Federal
Contract Compliance Programs.
   5.   The Department of Community Development is responsible for monitoring
contracts involving federal funds, including labor compliance.
7.05 PURCHASES REQUIRING BID SOLICITATION:
   1.   All purchases of $35,000 and up require bid solicitations except those
listed below:
      A.   Public utility service under tariffs on file with the Pennsylvania
Public Utility Commission.
      B.   Any items purchased through Federal or City programs that have
different bidding requirements mandated by a grant program.
      C.   Purchases made through intergovernmental cooperation as governed by
1972, P.L.762, No.180:53 Pa.C.S. §§ 2301 et seq. as amended and Act 31 of 1971
the City’s cooperative purchasing program, a City law of general application.
   2.   Bid solicitations or RFP's are not mandatory for the items listed in
7.05.1 (above); however, requests by departments, divisions, offices or
agencies to bypass the bid solicitation or RFP procedure must have valid
justification. All such requests shall be in writing and receive approval by
the Managing Director on a case by case basis.
7.06 MAILING LIST:
   1.   General. The bidders list is a current list of suppliers of various
categories of commodities. The purchasing coordinator shall develop and
maintain the mailing list.
   2.   Membership. The mailing list consists of:
      •   Vendors with whom there has been a satisfactory, past relationship.
      •   Vendors added by the purchasing coordinator as a result of research
in trade journals, other documents or by consultation with user departments.
      •   Vendors who contact purchasing in response to newspaper
advertisements or in anticipation of the City's future needs.
      •   Vendors who have never provided goods or services to the City and who
request to be added to the City's mailing list, may be added on a probationary
basis.
      •   Vendor that has proven to be acceptable either through a positive
experience with the City or through acceptable reference checks.
         The purchasing coordinator will review and update each commodity group
at least once every two (2) calendar years.
   3.   Removal. Vendor files shall be located in purchasing. It is the
responsibility of the department, division, office or agency to notify
purchasing by memorandum of any supplier that does not act in a responsible
manner.
   A bidder may be removed from the mailing list when:
      •   There are three (3) or more consecutive no responses to a request for
quotation, within a one (1) year period.
      •   There is failure to submit a bid for an annual contract for two (2)
consecutive years.
      •   Consistent inability to meet specifications and delivery dates.
      •   General failure to keep commitments, including indebtedness to the
City for any taxes, liens, judgments, fees or other debts for which no written
agreement or payment plan satisfactory to the City has been established.
[Amended 1-27-2016 by Ord. No. 1-2016]
      •   Consistent complaints by users about the quality of the product or
service.
         Evidence of such failures of performance shall be documented by the
department, division, office or agency and forwarded to the purchasing
coordinator and the Finance Director for review. If the Finance Director
determines that removal from the list is justified, the vendor shall be
notified in writing explaining the reasons for removal.
      4.   Reinstatement. A vendor can be reinstated to the mailing list upon
receipt of a letter of application that explains their interest in City
purchasing if the reason for removal was the vendor's failure to reply to the
Invitation to Bid.
         If the vendor was removed for inability to meet specification, meet
delivery dates or for offering a poor quality item, the vendor must take steps
to show the purchasing coordinator that the problem has been or is being
corrected. The purchasing coordinator will file the documentation submitted by
the vendor in the appropriate vendor file and if acceptable will reinstate the
vendor to the mailing list.
7.07 SOLICITATION PROCEDURE.
   1.   Product or Service Determination. The department, division, office or
agency determines the need for a product or service and is responsible for
budgeting the item. Purchasing can assist in deciding upon a reasonable figure
for the particular item.
   2.   Authorization. A memo requesting the purchasing coordinator to
advertise for bids for a specific item or service shall be initiated by the
department, division, office or agency and approved by the Managing Director
and Finance Director.
   3.   Requisition. The department, division, office or agency will initiate a
requisition.
7.08 PREPARING SPECIFICATIONS. 
   The specifications that are included in the Invitation to Bid are prepared
by the department, division, office or agency, with guidance from the
purchasing office. Specifications are required in all bid solicitation
situations, and optional based upon the need in all other cases as determined
by the purchasing office. The City strongly discourages restrictive
specifications that can favor certain vendors.
   1.   When the department, division, office or agency decides to prepare the
specifications, the department, division, office or agency should contact
various suppliers of the product or service and request manufacturer's
specifications. The purchasing office can provide guidance in this part of the
procedure.
      All department, division, office or agency should be wary of salespersons
who may attempt to influence how the City's specifications are drafted. The
department, division, office or agency should be aware that the City benefits
the most when there is good competition among numerous vendors.
   2.   The department, division, office or agency reviews all the
manufacturer's specifications and prepares the City specifications so that as
many suppliers as possible will be able to meet the requirements without
sacrificing quality. The specifications should include all essential
requirements to insure that the item meets the department, division, office or
agency's needs, but simultaneously containing only those features that are
necessary for an item's intended use.
   3.   The department, division, office or agency attaches the drafted City
specification to the manufacturers' specifications used, and forwards to the
purchasing office.
   4.   Purchasing will review the drafted specifications to assure that as
many vendors as possible can successfully meet the requirements and respond to
the Invitation to Bid. If the purchasing coordinator feels that the
specifications as drafted will not support competition, necessary changes will
be made in coordination with the department, division, office or agency. If the
purchasing coordinator and the department, division, office or agency cannot
agree on a common ground, they will meet with the Finance Director to make the
final determination of how the specifications will read.
   5.   The purchasing office may, with the cooperation of the department,
division, office or agency, organize a pre-bid conference with potential
vendors for the purpose of reviewing draft specifications for completeness,
accuracy and fairness.
7.09 INVITATION TO BID
   1.   General. The Invitation to Bid which is issued by purchasing
establishes the criteria for determining the responsive bidder by outlining the
procedure bidders must follow to be considered for the bid award. The
Invitation to Bid or a copy of the newspaper ad or internet posting outlining
the bid solicitation may be sent to vendors in that particular category of the
mailing list.
   2.   Procedural requirements included in the bid packet outline standard
instructions to be followed for bidding, delivery and, completion schedules,
payment, invoicing procedures, and conditions for inspections and acceptance of
purchased items.
   3.   Notice Inviting Bids.
      A.   Public notice shall be given for all bid solicitations. Acceptable
methods of public notice include: publishing an advertisement two times, each
publication on a different day, in at least one newspaper of general
publication, posting of the bid solicitation to the City website, publication
in a specialty-interest publication, or other methods as may be deemed
acceptable by the purchasing coordinator. The bids shall not be opened until at
least ten days have elapsed after the first advertisement.
      B.   City Web Site. All bid solicitations published on the Purchasing
section of the City web site shall include at least:
         •   A description of the equipment, supplies, products or services to
be purchased.
         •   Where the bid form and specifications can be obtained.
         •   The deadline and location for submission.
         •   Reference to prevailing wages if applicable.
      C.   Mailing List. The purchasing coordinator shall maintain a mailing
list of current suppliers. Vendors on the mailing list will be directed to the
City website, where they can find relevant information on open bids.
   4.   Bid Security. Purchasing shall require a bid security that serves the
purpose of protecting the interest of the City, unless otherwise determined by
the Managing Director at the time of bid publication. The bid security will be
required equally of all bidders.
      A.   Security Amount. All bids shall be accompanied by cash, certified
check, a bond with corporate surety or at the City's option, an irrevocable
letter of credit in the amount of ten percent (10%) of the bid.
7.10 BID RECEIPT, OPENING AND TABULATION.
   1.   Receipt. All bids shall be submitted in a sealed envelope, marked with
the bid number and delivered to the Purchasing Office by the date and time of
the bid opening or the deadline as advertised.
      Upon receipt, the bid envelope shall be stamped with the date and time
received and placed in a locked filing cabinet until the time of the opening.
All bids shall remain sealed until the time of the bid opening.
   2.   Opening. All bids submitted in response to the City's Invitation to Bid
shall be opened by the purchasing coordinator and witnessed by the City Clerk
or their designees at the time and date advertised in the legal notice. The bid
opening shall be held in a public forum and may be attended by the news media,
concerned citizens and interested vendors.
   3.   Tabulation. All bids shall be tabulated. The tabulation becomes a
permanent record of all bids received, showing the bidder's name, items and
prices. Bids considered invalid, i.e., submitted without security, will be
listed on the schedule as such.
      The tabulation shall be filed in the purchasing office for seven (7)
years, or as may be specified in the Records Retention Schedule, to be used as
evidence of competitive practices and serve as a source of information if
questions do arise.
7.11 BID EVALUATION AND AWARD:
   1.   No Bids. If a situation occurs that no bids are received by Purchasing,
the purchasing coordinator shall:
      A.   Review the specifications to insure that they are not overly
restrictive or unrealistic and after being duly authorized, re-issue the
Invitation to Bid with or without adjusted specifications.
      B.   If again bids are not received, the City may enter into a contract
for purchase of the item within forty-five (45) days of the second
advertisement thereof, in accordance with PA Act 1979-78.
      Regardless of action, the purchasing coordinator shall document in
writing the steps taken and reasons for the action.
   2.   Other Situations.
      A.   Late Bids. Late bids, regardless of the circumstances, are
unacceptable.
      B.   Tie Bids. Only on rare occasions are bids received from responsible
vendors for the same amount or unit price, with quality and service being
equal. In such instances, the contract shall be made by drawing lots in a
public forum.
         This tie bid procedure will only be followed when the tie bidders are
all responsible bidders and equal in quality and service, as well as price.
      C.   Alternate Bids. By City policy, alternate bids are not encouraged.
As a rule, if a bid is not responsive to the Invitation to Bid, it should be
rejected. However, if the alternate bid reflects the only product or service
the firm has to offer and if the bid is advantageous to the City through lower
cost for a quality item, the purchasing coordinator shall consult with the
appropriate department, division, office or agency and the purchasing committee
prior to making the final recommendation. In all cases, the purchasing
coordinator shall:
         Document the decision on accepting or rejecting an alternate bid with
reasons for the decision.
         Be sure that all respondents to an Invitation to Bid have received
opportunities equal to that of the alternate bidder.
      D.   Adjustments Due to Errors. If a mistake is discovered after opening,
only those deviations that do not give a bidder an unfair advantage over his/
her competitors will be permitted. These include, but are not limited to
multiplication errors in completing totals from unit prices (the unit price
will prevail) and an obvious misplacement of decimal points.
      E.   Withdrawal of Bids. If the bidder discovers an error after
submittal, but prior to opening, he/she will be permitted to make formal
changes or withdraw the bid before the bid opening without revealing the bid
amount.
         A new sealed bid should be delivered in person or by mail, prior to
the deadline advertised in the legal notice.
      A bidder to a construction contract may withdraw a bid from consideration
after the bid opening without forfeiture of the ten percent (10%) bid surety,
if the bid was submitted in good faith and the bidder submits credible evidence
that a clerical mistake or an unintentional omission of a substantial quantity
of work, labor, material or services was made in direct compilation of the bid
and the reason for the price being substantially lower, as opposed to a
judgment error.
   3.   Rejection of Bids. City Council or the Managing Director whichever
applies, shall have the authority to reject a single bid or all bids for
reasons including but not limited to the following circumstances:
      •   Unreasonably high bid prices
      •   Late arrival
      •   Alternate bids
      •   Error corrections that would give an unfair advantage
      •   Suspicion of collusion among bidders
      •   Substantial non-conformance with bid specifications
      •   Failure of the bid to meet the criterion of being the lowest
responsive and responsible bidder
      •   For indebtedness to the City, including but not limited to any taxes,
liens, judgments, fees or other debts for which no written agreement or payment
plan satisfactory to the City has been established. [Amended 1-27-2016 by Ord.
No. 1-2016]
   4.   Bid Award.
      A.   It is the policy of the City to make awards to the vendor who meets
the specifications for the items or services to be purchased at the lowest
cost. Factors such as delivery time, quality, operating and maintenance costs,
service, etc., as well as initial price, should be taken into consideration in
determining the lowest cost vendor.
      B.   The department, division, office or agency shall review all bids and
make a recommendation to the purchasing manager by completing the
"Recommendation to Award Contract" form.
         If the purchasing coordinator has technical or operational concerns
regarding the recommendation of the head of the department, division, office or
agency, the award will be referred to a purchasing committee, comprised of the
Managing Director, the Director of Finance , and the City Solicitor or his
designee, for determination. In the case where the Finance Department or Law
Department has issued the bid, the Managing Director shall designate one or
more neutral parties
      C.   The Director of Finance shall review the recommendation to ensure an
award is compatible with the budget.
      D.   The Managing Director shall approve all recommendations.
      E.   Both the Mayor and the Managing Director shall have final approval
of contracts below $35,000.
      F.   City Council shall award or reject all contracts exceeding
$34,999.99.
      G.   A purchase order shall be initiated after the contract award;
however, it shall not be issued until the contract documents have been
finalized.
      H.   The successful vendor after receiving the contract documents has ten
(10) working days to sign and return with the necessary bonds.
      I.   If the selected vendor fails to deliver a bond or items bid within
the time limits specified, the purchasing coordinator may choose to recommend
rescinding the award and re-advertise for bids. In such event, the delinquent
bidder shall be responsible for the costs of re-bidding and the amount of any
increase in the contract price thereby resulting. The purchasing coordinator
shall properly document the action, the reasons for the action and retain the
vendor bid surety not as a penalty, but as liquidated damages for inability to
comply with the contractual agreement.
      J.   Local Preference: For all competitive solicitations in which
objective factors are used to numerically evaluate the responses from vendors
by the selection committee, and price is one of several of the criteria for
award among otherwise qualified vendors, where a non-local business is the
highest ranked proposer and the ranking of a local proposer is within ten (10%)
of the ranking obtained by the non-local proposer, the highest ranked local
proposer (within 10%) may be considered for negotiations with the City. If the
City determines that it is, in its sole and exclusive discretion, unable to
negotiate an acceptable contract, then it shall proceed to negotiate with the
next highest ranked proposer, whether local or non-local.
         The City has the sole discretion in determining whether a business
meets the criteria to qualify for a local business preference and reserves the
right to revoke this preference at any time if the City determines the business
no longer meets the following criteria:
         1.   The principal place of business is located in the City of
Reading; and
         2.   The business has held a valid City business license for at least
one (1) year prior to the date of application; and
         3.   The business maintains its status as a local bidder throughout
the term of the contract; if it fails to do so, the City, in its sole
discretion, may terminate the contract.
Section 8
Purchasing of Professional Services
8.01 PURPOSE:
   The purpose of this regulation is to outline the process involved for
preparing specifications, letting of Request For Proposals (RFP's), awarding
contracts and payment of bills for professional services.
8.02 APPLICABLE TO:
   All departments, divisions, offices or agencies.
8.03 POLICY:
   1.   For the purpose of this regulation the term "professional" is defined
as those persons or firms marketing services requiring advanced academic or
technical training skills. Examples of professional services include work done
by the following contractors but is not necessarily limited to these services:
      •   Accountants
      •   Architects
      •   Attorneys, including independent legal counsel as per § 5-213 and §
5-302 [Amended 1-26-2015 by Ord. No. 4-2015]
      •   Bond Underwriters
      •   Engineers
      •   Insurance Consultants, Agents, and/or Brokers
      •   Investment Advisors
      •   Physicians
   2.   Professional service contracts are not to be confused with standard
contracts which seek a price or costs for particular work detailed in
specifications. Professional contracts seek expertise through an RFP and
pricing or cost may not be of "primary" importance.
   3.   A professional contract, while it is based upon work performed in
response to task specifications and the need for a finished product as outlined
by the City and agreed to by a contractor, it is one that by its very nature
cannot be awarded solely based upon the selection of the lowest bidder.
   4.   Factors other than price alone must be carefully weighed in the review
of proposals and the award of such contracts. These factors include the
professional qualifications/ certifications, special skills, experience, and
familiarity of the contractor with the work requested, all of which have
impacts on the quality of the product/service to be delivered.
8.04   PREPARING REQUESTS FOR PROPOSALS (RFP'S) FOR CONTRACTS GREATER THAN
$35,000.
   1.   When to prepare an RFP.
      A.   When it is estimated that the cost of a purchase of professional
services shall meet or exceed $35,000, the RFP process must be initiated and
the vendor must be retained through a written contract. Competitive proposals
increase the ability to fully evaluate both the benefit and costs of the
services being sought.
      B.   Notwithstanding any other provisions to the contrary if the Managing
Director so determines, no RFP shall be required for an employee engaged in
providing professional services to the City who terminates employment with the
City and shall then be engaged as an independent contractor. In addition, no
RFP shall be required for an independent contractor whose engagement
terminates, if the Managing Director desires to continue the engagement by the
City.
      C.   For all contracts expected to exceed $34,999.99 and for all
contracts that are multi-phased (e.g., feasibility study and design, multiple
contract renewals/extensions within a one-year period) department, division,
office, agency or person designated by the Managing Director shall prepare a
RFP specifically for the extent of the work effort that can be defined at that
particular time. The RFP should solicit information pertaining to the
contractor's qualifications and costs (including appropriate hourly rates,
etc.) for as many phases as appropriate. Costs and qualification information
should then be utilized to select the contractor. For any subsequent phases of
the contract that have not been specifically defined in the initial RFP, a new
RFP should be drafted and circulated to secure competitive proposals from
interested contractors.
   2.   How to write an RFP:
      The Request For Proposal shall clearly describe the desired services and
may include, but not be limited to, the following information:
      •   General background information pertinent to the requested services.
      •   Nature and scope of requested services including minimum tasks and
activities to be performed together with prescribed completion schedule.
      •   Methodology and technical approach to be used in accomplishing the
requested work.
      •   Description of reports required.
      •   Documentation of qualifications and experience in similar work and
resumes of staff members to be assigned to the engagement.
      •   Compensation information including detailed cost information
itemizing hours and rates of each class of staff to be utilized, and out-of-
pocket expenses such as travel, telephone, publication and duplication.
      •   Estimated utilization of City resources necessary to complete the
engagements.
      •   Information as to the City's evaluation and selection process.
      •   Minority Business Enterprise (MBE)/Woman Business Enterprise (WBE)
participation.
8.05 CONTRACTS BETWEEN $10,000 AND $34,999:
   1.   The department, division, office, agency or person designated by
Managing Director to handle the assignment, shall request written proposals
from at least three (3) firms. Proposals shall include the fee in the form of a
unit cost and the total maximum cost to be charged. After analysis, a
recommendation shall be presented to the purchasing coordinator, Finance
Director and Managing Director for final approval.
      In the event the Solicitor has concluded that a conflict exists between
the Mayor/Administration and City Council, the RFP process for independent
legal counsel shall commence. The Mayor/Administration or City Council shall
review their respective proposals and prepare individual justifications that
will include, at minimum: a brief explanation identifying the preferred bid,
anticipated cost, and the allocation source from where the expenses will be
paid. Final analysis and ultimate approval for all justifications will rest
with the purchasing coordinator, Solicitor or his representative, Director of
Finance and Managing Director. [Added 1-26-2015 by Ord. No. 4-2015]
   2.   Upon written request, unsuccessful firms shall be given a written
explanation as to the reasons for the selection.
   3.   The department, division, office or agency should take precautions to
project the total cost of professional service contracts that are multi-phased.
An RFP must be prepared for those multi-phased contracts when the total cost of
which could exceed $34,999.99.
   4.   Once final approval for a contract less than $35,000 has been granted
by the Finance Director and the Managing Director, the department, division,
office, agency or person designated by the Managing Director to handle the
assignment shall meet with a representative from the City Solicitor’s office to
draft the required contracts.
   5.   Multiple contracts valued below $35,000 which occur during a single
year and provide for the same or a substantially similar service; or for which
services are provided by the same individual or vendor shall be considered to
be multi-phased. These contracts shall be subject to the approval requirements
of a contract that exceeds $34,999.99.
   6.   No contract valued at less than $35,000 shall be eligible for payment
by the City without the contract having been signed by the City Solicitor.
   7.   The City Solicitor shall provide final review for form and content and
signature on the contract. Contracts without Solicitor signature will not be
eligible for payment.
8.06 THE PURCHASING COORDINATOR'S RESPONSIBILITY: [Amended 9-8-2014 by Ord. No.
65-2014]
For purposes of consistency, the purchasing coordinator may be appointed to all
committees designated to prepare RFPs, shall review all documents prior to
issuance and may evaluate submissions. The purchasing coordinator shall not
have the ability to vote upon submissions on which the purchasing coordinator
has not performed an evaluation.
The Finance Director shall authorize the advertising or posting for
professional services or RFPs by the purchasing coordinator, who will
advertise, if applicable, in local newspapers of general circulation, regional
metropolitan newspapers, trade journals, and, in all instances, post on the
City website.
   1.   The advertisement or posting shall give notice that an RFP is available
for review by interested firms. Basic information describing the requested
services, where the document can be obtained and the deadline and location for
submission shall be included.
   2.   At the discretion of the purchasing coordinator or the department,
division, office or agency a mandatory pre-proposal conference may be held with
all interested firms to clarify any questions.
8.07   SELECTION OF PROFESSIONAL SERVICE CONTRACTS GREATER THAN $34,999.99
   1.   The proposals of those firms responding to an RFP are reviewed by a
selection committee designated by the Managing Director or his designee.
      In the event the Solicitor has concluded that a conflict exists between
the Mayor/Administration and City Council, the RFP process for independent
legal counsel shall commence. The Mayor/Administration or City Council shall
review their respective proposals and prepare individual justifications that
will include, at minimum: a brief explanation identifying the preferred bid,
anticipated cost, and the allocation source from where the expenses will be
paid. The justifications will then be submitted to a Panel composed of the
Solicitor, Managing Director, and Auditor for their review and recommendation.
The Panel shall offer their recommendation for final approval to City Council
once they have reached a two-thirds majority vote. Failure to secure a majority
vote by either the Mayor/Administration or City Council will require
supplemental information or additional information as requested by the Panel.
[Added 1-26-2015 by Ord. No. 4-2015]
      A.   The selection committee shall consist of the purchasing coordinator
(advisory and oversight when not an evaluator), the City Solicitor (non-voting
member), three designees of the department, division, office or agency, and the
designee of the Finance Director. All committee members must sign and return,
to the purchasing coordinator, the Confidentiality Statement and No Conflict of
Interest Statement prior to receiving any non-public information regarding the
applicable RFP. [Amended 9-8-2014 by Ord. No. 65-2014]
      B.   The selection process shall be based on the objective criteria
contained in the RFP (Section 8.04.2) and not on the lowest bid.
         Examples of the evaluation criteria include: size and experience of
the firm on similar projects, client references, demonstrable understanding of
the requested work, the ability and/or commitment to meet the prescribed
completion schedule, and the cost estimates.
      C.   The recommendation of the selection committee shall be to the firm
with highest total points.
      D.   The selection committee has the responsibility to negotiate the most
favorable cost, terms and conditions to the City of Reading. The negotiating
process may involve one or more RFP responses, and may continue until the
actual award of the contract.
      E.   A meeting with the purchasing coordinator and the representative of
the Solicitor's office will be available for a firm who is dissatisfied after
not being recommended for award of the contract.
   2.   The selection committee shall submit a written report on the process
and its recommendation, to be reviewed with the Finance Director.
   3.   Prior to formal acceptance, the RFP and the proposal shall be submitted
to the Solicitor’s staff for review.
   4.   The Finance Director and the selection committee will prepare a
recommendation for the Managing Director to present to City Council for final
approval where such approval is required by the Charter and/or by the
Administrative Code.
   5.   The Finance Director shall advise the purchasing coordinator to
formally notify the successful firm.
   6.   No contract valued at greater than $34,999.99 shall be eligible for
payment by the City unless the contract is approved by Council and signed by
the Mayor and City Solicitor.
   7.   The City Solicitor shall provide final review of the contract for form
and content. The City Solicitor’s signature shall only be affixed to the
contract after this review is complete. Contracts lacking Solicitor approval
will not be eligible for payments.
8.08 RENEWAL OF PROFESSIONAL SERVICE CONTRACTS:
The City shall have the option to renew a professional services contract for
one (1) year beyond the established contract period, based upon a continuation
of the current contract price or the re- negotiation of a new price. This does
not preclude the City from requesting a term contract with multiple 1-year
renewal periods, as long as the total contract term does not exceed five (5)
years. However, if a contract does not originate with multiple 1-year renewal
periods, it shall only be eligible for a one (1) year extension at the current
or re-negotiated price.
Section 9
Non-Collusion and Bid Rigging
9.01   DEFINITION OF BID-RIGGING - The concerted activity of two or more
persons to influence the winning bidder of a contract.
9.02   PROHIBITED ACTIVITIES - It is unlawful for any person to conspire,
collude, or combine with another in order to commit or attempt to commit bid-
rigging. Unlawful bid-rigging includes but is not limited to:
      A.   Agreeing to sell items or services at the same price.
      B.   Agreeing to submit identical bids.
      C.   Agreeing to rotate bids.
      D.   Agreeing to share profits with a contractor who does not submit the
low bid.
      E.   Submitting prearranged bids, agreed-upon higher or lower bids or
other complementary bids.
      F.   Agreeing to set up territories to restrict competition.
      G.   Agreeing not to submit bids.
9.03   SIMULTANEOUS BIDS - It is not unlawful for the same person to
simultaneously submit bids for the same work or a portion thereof, as a
proposed prime contractor and subcontractor.
9.04   NON-COLLUSION AFFIDAVITS - All Bids and RFP's should include the
requirement for bidders and vendors to provide a non-collusion affidavit with
their bids/proposals. A form of a non-collusion affidavit is found in the
Appendix of Forms. The non-collusion affidavit must state whether or not the
person has been convicted or found liable for any act prohibited by federal or
state law in any jurisdiction involving conspiracy or collusion with respect to
bidding on any public contract within the last five years. The non- collusion
affidavit should provide that the person's statement on the affidavit that he
has been convicted or found liable for any act prohibited by federal or state
law in any jurisdiction involving conspiracy or collusion with respect to
bidding on any public contract within the last five years does not prohibit the
City from accepting a bid from or awarding a contract to that person but it may
be grounds for:
      A.   Rejection of the bid/proposal on the basis of lack of
responsibility; and/or
      B.   Suspension or disbarment
9.05   INVESTIGATION. If suspicion exists that a bidder may have engaged in
bid-rigging or collusion activity, the purchasing coordinator will refer the
matter to the City Solicitor who may, if the Solicitor also finds suspicious
facts, forward the matter to the Office of the Berks County District Attorney.
Section 10
Allowable Contract Types
10.01 GENERAL.
   1.   The selection of an appropriate type of contract and contract costs are
related and should be considered together. The objective is to negotiate a
contract type and price that includes reasonable contractor risk and provides
the contractor with the greatest incentive for efficient and economical
performance. When there is a need for using other than a firm fixed-price
contract, it must be determined, before award of the contract, whether the
contractor's accounting system will permit timely development of all necessary
cost data in the form required by the specific contract type contemplated and
is adequate to allocate costs in accordance with generally accepted accounting
principles. This may be particularly critical where a cost-reimbursement type
of contract is being considered and all current or past experience with the
contractor has been on a fixed-price basis.
      A contract may be one of the following types or a combination of the
types identified below. COST-PLUS-A-PERCENTAGE-OF-COST CONTRACTS ARE
PROHIBITED.
10.02   FIRM, FIXED-PRICE CONTRACTS. Firm, fixed-price contracts are of several
types designed to facilitate proper pricing under varying circumstances.
      1.   Established-Price Types. The established-price type of contract
provides for a firm price or, under appropriate circumstances, may provide for
an adjustable price for the supplies, services, or construction which are being
procured. In providing for an adjustable price, the contract may fix a maximum
or minimum price. Unless otherwise provided in the contract, any such maximum
or minimum price is subject to adjustment only if required by the operation of
any contract clause which provided for equitable adjustment, escalation, or
other revision of the contract price upon the occurrence of an event or
contingency. Established-price contract types are generally created through
line item specific bid pricing or established catalog bid pricing.
      2.   Basic Established-Price Contract. The basic established-price
contract provides for a price which is not subject to an adjustment by reason
of the cost experience of the contractor in the performance of the contract.
This type of contract places maximum risk upon the contractor. Because the
contractor assumes full responsibility, in the form of profits or losses, for
all costs under or over the firm fixed-price, he or she has a maximum profit
incentive for effective cost control and contract performance. Use of the basic
established-price contract is suitable for use in procurements when reasonably
definite work statements, specifications, and performance requirements are
available and whenever fair and reasonable costs can be established at the
outset.
      3.   Established-Price Contract With Escalation. The established-price
contract with escalation provides for the upward and downward revision of the
stated contract price upon the occurrence of certain contingencies which are
specifically defined in the contract. The risks in a basic established-price
contract are reduced by the inclusion of escalation provisions in which the
parties agree to revise the stated price upon the happening of a prescribed
contingency. Where escalation is agreed upon, upward adjustments shall be
limited to the establishment of a reasonable ceiling, and provisions will be
included for downward adjustments in those instances where the prices or rates
shall fall below the base levels provided in the contract. The escalation
generally covers the increase in labor costs due to an increase in the minimum
wage or union contract negotiations, or other costs such as fuel, which are
beyond the direct control of the contractor.
      4.   Established-Price Plus Incentive Contract. The established-price
plus incentive contract is a firm, fixed-price type of contract with provisions
for adjustment of profit and establishment of the final contract price by a
formula based on the relationship which final negotiated total cost bears to
total target costs. Established- price plus incentive contracts are appropriate
when the supplies, services, or construction being procured are of such a
nature that assumption of a degree of cost responsibility by the contractor is
likely to provide him with a positive profit incentive for effective cost
control and contract performance.
      5.   Prospective Price Redetermination at a Stated Time or Times During
Performance Contract. This type of contract provides for an established-price
for an initial period of contract performance and for prospective price
redetermination either upward or downward at a stated time or times during the
performance of the contract. This type of contract is appropriate in the
procurement of supplies, services, or construction where it is possible to
negotiate fair and reasonable established prices for an initial period but not
for subsequent periods of contract performance.
         This type of contract should not be used unless:
         1.   It has been established through negotiations that a basic
established-price contract does not fulfill the requirements established by the
conditions surrounding the procurement.
         2.   The contractor's accounting system is adequate for price
redetermination purposes.
         3.   The prospective pricing period can be made to conform with the
operations of the contractor's accounting system.
         4.   Reasonable assurance exists that price redetermination action
will be taken promptly at the time or times specified.
         5.   It has been approved by the Finance Director.
10.03   TIME AND MATERIALS CONTRACT.
      The time and materials contract provides for the procurement of supplies,
services, or construction on the basis of:
      1.   Direct labor hours at specified fixed hourly rates (which rates
include direct and indirect labor, overhead, and profit).
      2.   Material at cost which could include handling and administrative
expenses. This type of contract does not afford the contractor any positive
profit incentive to control the cost of the materials or to manage his labor
force effectively. The time and materials contract is used only where it is not
possible at the time of placing the contract to estimate the extent or duration
of the work or to anticipate costs with any reasonable degree of confidence.
This type of contract is usually used for procurement of repairs, maintenance
or overhaul work, and work to be performed in emergency situations. If this
type of contract is used, the contract must show a ceiling price which the
contractor exceeds at his own risk. For all agreed upon work not completed at
the ceiling price, the Contractor must complete the agreed upon work at their
own expense.
      3.   Labor-Hour Contract. The labor-hour type of contract is a variant of
the time and materials type of contract differing only in that materials are
not supplied by the contractor.
      4.   Unit Price Contract. The unit prices for the supplies, services, or
construction to be provided are established in the contract with an estimated
total amount. The contractor is paid in accordance with the unit price.
      5.   No-Fee Contract. A contract where supplies, services, or
construction are provided at no cost to the City.
10.04 COST-REIMBURSEMENT CONTRACT.
   The cost-reimbursement type of contract provides for payment to the
contractor of allowable costs incurred in the performance of the contract to
the extent prescribed in the contract. This type of contract establishes an
estimate of total cost for the purpose of obligation of funds and a ceiling
which the contractor may not exceed (except at his own risk) without prior
approval and subsequent amendment of the contract. The cost- reimbursement
contract is suitable for use only when the uncertainties involved in contract
performance are of such magnitude that cost of performance cannot be estimated
with sufficient reasonableness to permit use of any type of fixed-price
contract. In addition, it is essential that the contractor's cost accounting
system is adequate for the determination of costs applicable to the contract
and appropriate surveillance by agency personnel during performance will give
reasonable assurance that inefficient or wasteful methods are not being used.
   1.   Cost-Sharing Contract. A cost-sharing contract is a cost-reimbursement
type contract under which the contractor receives no fee but is reimbursed only
for an agreed portion of its allowable costs. A cost-sharing contract is
suitable for those procurements which cover research projects which are jointly
sponsored by the City and the contractor with benefit to the contractor in lieu
of full monetary reimbursement of costs. In consideration of this benefit, the
contractor agrees to absorb a portion of the costs of performance. This type of
contract is used for jointly sponsored research and development work with
nonprofit educational institutions or other nonprofit organizations or other
research and development work where the results of the contract may have
commercial benefit to the contractor.
   2.   Cost-Plus-Incentive-Fee Contract. The cost-plus-incentive-fee contract
is a cost- reimbursement type contract with provisions for a fee which is
adjusted by formula in accordance with the relationship which total allowable
costs bear to target costs. Under this type of contract, there is negotiated
initially a target cost, a target fee, a minimum and maximum fee, and a fee
adjustment formula. After performance of the contract, the fee payable to the
contractor is determined in accordance with the formula. The provision for
increase or decrease of fee is designed to provide an incentive for maximum
effort on the part of the contractor to manage the contract effectively.
   3.   Cost-Plus-A-Fixed-Fee Contract. The cost-plus-a-fixed-fee contract is a
cost reimbursement type of contract which provides for the payment of a fixed
fee to the contractor. The fixed fee, once negotiated, does not vary with
actual cost, but may be adjusted as a result of any subsequent changes in the
work or services to be performed under the contract. Because the fixed fee does
not vary in relation to the contractor's ability to control costs, the cost-
plus-a-fixed-fee contract provides the contractor with only a minimum incentive
for effective management control of costs. This type of contract is usually
used for the performance of research or preliminary exploration or study where
the level of effort required is unknown. The fixed fee shall not exceed 10
percent of the estimated cost of the contract, exclusive of the fee, as
determined at the time of entering into such contract. Payment schedules for
reimbursing contractors will be designed to provide the City with a measure of
assurance that contractor performs the work or services satisfactorily before
complete payment is made.
10.05   PERFORMANCE BASED CONTRACT. The performance based contract is one which
incorporates an incentive to the contractor to surpass stated performance
targets by providing for increases in fee or profit to the extent such targets
are surpassed and for decreases to the extent such targets are not met. The
incentive feature (providing for increases or decreases, as appropriate) is
applied to performance targets rather than performance requirements. The
incentive should relate to specific performance areas or milestones which have
been very carefully established and specified in the contract. Performance
incentives present complex problems in contract administration and should be
approached with caution.
Section 11
Bid Protests
11.01   WHO MAY FILE THE PROTEST. Any bidder, offeror, prospective bidder,
prospective offeror, or a prospective contractor who is aggrieved in connection
with the solicitation or award of a contract may file a protest. Protests
relating to cancellation of invitations for bids or requests for proposals and
protests relating to the rejection of all bids or proposals are not permitted.
11.02   TIME FOR FILING.
      1.   If a protest is submitted by a prospective bidder or prospective
offeror, the protest must be filed before bid opening time or proposal receipt
date.
      2.   If a protest is filed by a bidder or offeror or a prospective
contractor, the protest must be filed within seven days after the protesting
bidder or offeror or prospective contractor knew or should have known of the
facts giving rise to the protest EXCEPT THAT IN NO EVENT MAY A PROTEST BE FILED
LATER THAN SEVEN DAYS AFTER THE DATE THE CONTRACT WAS AWARDED. Date of filing
is the date of receipt of protest.
      3.   Untimely filed protests must be disregarded by the purchasing
coordinator.
11.03 FORM OF PROTEST.
      1.   A protest must be in writing and filed with the purchasing
coordinator.
      2.   A protest must state all grounds upon which the protesting party
asserts that the solicitation or award was improper. Issues not raised by the
protesting party before the purchasing coordinator are deemed waived and may
not be raised on appeal.
      3.   The protesting party may submit with the protest any documents or
information deemed relevant.
      4.   The written protest shall be accompanied by a cashier's check in the
amount of five percent (5%) of the contract award amount, or if the amount of
the contract cannot be reasonably determined at the time, then in the amount of
One Thousand Two Hundred Fifty Dollars ($1,250.00), made payable to the City of
Reading. The purpose of this protest bond shall be to reimburse the City for
all administrative costs associated with the appeal process. Failure to submit
a protest bond shall be deemed a waiver of the bid protest and is a
jurisdictional deficiency in the protest that will forfeit the right of the
bidder to maintain the protest.
11.04   NOTICE OF PROTEST. If award has been made, the purchasing coordinator
shall notify the successful bidder or contractor of the protest. If the protest
is received before award and substantial issues are raised by the protest, all
bidders and offerors who appear to have a substantial and reasonable prospect
of winning the award shall be notified and may file their agreement/
disagreement with the purchasing office within five days after receipt of
notice of protest.
11.05   STAY OF PROCUREMENT. The purchasing coordinator shall immediately
decide upon receipt of the protest whether or not the solicitation or award
shall be stayed, or if the protest is timely received after the award, whether
the performance of the contract should be suspended. The purchasing office
shall not proceed further with the solicitation or with the award of the
contract, and shall suspend performance under the contract if awarded, unless
theFinance Director makes a written determination that the protest is clearly
without merit or that award of the contract without delay is necessary to
protect the substantial interests of the City.
11.06   PROCEDURES.
      1.   Purchasing Coordinator Response. Within 15 days of the receipt of a
protest, the purchasing coordinator shall submit a written response to the
Finance Director. The response may include any documents or information that
the purchasing coordinator deems relevant to the protest.
      2.   Protesting Party Reply. Within 10 days of the date of the purchasing
coordinator response, the protesting party may file a written reply.
      3.   Review. The Director of Finance or designee shall:
         A.   Review the protest and any response or reply.
         B.   Request and review any additional documents or information deemed
necessary to render a decision.
         C.   Give the protesting party and the department head reasonable
opportunity to review and address any additional documents or information
requested.
         D.   In their sole discretion, conduct a hearing.
         E.   Within 60 days of the receipt of the protest, issue a written
determination stating the reasons for the decision.
         F.   If additional time is required to investigate the protest, inform
the protesting party of the additional time needed to render a determination
and obtain the protesting party's consent.
      4.   “Clearly Without Merit” determinations. If the Finance Director
determines, upon receipt, that the protest is clearly without merit and does
not stay the procurement, the purchasing coordinator shall immediately issue
the decision as required by 11.08, below.
11.07   SETTLEMENT. The Director of Finance, in consultation with the City
Solicitor, has the authority to settle and resolve bid protests.
11.08   DECISION. The Director of Finance or designee shall promptly, but in no
event later than 60 days from the filing of the protest, issue a written
decision. The decision shall:
      1.   State the reasons for the decision.
      2.   If the protest is denied, inform the protesting party of its right
to file an appeal in Berks County Court within 15 days of the mailing date of
the decision.
      3.   If it is determined that the solicitation or award was contrary to
law, enter an appropriate order under 11.09. or 11.10., below.
      4.   The purchasing coordinator shall send a copy of the decision to the
protesting party and any other person determined by the Finance Director to be
affected by the decision.
11.09   REMEDY BEFORE EXECUTION OF CONTRACT. If, before execution of a
contract, it is determined that a solicitation or proposed award of a contract
was in violation of law, the purchasing coordinator may do one of the
following:
      1.   Cancel the solicitation;
      2.   Change the solicitation to comply with law;
      3.   Reject all bids or proposals or those parts of the bids or proposals
which were affected by the violation; or
      4.   Change or cancel the award to comply with law.
11.10   REMEDIES AFTER EXECUTION OF CONTRACT. If, after the execution of a
contract, it is determined that a solicitation or award of a contract was in
violation of law:
      1.   If the contractor did not act fraudulently or in bad faith, the
contract may be:
         A.   Ratified and affirmed provided it is determined by the purchasing
agency that doing so is in the best interest of the City.
         B.   Modified to comply with the law with the consent of all parties.
         C.   Cancelled and the contractor shall be compensated for the actual
expenses reasonably incurred under the contract prior to termination. Such
compensation shall not include loss of anticipated profit, loss of use of
money, or administrative or overhead costs.
      2.   If the contractor has acted fraudulently or in bad faith, the
contract may be:
         A.   Declared void.
         B.   Modified to comply with law with the consent of all parties.
         C.   Ratified and affirmed, provided it is determined by the
purchasing coordinator, if that action is in the best interests of the City and
without prejudice to the right of the City to damages, as may be appropriate.
Section 12
Petty Cash Funds
12.01 PURPOSE:
   The purpose of this regulation is to establish the policy for the use of
petty cash funds and to establish the procedure for replenishing these funds.
12.02 APPLICABLE TO:
   All departments, divisions, offices or agencies.
12.03 GENERAL POLICY:
   1.   Petty cash funds exist to permit departments, divisions, offices or
agencies to reimburse employees for incidental purchases. Petty cash is
strictly for the purpose of reimbursing employees for out-of-pocket business
expenses. There will be no petty cash advances.
   2.   Petty cash funds shall not be used to pay invoices. All invoices shall
be paid through the accounts payable system.
   3.   A petty cash purchase shall not exceed one hundred ($100) dollars. At
no time shall expenditures be fragmented to stay within the one hundred ($100)
dollar limit.
      Departments, divisions, offices or agencies approving petty cash
expenditures shall keep in mind that the City may pay higher prices by
purchasing items through a number of small petty cash expenditures, rather than
through a single bulk purchase via purchasing.
   4.   Items such as office supplies that are available from or through the
purchasing office shall not at any time be purchased with petty cash funds.
      Petty cash shall not be used as a substitute to the Emergency Purchase
Procedure.
   5.   All petty cash vouchers must have valid vendor receipts attached for
the exact amount to be reimbursed. For mileage reimbursement, the travel
expense report form must be used. Departments, divisions, offices or agencies
shall not approve petty cash vouchers without proper receipts and shall inform
employees that reimbursement will not occur if the proper procedure is not
followed. Employees should be aware that the City is exempt from Pennsylvania
sales tax, and that such tax should not be paid.
   6.   A brief statement justifying the petty cash expenditure shall be
included on the petty cash voucher or petty cash ledger form. Petty cash
expenditures shall be charged to the correct budget account number.
12.04 PETTY CASH FUNDS:
   The Director of Finance shall authorize the location and amount of petty
cash funds. The following departments, divisions, offices and agencies maintain
petty cash funds for the personnel in their offices:
   •   Treasurer's office for all City Hall departments, divisions, offices or
agencies unless listed below:
      •   Public Works
      •   Police
      •   Sewage Treatment
12.05 RESPONSIBILITY FOR PETTY CASH FUNDS:
A specific employee, designated as custodian, shall be assigned to each petty
cash fund. The custodian is responsible for the accurate accounting and control
of the department, division, office or agency's fund, including following the
procedure to replenish the petty cash funds.
The City Auditor shall be responsible for the annual review of petty cash
purchases and, when appropriate, make recommendations to the department,
division, office or agency as to what purchases should be directed through the
purchasing office.
12.06 PETTY CASH FUND PROCEDURES:
   1.   Reimbursement of Employee. The employee shall make a petty cash
purchase with his/her own money. The employee shall be reimbursed the same day
or the following work day by following the proper petty cash procedure:
      A.   The employee shall first obtain permission from her/his immediate
supervisor to purchase the required items or services. Any questionable petty
cash expenditures shall be cleared with the department, division, office or
agency before making the purchase.
      B.   The employee shall purchase the items or services from a vendor at a
reasonable price. The purchasing office may assist in selecting a vendor.
      C.   For those departments, divisions, offices or agencies that maintain
a petty cash fund, the employee shall submit his/her receipt, which has been
signed by the immediate supervisor to the custodian for reimbursement from the
petty cash fund.
      D.   For those departments, divisions, offices or agencies that do not
maintain a petty cash fund, the signed receipt shall be presented to the
Finance Director’s office where a petty cash voucher will be prepared in
duplicate and the proper code assigned.
      E.   The Finance Director’s office shall retain the duplicate copy of the
voucher for audit purposes. The employee shall submit the original with the
attached receipt to the City Treasurer for reimbursement.
      F.   The employee signature on the voucher acknowledges only receipt of
the money, not responsibility for the purchase.
      G.   The employee shall submit the original with the necessary receipt
attached to the custodian for reimbursement.
   2.   Replenishing the Petty Cash Fund Other than City Treasurer. The
custodian of the petty cash fund shall replenish the fund as needed through the
Accounts Payable system.
      A.   The custodian shall verify that the account being charged for the
petty cash funds has a sufficient balance.
      B.   The custodian shall complete an Authorization to Reimburse Petty
Cash Fund form.
      C.   The custodian shall keep the duplicate copy, attach all petty cash
vouchers with receipts to the original, and submit to the City Accountant with
a completed Accounts Payable Approval form.
      D.   The City accountant shall confirm accuracy of information, verify
that there are sufficient funds in account, and submit to Accounts Payable for
processing.
      E.   Accounting shall retain and file the original copy of the
reimbursement form, the petty cash voucher and receipts.
      F.   Accounts Payable shall process the forms and generate a check
payable to the office as a reimbursement to the respective petty cash fund,
treating the reimbursement as a payment to a vendor.
   3.   Replenishing the City Treasurer Petty Cash Fund. The City Treasurer
shall replenish the fund on a monthly basis through the Accounts Payable
system.
      A.   On a monthly basis, the City Treasurer shall segregate all petty
cash vouchers by fund and submit to the city accountant for reimbursement.
      B.   The accounting office shall confirm the accuracy of the information,
breakdown the expenditures by line item, confirm that sufficient funds are in
the accounts, and submit the vouchers and an Accounts Payable Approval form to
Accounts Payable for processing.
      C.   Accounts Payable shall generate a check payable to the City
Treasurer as reimbursement.
Section 13
Sale and Lease of City Owned Land and Property
[Added 11-23-2015 by Ord. No. 82-2015; amended 4-24-2023 by Ord. No. 39-2023]
13.01   BACKGROUND:
   1.   Introduction
      The City of Reading periodically offers properties for sale or lease to
prospective buyers and/or lessees, as a way of providing property development
and improvement opportunities that will strengthen the city's downtown and
neighborhood real estate markets. The proceeds from the sale of properties
shall be used either to fund capital repairs/projects or to support the City's
reserve funding.
      The policies included in this document are intended to provide
prospective buyers and/or lessees with clear information about how to pursue
opportunities to purchase or lease city-owned properties and how the city
administration solicits, reviews, and responds to purchase offers.
   2.   Qualified Buyers and Bids
      In order to be considered qualified to purchase or lease a city-owned
property, a prospective buyer:
         •   Must be current with respect to property taxes and other city
obligations or have entered into a payment agreement to fulfill these
obligations.
         •   Must not own or have an interest in any property with any
significant unremediated violation of city codes and ordinances.
         •   Must not own a property that was subject to a completed Berks
County tax foreclosure proceeding within the previous five years.
      A prospective buyer and/or lessee must submit the disclosure information
described in this document. Failure to submit disclosures or to provide other
requested information will result in disqualification.
      The City will require a prospective buyer and/or lessee to submit an
application that describes development or improvement plans proposed for the
property and that includes evidence that the prospective buyer has the
financial and operational capacity to implement the plans as proposed. The
amount of detailed information to be included in the application will depend on
the proposed use of the property. For example, the development/improvement plan
and documentation of financial/operational capacity associated with the
purchase of a side yard will be different from that associated with the
purchase of a large parcel proposed for a major commercial or residential
development.
   3.   Appropriate and Timely Development
      The City expects that properties will be developed in an appropriate and
timely manner, based on documentation submitted by a prospective buyer and/or
lessee. Generally, the City will require that development or improvement
activities begin within six months after the date of sale and that these
activities be completed as documented in the prospective buyer's and/or
lessee's application. To the extent needed in order to ensure that its
expectations are met, the City will place conditions on certain property sales
and/or leases and will monitor the status of the property following the sale or
lease until the proposed activities have been completed.
      Proposed uses of purchased or leased property must be consistent with the
City's Comprehensive Plan and with other city-approved and accepted plans.
Purchasers are required to comply with all city, state and federal codes,
regulations and statutes.
   4.   Documentation of Site Control
      The City recognizes that developers often require legally recognizable
site control as part of the development process. In order to respond to this
need, the City may execute contingent agreements of sale, property reservation
letters or option agreements in order to allow developers to pursue financing
and other approvals necessary for development.
      Agreements or contracts proposed to be executed for this purpose must
meet the following conditions.
         •   The applicant must be a qualified buyer by fulfilling the
requirements described in section II above.
         •   The agreement or contract must be limited to one year or less,
with any subsequent renewal or extension solely at the City's discretion.
         •   The applicant may not use or move into the property without the
City's authorization.
         •   Anon-refundable option fee will be due upon execution (not-for-
profit organizations and city-supported projects may be exempted from the fee).
         •   The terms of the agreement or contract will be public information.
   5.   Ethics
      The City of Reading is committed to ethical and transparent processes for
the sale and conveyance of its properties. All real estate transactions are
governed by City and State laws and rules that generally prohibit, among other
things, conflicts of interest, the disclosure of confidential information, and
the representation of a person or organization by a City official or employee
in a transaction with the City.
   6.   City Council
      All sales, and leases, and conveyances of city-owned property are subject
to approval by the City Council of Reading regardless of the price of the sale
or lease. Following the city administration's favorable review of an offer to
purchase a particular property, the Managing Director will submit documentation
in support of the property sale to Council. The proceeds from the sale of
properties shall be used either to fund capital repairs/projects or to support
the City's reserve funding.
13.02   PROPERTY SALES PROCESS:
   The City offers properties for sale in several ways.
   1.   General Sales
      The City may publish information about one or more properties in its
inventory online, in some instances with a listing price. Offers from
prospective buyers are accepted and reviewed on an ongoing basis.
      If the City receives more than one qualified offer for a property, the
City may provide first preference to an applicant that proposes to develop the
property for a public purpose, as described below. If no public purpose is
proposed, the City will determine the most qualified applicant. In some
instances, the City may use a Competitive Sales approach to obtain the best
offer for the property.
      The City's Real Estate Review Committee must approve the final sales
price of any property that to be sold in this manner.
   2.   Competitive Sales
      The City may offer a property for sale through broker listings, the use
of the Multiple Listing Service, web sites or other methods of advertising in
order to encourage broad participation in the sale of certain properties.
      Properties will be placed on the market long enough to allow for broad
engagement by potential buyers. The City retains the right to approve or reject
an offer, based on price or other criteria. The Real Estate Review Committee
will approve the asking price and will recommend approval of an offer for each
such property to the Managing Director.
   3.   Direct Sales
      The City may determine that certain properties will be sold to a specific
party. Prior to the introduction of the ordinance required under the Charter
for all sales of City-owned property, the Mayor, the Managing Director, and the
Finance Director must all approve the proposed sale in writing.
   4.   Requests for Proposals/Requests for Qualifications
      Under circumstances in which the City has a specific planned use for a
parcel, the City may issue a Request for Proposals (RFP) or Request for
Qualifications (RFQ) in order to identify and select a potential developer.
Offering a property for sale in this manner provides the City with an
opportunity to explain the planned use and any restrictions that might be
placed on the developer or successive owners of the property. An RFP/RFQ may be
issued by a designated city agency and may be developed in consultation with
other parties, as appropriate.
      Any RFP or RFQ issued by the City for this purpose will be advertised in
order to encourage broad participation. Selection criteria will be published as
part of the RFP/RFQ documentation. These criteria may include factors such as
developer capacity, anticipated development outcomes, and price. Issuance of an
RFP or RFQ does not obligate the City to select a developer or a purchaser.
   5.   Sale of Small Vacant Lots for Side or Rear Yards
      The City will review and respond to a request for the purchase of a small
vacant lot for improvement as a side or rear yard under the following
circumstances.
         •   The applicant must be the owner of an adjacent property and must
be using that property as a primary residence.
         •   The property to be acquired must share a common boundary at either
the side or back of the applicant’s property.
         •   The block on which the applicant and the property are located must
consist primarily of occupied properties.
         •   An applicant may acquire up to two adjacent lots, as long as one
of those lots shares a common boundary with the applicant’s primary residence.
         •   The City reserves the right not to convey properties that are
adjacent to or near other vacant properties.
         Once an application for property for a side or rear yard has been
submitted, the City will give notice to any other property owners whose
property shares a common boundary with the proposed yard. Those property owners
will be offered the opportunity to submit an application for the property. If
more than one adjacent property owner submits an offer to purchase the
property, the City may sell the property to the highest bidder, subdivide the
lot (if the applicants and the Planning Commission agree and if the applicants
take full responsibility for the subdivision), or pursue another approach to
resolving this situation.
13.03   PROPERTY LEASE PROCESS:  (Reserved)
13.04   PRICING:
   1.   Listing Price
      The City will publish list prices for all properties. The City may use an
appraisal to establish the price of any property. For vacant structures, the
cost of repair may be considered in determining price.
   2.   Discounted Pricing
      The City may choose to support certain projects that serve a public
purpose by conveying a property at a discounted price. If a property is
identified for one of the following uses, the City will evaluate the proposal
and property request to determine whether the proposed project provides
significant, visible community benefits that would merit city support in the
form of the reduction in price.
      a.   The price of property being acquired for a housing development
venture defined as affordable by local, state, or federal government entities
may be discounted. Affordable housing projects do not have to be directly
subsidized by the city, state or federal government to qualify for discounted
pricing.
      b.   Development projects that advance the City's economic development
goals as articulated in the Comprehensive Plan and other City-approved and
accepted plans may be eligible for discounted pricing. Eligible projects
include but are not limited to:
         1.   Leveraging of previous public investments in infrastructure, job
creation, and economic development;
         2.   Projects with the potential to spur additional private investment
in underperforming commercial corridors, neighborhood centers, and areas of
regional economic significance as identified in the city's Comprehensive Plan
and other city-approved and accepted plans;
         3.   Projects that return industrial land to productive use in areas
identified as appropriate for industrial development; and
         4.   Projects that support the completion of significant public
improvements, including but not limited to the upgrading of public utilities
and the rehabilitation or provision of new public infrastructure.
      c.   Community development projects that provide significant incremental
benefits may be eligible for discounted pricing. Eligible projects include but
are not limited to:
         1.   Support for existing community facilities or the provision of
space for new community facilities such as libraries, recreation centers,
health centers, computing centers, and playgrounds;
         2.   Significant improvements to community infrastructure including
the greening of schoolyards or recreation center yards or other publicly- owned
parcels to achieve storm water management, public recreation, or community
gardening goals;
         3.   Creation of new infrastructure or support for existing
infrastructure to improve safety and mobility for children, seniors, and other
pedestrians, including sidewalk improvements, pedestrian plazas, traffic
medians, or easements for trails; and
         4.   Urban agriculture - the cultivation of fruits, herbs, and
vegetables - and complementary activities, such as processing and distributing
food, collecting and reusing food waste and rainwater, and educating,
organizing, and employing local residents.
      Although religious institutions are not eligible for discounted pricing,
community development projects sponsored by non-profit organizations affiliated
with religious institutions may be eligible.
      d.   For properties priced at $25,000 or less that are proposed to be
used as side or rear yards, up to $15,000 of the value may be deferred or
forgiven.
13.05   DISCOUNTED PRICING AND SELF-AMORTIZING MORTGAGES:
   For properties conveyed at a discounted price, the City may require the
buyer to enter into a ten-year, self-amortizing mortgage for the amount of the
discount, in order to ensure that, in the event that the property is resold to
another party within 10 years, the buyer will not unduly benefit from the
discounted price.
   The characteristics of the self-amortizing mortgage are as follows:
   a.   The length of the mortgage will be 10 years from the date of
conveyance;
   b.   The value of the mortgage is the amount of the price reduction agreed
to by the City;
   c.   The buyer is not required to make payments on the mortgage so long as
the property is used in conformance with the agreed-upon use for the ten-year
period;
   d.   The mortgage balance will decrease by 10% each year for 10 years (for
example, after one year, the balance remaining on a $10,000 mortgage will be
$9,000; after two years, the balance will be $8,000, and so on);
   e.   Upon satisfactory completion of the ten-year period, the City will
satisfy the mortgage.
   f.   In the event that the buyer wishes to sell the property before the ten-
year expiration date of the mortgage, the City must receive the remaining
amount owed on the mortgage before the mortgage will be satisfied;
   g.   The mortgage may be assumed by heirs to the original buyer.
13.06   URBAN AGRICULTURE:
   The City supports the use of vacant land for three categories of urban
agriculture.
      a.   Individual Gardens.
         Definition: An individual garden is a property for which an individual
or household is given temporary access to garden and maintain for their
personal use. The intent is to provide an interim use for the land to eliminate
blight and improve safety until development is possible.
         The City expects that the majority of individual gardens will be
temporary, and the land will still be available for development.
         Terms: An Individual Garden Agreement (IGA) executed by the City with
the individual or household will last for one year, and may begin and end at
any time throughout the year. IGAs are time-limited agreements that both the
City and gardener may terminate at any time, with or without cause, upon prior
written notice to the other party. The City will use reasonable efforts to
avoid terminating the urban garden agreement between April 1 and November 1.
The City will provide as much notice as possible if a license is to be
terminated.
         Pricing: IGAs will be executed at nominal cost.
         Renewal: IGAs may be renewed annually at the request of the applicant
and at the discretion of the City.
         Additional requirements: The City expects that individual gardens will
be maintained throughout the term of the IGA. Maintenance standards will be
provided in writing to all applicants.
         Acceptable Uses: The gardener may enter and use the property only for
the following non-commercial, gardening purposes: to grow food, flowers,
ornamental plants, and other landscaping, to compost in rodent-resistant
containers, and to complete associated construction, with the written approval
of the City.
      b.   Community Gardens and Open Space.
         Definition: A community garden is defined as one or more properties
managed and maintained by a group of individuals to grow and harvest food crops
or non-food crops (such as flowers) for personal or group consumption, for
donation, or for sale that is incidental in nature. A community garden area may
be divided into separate garden plots or orchard areas for cultivation by one
or more individuals or may be farmed collectively by members of the group. A
community garden may include common areas (such as hand tool storage sheds)
maintained and used by the group. Community gardens may be used for
recreational purposes, and improvements to facilitate such purposes may be
allowed on a case-by-case basis upon review by the City and with community
support.
         Terms: Community gardens and community-managed open spaces are
eligible for Community Garden licenses or leases of up to five years in length,
subject to renewal. Leases and licenses of longer than one year, lease and
license renewals, and purchase options are available at the discretion of the
city administration and subject to the approval of City Council. The City shall
provide as much notice as possible if a license is to be terminated or a lease
not renewed.
         Pricing: Community Garden licenses and leases are to be made available
at nominal cost in recognition of the beneficial community impact.
         Additional Requirements for Community Gardens:
            •   Sponsorship by a local neighborhood, civic association, or
institution.
            •   Insurance in a form acceptable to the City.
            •   Maintenance plan and description of community benefits and any
related programming.
         Acceptable Uses:
         The gardeners may enter and use the property only for the following
non- commercial, gardening purposes: to grow food, flowers, ornamental plants,
and other landscaping, to compost in rodent-resistant containers, and to
complete associated construction, with the written approval of the City.
      c.   Market and Community-Supported Farms
         Definition: A market farm is defined as an area managed and maintained
by an individual or group of individuals to grow and harvest food crops or non-
food crops (such as flowers) for sale or distribution that is not incidental in
nature. Market farms include both for-profit and nonprofit enterprises.
         Terms: Lease terms are to be variable and are to be established by the
City on an individual basis.
         Pricing: Market and Community-supported Farm Leases may be available
for nominal or reduced price at the discretion of the City.
         Additional Requirements for Market and Community-Supported Farms:
            •   Insurance in a form acceptable to the City.
            •   City approval of a business plan/feasibility study.
            •   Written city approval for any constructed improvements.
         Acceptable Uses:  A market or community-supported farm may use the
property to grow food, flowers, ornamental plants, and other landscaping, to
compost in rodent-resistant containers, and to complete associated
construction, with the written approval of the City.
Section 14
Receiving shipments of materials, supplies and equipment
14.01   PURPOSE:
   The purpose of this issuance is to outline the required procedures for the
receipt of materials delivered by vendors after procurement by purchase order.
14.02   APPLICABLE TO:
   All departments, divisions, offices or agencies.
14.03   RECEIVING ORDERED MATERIAL:
   1.   Responsibility. Each item received must be inspected for damage and
received in order to properly pay bills. These duties are the responsibility of
the using department, division, office or agency personnel.
   2.   Receiving Shipments in Full or in Part. The receiver should check the
packing slips to insure that all items were shipped as ordered. If the order is
received in full, the packing slip should be signed, dated and filed with the
department, division, office or agency copy of the purchase order. The
signature and date is confirmation that the order was received as indicated.
      If a partial shipment is received, the packing slip should indicate that
the remainder of the order is on backorder. If so, the slip should be signed,
dated and forwarded to Accounts Payable with a copy of the purchase order for
payment. A copy of the receiving should be filed with the department, division,
office or agency. If a backorder is not indicated or the complete order is not
received by the agreed upon date, the purchasing coordinator should be notified
within one (1) working day for follow up with the vendor.
   3.   Incorrect or Damaged Shipments. The person receiving items inspects
them for damage and correctness of order. If an order is delivered not as
specified, the department, division, office or agency shall contact the
purchasing office within one (1) working day of receipt of the order. The
department, division, office or agency will explain why the delivery was
unacceptable and request that provisions be made for a satisfactory replacement
or a supplemental delivery. The purchasing coordinator shall also be contacted
immediately if the vendor cannot comply with the original order.
   4.   Invoices. Although the vendor is directed to send all invoices to
Accounts Payable, occasionally they may be included with a shipment. The
department, division, office or agency shall forward all invoices to Accounts
Payable immediately for proper payment, if they are included in the shipment.
Section 15
Procedures Related to the Solicitation and Award of Public Contracts
[Added 12-19-2022 by Ord. No. 143-2022]
Whereas, the City recognizes that there is a need to ensure that all work on
public construction and maintenance contracts is performed by responsible,
qualified firms that maintain the capacity, expertise, personnel and other
qualifications and resources necessary to successfully perform public contracts
in a timely, reliable and cost-effective manner.
Whereas, to effectuate the purpose of selecting responsible contractors for
public contracts and to protect the City's investments in such contracts,
prospective contractors and subcontractors should be required to meet pre-
established, clearly defined, minimum standards relating to contractor
responsibility, including requirements and criteria concerning technical
qualifications, competency, experience, adequacy of resources, including
equipment, financial and personnel resources, and satisfactory records
regarding past project performance, safety, law compliance and business
integrity.
Whereas, due to the critical impact that skilled construction craft labor has
on public works projects, and due to the limited availability of skilled
construction craft labor and imminent craft labor skill shortages, it is
necessary to require contractors and subcontractors to participate in
established, formal apprenticeship training programs as a condition of bidding,
for the purpose of both promoting successful project delivery and ensuring
future workforce development.
Whereas, the City shall require compliance with the provisions of this
ordinance by business entities seeking to provide services to the City as
specified herein. The requirements of this ordinance are intended to
supplement, not replace, existing contractor qualification and performance
standards or criteria currently required by law, public policy or contracting
documents. However, in the event that any of the provisions of this ordinance
conflict with any law, public policy or contracting documents of the City, this
ordinance shall prevail.
15.01   RESPONSIBLE CONTRACTOR REQUIREMENTS
   (a)   This ordinance shall apply to public works projects undertaken by the
City for the construction, demolition, alteration, renovation, modernization,
service or maintenance of buildings, structures or facilities valued at
$250,000 or more. All contractors and subcontractors that perform on such
projects, regardless of the value of individual contracts or subcontracts,
shall satisfy the requirements of this ordinance in all respects.
   (b)   All firms engaged in contracts covered by this ordinance shall be
qualified, responsible contractors or subcontractors that have sufficient
capabilities in all respects to successfully perform contracts on which they
are engaged, including the necessary experience, equipment, technical skills
and qualifications and organizational, financial and personnel resources. Firms
bidding on public contracts shall also be required to have a satisfactory past
performance record and a satisfactory record of law compliance, integrity and
business ethics.
15.02   CONTRACTOR RESPONSIBILITY CERTIFICATIONS
   (a)   As a condition of performing work on a public works contract subject
to this ordinance, a general contractor, construction manager or other lead or
prime contractor seeking award of a contract shall submit a Contractor
Responsibility Certification.
   (b)   The Contractor Responsibility Certification shall be completed on a
form provided by the City and shall reference the project for which a bid is
being submitted by name and contract or project number.
   (c)   In the Contractor Responsibility Certification, the construction
manager, general contractor or other lead or prime contractor shall confirm the
following facts regarding its past performance and work history and its current
qualifications and performance capabilities:
      (1)   The firm will pay all craft employees on the project, at a minimum,
the applicable wage and fringe benefit rates, as established for the
classification in which the worker is employed, in accordance with the
Pennsylvania Prevailing Wage Act and/or the Federal Davis Bacon Act, 40 U.S.C.
§ 276a et. seq. These wages shall also be paid to employees performing any
custom fabrication work for the project. For purposes of this subsection,
custom fabrication shall mean the fabrication, assembly modification or other
production of non-standard goods, or materials, including components, fixtures,
or parts thereof, that are fabricated assembled or modified offsite, but
produced specifically for a project covered by this ordinance. This requirement
shall include, but not be limited to custom fabrication for electrical,
plumbing, mechanical, refrigeration, heating, cooling, ventilation, sheet metal
or other duct systems, mechanical insulation, ornamental iron work or boiler
systems. Fabrication shall also include the fabrication, assembly or other
production of components or structures prefabricated to specifications for a
particular project covered by this ordinance.
      (2)   The firm will ensure that all craft labor it employs on the project
will have completed, prior to working on the project the OSHA 10-hour training
course for safety established by the U.S. Department of Labor. If the firm is a
prime contractor, it shall also ensure that at least one person on the project
has completed the OSHA 30-hour construction training course established by the
U.S. Department of Labor.
      (3)   The firm participates in a Class A Apprenticeship Training Program,
as defined below, for each separate trade or classification in which it employs
craft employees.
         A.   For purposes of this section, a Class A Apprenticeship Program is
an apprenticeship program registered with and approved by the U.S. Department
of Labor or a state apprenticeship agency and has graduated apprentices to
journey person status for at least three of the past five years. This may be an
apprenticeship program subject to the Employee Retirement Income Security Act
of 1974, 29 U.S.C. § 1001 et seq. ("ERISA"), or a non-ERISA program.
         B.   To demonstrate compliance with this section, the firm shall
provide, with this certification, a list of all trades or classifications of
craft employees it will employ on the project and documentation verifying it
participates in a Class A Apprenticeship Program for each trade or
classification listed.
         C.   The requirements of this section and subsection (4) below help
ensure that the bulk of the craft labor workforce employed on the project will
have sufficient skills and training to correctly perform work assigned to them.
      (4)   The construction manager, general contractor or other lead or prime
contractor responsible for the project shall ensure that at least 70 percent of
the craft labor workers employed on the project shall be comprised of either
journey person workers who have successfully completed a Class A Apprenticeship
Program as defined in this ordinance or apprentices registered in such
programs. The apprenticeship participation of specified by this section must be
in the same trade or craft for which the workers are employed on the project.
      (5)   The firm has all other technical qualifications and resources,
including equipment, personnel and financial resources, to perform the
referenced contract, or will obtain same through the use of qualified,
responsible subcontractors.
      (6)   The firm will maintain all qualifications, resources and
capabilities referenced in this certification throughout the duration of the
project.
      (7)   The firm shall assign craft labor personnel only work in the craft
or trade in which they are employed.
      (8)   The firm shall notify the City within seven (7) days of any
material changes to all matters attested to in this certification.
      (9)   The firm understands that the Contractor Responsibility
Certification required by this section shall be executed by a person who has
sufficient knowledge to address all matters in the certification and shall
include an attestation stating, under the penalty of perjury, and/or Unsworn
Falsification to Authorities, that the information submitted is true, complete
and accurate.
   (d)   Execution of the Contractor Responsibility Certification required by
this ordinance shall not establish a presumption of contractor responsibility
and the City may require any additional information it deems necessary to
evaluate a firm's status as a responsible contractor, including technical
qualifications, financial capacity or other resources and performance
capabilities. The City may require that such information be included in a
separate Statement of Qualifications and Experience or as an attachment to the
Contractor Responsibility Certification.
   (e)   The submitting firm shall stipulate in the Contractor Responsibility
Certification that, if it receives a Notice of Intent to Award Contract, it
will provide a Subcontractor List and required subcontractor information as
specified in Section 15.06 of this ordinance.
   (f)   If the submitting firm has ever operated under another name, or is
controlled by another company or business entity, or in the past five (5) years
controlled or was controlled by another company or business entity, whether as
a parent company, subsidiary or in any other business relation, it shall attach
a separate statement to its Contractor Responsibility Certification that
explains in detail the nature of any such relationship. Additional information
may be required from such an entity if the relationship in question could
potentially impact contract performance.
   (g)   If a firm fails to provide a Contractor Responsibility Certification
required by this section, it shall be disqualified from bidding. No action of
any nature shall lie against the City because of its refusal to accept a bid
for failing to provide information required by this section.
15.03   NOTICE OF INTENT TO AWARD CONTRACT
   (a)   After it has received bids for a project, the City shall issue a
Notice of Intent to Award Contract to the firm offering the lowest responsible
bid.
   (b)   Such Notice shall be issued immediately or as soon as practicable
after bids are opened and Notice of Intent to Award Contract is issued. The
Notice shall stipulate that the contract award is conditioned on the issuance
of a written Contractor Responsibility Determination, as required by Section
15.05 and any other conditions deemed appropriate by the City.
15.04   SUBCONTRACTOR LISTS, SUBCONTRACTOR RESPONSIBILITY CERTIFICATIONS
   (a)   A prospective awardee shall submit to the City a Subcontractor List
containing the names of any subcontractors that will be used for the referenced
project, their addresses, and a description of the work each listed
subcontractor will perform on the project.
   (b)   At the time a perspective awardee submits the Subcontractor List, it
shall also submit Subcontractor Responsibility Certifications for all listed
subcontractors to the City. Subcontractor Responsibility Certifications shall
be executed by the respective subcontractors on forms prepared by the City and
shall contain the same information and representations required in Contractor
Responsibility Certifications, including verification of apprenticeship
qualifications as required by Section 15.02(c), for each trade or
classification of craft workers it will employ on the project.
   (c)   Subcontractor Responsibility Certifications shall be executed by a
person having sufficient knowledge to address all matters in the certification
and shall include an attestation stating, under the penalty of perjury and/or
Unsworn Falsification to Authorities, that all information submitted is true,
complete and accurate.
15.05   CONTRACTOR RESPONSIBILITY REVIEW AND DETERMINATION
   (a)   After the receipt of bids, the City shall undertake a review process
to determine whether the prospective awardee is a qualified, responsible
contractor in accordance with the requirements of this ordinance and other
applicable laws and regulations and has the resources and capabilities to
successfully perform the contract. The time of the review process shall be as
determined necessary by the City.
   (b)   As part of this review process, the City shall ensure that the
Contractor Responsibility Certification, the Subcontractor List and the
Subcontractor Responsibility Certifications, as required by this ordinance,
have been submitted and properly executed.
   (c)   The City may conduct any additional inquiries to verify that the
prospective awardee and its subcontractors have the technical qualifications
and performance capabilities necessary to successfully perform the contract and
that the firms have a sufficient record of law compliance and business
integrity to justify the award of a public contract. In conducting such
inquiries, the City may seek relevant information from the firm, its prior
clients or customers, its subcontractors or any other relevant source.
   (d)   If at the conclusion of the review process the City determines that
all responsibility certifications have been properly completed and executed,
and if it concludes that the qualifications, background and responsibility of
the prospective awardee and the firms on its Subcontractor List are
satisfactory, it may issue a formal written Contractor Responsibility
Determination verifying that the prospective awardee is a qualified,
responsible contractor. In the event a firm is determined to be non-
responsible, the City shall proceed to conduct a responsibility review of the
next lowest, responsive bidder or, if necessary, rebid the project.
   (e)   A Contractor Responsibility Determination may be issued after the
conclusion of the review process under this Section and Section 15.06. A
Responsibility Determination may be revoked or revised in any manner at any
time if the City obtains relevant information warranting any such revocation or
revisions.
15.06   SUBCONTRACTOR RESPONSIBILITY REVIEW REQUIREMENTS
   (a)   A construction manager, general contractor or other lead or prime
contractor shall not be permitted to use a subcontractor on any work performed
for the City unless it has identified the subcontractor on its Subcontractor
List and provided a Subcontractor Responsibility Certification in accordance
with the requirements of Section 15.05.
   (b)   A subcontractor listed on a firm's Subcontractor List shall not be
substituted unless written authorization is obtained from City and a
Subcontractor Responsibility Certification is provided for the substitute
subcontractor.
   (c)   In the event that the City determines that a prospective subcontractor
listed by the apparent low bidder does not meet the responsibility standards of
this ordinance, it may, after informing the prospective awardee, exercise one
of the following options:
      (1)   permit the awardee to substitute a qualified, responsible,
subcontractor in accordance with the requirements of this section;
      (2)   require the awardee to self-perform the work in question if the
firm has the required experience, licenses and other qualifications to perform
the work in question; or
      (3)   disqualify the prospective awardee.
   (d)   In the event that a subcontractor is disqualified under this
ordinance, the general contractor, construction manager or other lead or prime
contractor shall not be permitted to make any type of contractual claim against
the City on the basis of a subcontractor disqualification.
15.07   FALSE OR MISLEADING RESPONSIBILITY CERTIFICATIONS
   If the City determines that a Contractor or Subcontractor Responsibility
Certification contains false or misleading material information that was
provided knowingly or with reckless disregard for the truth, or omits material
information knowingly or with reckless disregard of the truth, the firm for
which the certification was submitted shall be prohibited from performing work
for the City for a period of three (3) years, and shall be subject to any other
penalties and sanctions, including contract termination, available to the City
under law. A contract terminated under these circumstances shall further
entitle the City to withhold payment of any monies due to the firm as damages.
15.08   EXECUTION OF FINAL CONTRACT
   (a)   A contract subject to this ordinance shall not be executed until all
requirements of this ordinance have been fulfilled and until Contractor and
Subcontractor Responsibility Certifications have been issued by the City under
Section 15.0S(d). Upon completion of all requirements under this ordinance, the
City may execute a final contract based upon the Notice of Intent.
   (b)   Prior to the execution of a final contract under this Section, the
City shall publicly post the Notice of Intent to Award, Contractor and
Subcontractor Responsibility Certifications, Subcontractor Lists and Contractor
Responsibility Determination on the City website for public inspection for a
period of five (5) calendar days after the issuance of the Contractor
Responsibility Determination.
15.09   WAIVER OF RESPONSIBLE CONTRACTOR REQUIREMENTS
   The requirements listed in Section may only be waived by resolution of the
City Council under the following conditions:
      (1)   After soliciting bids through the City's purchasing process, no
bids that meet the requirements of this ordinance and are otherwise qualified
have been received for the project by the close of the bidding periods;
      (2)   Bid materials and waiver resolution are provided to the City
Council Clerk no later than 12:00 PM on the Thursday before the next scheduled
City Council meeting;
      (3)   The waiver may only apply for the specific project;
      (4)   The resolution shall identify the basis for the waiver, which
provisions of this Section are to be waived, and whether the project shall be
re-bid.
§ 5-810. Repository sale bids.
[Added 5-28-2019 by Ord. No. 15-2019]
   The “Real Estate Tax Sale Law,” Act No. 542 of 1947, P.L. 1368 as amended,
requires that bids made at the Berks Tax Claim Repository Sale must be approved
by the taxing district - the County, the School District and the City - which
can allow property to be conveyed to a new owner and eliminates the taxing
districts property interest in those properties. City Council shall adopt a
resolution authorizing the Solicitor to accept or reject a repository sale bid,
after inviting input from the mayor at a Council meeting or session, within 60
days of receipt from the County Tax Claim Director or his or her designee.
§ 5-811. Department of Public Works.
[Amended 8-22-2016 by Ord. No. 34-2016]
   A.   Function. The Department of Public Works shall be responsible for the
design, construction, operation and maintenance of those physical structures
and facilities that are owned and maintained by the City. Additionally, it will
provide such City functions as streets maintenance, sewage, parks, waste
disposal, environmental protection, water authority services and traffic
management. Finally, this Department will provide engineering services for its
own activities as well as the activities of other departments.
   B.   Department Director. The Department Director is also the City Engineer
and is responsible to the Managing Director for the function and performance of
the department.
   C.   Department Director qualifications. Charter §§ 604 and 706 speak to
general qualifications. Charter § 606 specifies that the Director of Public
Works shall be a professional civil engineer registered in Pennsylvania.
      Editor's Note: Sections 604 and 706 of the Charter provide:
      § 604. Qualifications.
      The heads of departments, offices, and agencies shall be selected solely
on the basis of education, training, experience and professional, executive and
administrative abilities; and such other qualifications as may be set forth in
this Charter. (See § 705.)
      § 705. Compensation of heads of departments, offices and agencies.
      The compensation of all heads of departments, offices and agencies under
the direction of the Mayor shall be proposed by the Mayor and approved by
ordinance. Compensation of all other employees shall be set in accordance with
the uniform pay plan established by City Council in the Personnel Code. All
such heads of departments, offices and agencies need not be residents of the
City at the time of appointment, but after appointment shall reside in the
City. City residency shall be required within 12 months of being appointed.
      Editor's Note: Section 606 of the Charter provides:
      § 606. Department of Public Works/City Engineer.
      (a)   The Department of Public Works is mandated by this Charter. The
Mayor shall appoint and fix the compensation of the head of the Department of
Public Works/City Engineer. He shall be a professional civil engineer
registered in Pennsylvania, and shall perform the duties required through the
Administrative Code or other action, or as may be required of a City Engineer
by general law.
      (b)   The Department of Public Works shall include an environmentalist
who shall be appointed by the head of the Department of Public Works whose
duties shall include education, lobbying, research and public liaison. The
environmentalist shall have sufficient technical qualifications for a position
of this type.
   D.   Department Director duties. The duties and responsibilities of the
Director shall include, but not be limited to the below. He/she shall direct
personally and through subordinates the performance of the below duties.
      (1)   Provide engineering services either directly or by contract for the
City.
      (2)   Construct and maintain the streets and bridges of the City,
including the provision of street cleaning, snow removal and ice control
services.
      (3)   Construct and maintain storm and sanitary sewer structures and
facilities.
      (4)   Construct, operate and maintain public wastewater treatment and
disposal structures, and facilities.
      (5)   Install and maintain traffic control devices and directional signs
and signals, street name signs, streetlights (as per Met Ed agreement) and
parking meters.
      (6)   Provide services to the Water Authority as requested according to
the contract between the City and the Authority as well as the current
collective bargaining agreement.
      (7)   Provide public environmental education, lobbying, research and
liaison with other environmental agencies.
      (8)   Provide for the management and/or collection and disposal of
municipal solid wastes including recyclables.
      (9)   Coordinate Reading beautification program.
      (10)   Plan, develop, design, and administer in cooperation with other
municipal departments, municipal park and recreation facilities owned,
acquired, or designated by the City.
      (11)   Plant and maintain trees on City property.
      (12)   Provide for custodian services for all municipal buildings.
      (13)   Provide for inspection and related procedures to assure proper
maintenance and repair of sidewalks in accordance with municipal ordinances.
      (14)   Repair and maintain municipal vehicles and equipment.
      (15)   Maintain and update Official Maps, plats, and other engineering
records of the City.
      (16)   Provide electrical services.
      (17)   Plan, develop, design and administer in cooperation with other
appropriate departments and agencies of other governments, expansion and
modification of facilities for which this department is responsible.
      (18)   Administer community recreational programs.
§ 5-812. Reserved.
§ 5-813. Economic Development Manager.
[Amended 10-11-2004 by Ord. No. 42-2004; 6-12-2006 by Ord. No. 46-2006; 2-12-
2007 by Ord. No. 13-2007; 8-22-2016 by Ord. No. 34-2016]
   A.   Position. The Economic Development Manager shall be directed and
supervised by the Managing Director and be responsible for the preparation of
short- and long-range planning, economic and community development programs.
   B.   Qualifications. Minimum qualifications for this position are a
bachelor's degree in a related field, or its equivalent, plus three years'
experience in community planning/development. A master's degree in a related
field is preferred.
   C.   Duties. The duties and responsibilities of the Manager shall include,
but not be limited to, the below. He/she shall report to the Managing Director
and personally and through subordinates on the performance of the below duties:
      (1)   Perform the various duties and exercise the powers as prescribed by
the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, 1968, P.L. 805, No. 247, as
amended, 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
      (2)   Prepare, review and maintain the Comprehensive Plan of the City,
including data collection, mapping and analysis.
      (3)   Develop the capital improvement program and assist in developing
priorities and feasibility studies.
      (4)   Develop community block grant projects and prepare the appropriate
funding grant applications.
      (5)   Enforce historical preservation and land use codes as may be
enacted by law or ordinance.
      (6)   Issue such licenses and permits as may be required by law,
ordinance and the Administrative Code.
      (7)   Coordinate community, economic and other development projects
within the City.
      (8)   Administer urban renewal program activities.
      (9)   Serve as administrative staff to the Zoning Hearing Board, City
Planning Commission, Redevelopment Authority, Historical and Architectural
Review Board, and Shade Tree Commission, and provide support services as deemed
appropriate.
§ 5-814 - Department of Human Resources.
A.   Function. Responsible for carrying out Code of Ordinances, Chapter 70
Personnel.
B.   Department Director Qualifications. Charter §§ 604 and 705 speak to
general qualifications. Merit system rules and regulations define
qualifications and appointment process.
   Editor's Note: Sections 604 and 705 of the Charter provide:
   § 604. Qualifications.
   The heads of departments, offices, and agencies shall be selected solely on
the basis of education, training, experience and professional, executive and
administrative abilities; and such other qualifications as may be set forth in
this Charter. (See § 705.)
   § 705. Compensation of heads of departments, offices and agencies.
   The compensation of all heads of departments, offices and agencies under the
direction of the Mayor shall be proposed by the Mayor and approved by
ordinance. Compensation of all other employees shall be set in accordance with
the uniform pay plan established by City Council in the Personnel Code. All
such heads of departments, offices and agencies need not be residents of the
City at the time of appointment, but after appointment shall reside in the
City. City residency shall be required within 12 months of being appointed.
C.   Department Director Duties.
   (1)   Recruit, hire, assign and reassign employees.
   (2)   Training.
   (3)   Performance evaluation.
   (4)   Discipline and discharge.
   (5)   Employee benefit programs.
   (6)   Risk and safety programs.
   (7)   Worker's Compensation.
   (8)   Labor Negotiations.
   (9)   Insurance Analysis.
   (10)   Civil Service Programs.
§ 5-815. Department of Police.
[Amended 11-13-2001 by Ord. No. 39-2011; 12-28-2009 by Ord. No. 73-2009; 8-22-
2016 by Ord. No. 34-2016]
   A.   Function. The Department of Police shall be responsible for the
protection of persons and property within the City by maintaining law and
order.
   B.   Department Director.
      (1)   Whenever the Chief of Police (or Acting Chief) is absent due to
vacation, illness or injury, the current Chief (or Acting Chief) shall
designate one of the police Department's Command Staff to head the department
and staff until the Chief of Police returns to duty.
      (2)   Whenever the position of Chief of Police (or Acting Chief) is
vacant due to the removal, resignation, retirement, incapacitation due to
permanent disability, as per § 70-715, Disability removal, or death, the
Managing Director shall appoint one of the Police Department's Command Staff to
the Acting Chief position, as is required in § 5-401 of this chapter, until
such time as the Mayor nominates a replacement to City Council and City Council
approves the nomination. [Amended 1-27-2014 by Ord. No. 8-2014]
   C.   Department Director qualifications. Charter §§
604 and
705 speak to general qualifications. Merit system rules and regulations define
qualifications and appointment process.
      Editor's Note: Sections
604 and
705 of the Charter provide:
      § 604. Qualifications.
      The heads of departments, offices, and agencies shall be selected solely
on the basis of education, training, experience and professional, executive and
administrative abilities; and such other qualifications as may be set forth in
this Charter. (See § 705.)
      § 705. Compensation of heads of departments, offices and agencies.
      The compensation of all heads of departments, offices and agencies under
the direction of the Mayor shall be proposed by the Mayor and approved by
ordinance. Compensation of all other employees shall be set in accordance with
the uniform pay plan established by City Council in the Personnel Code. All
such heads of departments, offices and agencies need not be residents of the
City at the time of appointment, but after appointment shall reside in the
City. City residency shall be required within 12 months of being appointed.
   D.   Department Director duties. The duties and responsibilities of the
Chief shall include, but not be limited to the below. He/she shall direct
personally and through subordinates the performance of all these duties and
responsibilities:
      (1)   Protect persons and property by maintaining law and order.
      (2)   Enforce all criminal laws and ordinances.
      (3)   Detect and apprehend criminal offenders and persons suspected of
committing a crime.
      (4)   Maintain records and files of crimes and criminals.
      (5)   Operate facility for the short-term detention of persons in
custody.
      (6)   Develop and conduct community relations and education programs.
      (7)   Conduct in-service training as prescribed by the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania.
      (8)   Direct other law enforcement personnel with less than full police
powers such as school-crossing guards and park rangers.
      (9)   Coordinate the emergency management services.
      (10)   Operate and maintain the police radio and other municipal radio
and emergency communication systems as may be assigned to the Department.
      (11)   Maintain records and logs relating to radio and emergency
communication systems as required by law.
   E.   Police powers. Police employed by the City of Reading shall be ex
officio constables of the Commonwealth and shall and may, within the City or
upon property owned or controlled by the City or by an authority of the City
within the Commonwealth, exercise the powers and prerogatives conferred on
police officers by law. Police, when acting as constables, shall have the
authority to serve and execute all criminal processes for the violation of
municipal ordinances which may be issued, and the fees and costs collected in
such capacity shall be paid into the City treasury.
§ 5-816. Department of Fire and Rescue Services.
[Amended 9-23-1996 by Ord. No. 30-1996; 5-29-2001 by Ord. No. 14-2001; 2-12-
2007 by Ord. No. 12-2007; 8-22-2016 by Ord. No. 34-2016]
   A.   Function. The Department of Fire and Rescue Services shall be
responsible for the protection of persons and property within the City against
fire and other hazards.
   B.   Department Director. The Department of Fire and Rescue Services shall
be headed by a Director termed a Chief who shall be responsible to the Managing
Director for the performance of the department and for all other
responsibilities and obligations that the Managing Director may from time to
time assign consistent with the law, Charter or ordinance.
   C.   Department Director qualifications. Charter §§
604 and
705 speak to general qualifications. Merit system rules and regulations define
qualifications and appointment process.
      Editor's Note: Sections
604 and
705 of the Charter provide:
      § 604. Qualifications.
      The heads of departments, offices, and agencies shall be selected solely
on the basis of education, training, experience and professional, executive and
administrative abilities; and such other qualifications as may be set forth in
this Charter. (See § 705.)
      § 705. Compensation of heads of departments, offices and agencies.
      The compensation of all heads of departments, offices and agencies under
the direction of the Mayor shall be proposed by the Mayor and approved by
ordinance. Compensation of all other employees shall be set in accordance with
the uniform pay plan established by City Council in the Personnel Code. All
such heads of departments, offices and agencies need not be residents of the
City at the time of appointment, but after appointment shall reside in the
City. City residency shall be required within 12 months of being appointed.
   D.   Department Director duties. The duties and responsibilities of the
Chief shall include, but not be limited to the below. He/she shall direct
personally and through subordinates the performance of the below duties and
responsibilities.
      (1)   Prevent and extinguish fires.
      (2)   Provide rescue services as appropriate.
      (3)   Identify, remove and control fire hazards and other hazardous
conditions.
      (4)   Enforce laws, ordinances, rules, and regulations relating to fires
and fire hazards.
      (5)   Maintain computerized fire incident reporting system.
      (6)   Develop and conduct community relations and education programs.
      (7)   Responsible for fire communications.
      (8)   Review records and logs relating to radio and the emergency
communication system.
      (9)   Conduct training programs for department personnel.
      (10)   Operate the Reading-Berks Fire Training Center in cooperation with
the County of Berks.
      (11)   Administer an apparatus/equipment and facility maintenance,
testing and repair program in cooperation with other City departments.
   E.   Fire Marshal.
      (1)   Function. The Fire Marshal shall be responsible for the fire
investigation, recordkeeping, fire prevention and fire code enforcement for the
City.
      (2)   Appointment. The Fire Marshal shall be appointed by the Mayor as
per §
603 of the Charter.
          Editor's Note: Section
603 of the Charter provides:
         § 603. Heads of departments, offices, and agencies.
         (a)   Appointment. Except as otherwise provided by this Charter, the
Mayor shall appoint and remove the head of any department, office and agency.
An appointment shall not be effective unless City Council by resolution
confirms it or fails to reject it within 60 days after the appointment. The
appointee shall serve unless rejected by City Council or until removal from
office, whichever is sooner.
         (b)   Removal. The Mayor shall have the power at any time to remove
the head of any department, office or agency immediately under the Managing
Director's direction and supervision, but the Mayor shall within 14 days notify
in writing City Council of the removal and the reason for it.
      (3)   Status. The Fire Marshal is a member of the Fire Department and
reports to its Chief. However, the Marshal shall provide investigative reports
to the Mayor, Managing Director and the Chief.
      (4)   Duties. The duties and responsibilities of the Fire Marshal shall
include the following, but not be limited to the following:
          (a)   Initiate and administer a fire prevention program for the City.
         (b)   Enforce the fire code in conjunction with the Codes Service
Division - Building/ Trades.
         (c)   Investigate cause and origin of fire as required by the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania Fire Marshal law.
         (d)   Maintain records as required by all applicable statutes, laws
and regulations of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, and the City of Reading,
the fire prevention code as adopted by the City of Reading8 and the City of
Reading Department of Fire and Rescue.
8.   Editor's Note: See Ch. 237, Fire Prevention and Protection.
§ 5-817. Department of Law.
[Amended 6-22-1998 by Ord. No. 22-1998; 8-22-2016 by Ord. No. 34-2016]
   A.   Function.
      (1)   The Department of Law shall be responsible for representing the
City on all legal questions arising in the conduct of municipal business. The
Solicitor, as head of the Legal Department, shall serve as chief legal advisor
to the Mayor, the Council and all City departments and agencies and shall
represent the City in all legal proceedings and shall perform such other duties
prescribed by law, by the Charter, by the City Administrative Code or by action
of Council.
      (2)   In the event either the Mayor/Managing Director or City Council
requires legal representation in an area of conflict, each party shall have the
ability to select their own legal counsel independent of the City Solicitor.9
   B.   Department Director.
      (1)   The Department of Law shall be headed by the City of Reading
Solicitor who shall be responsible to the Mayor and City Council for the
performance of the Department, and for all other responsibilities and
obligations that the Mayor or Council may from time to time assign consistent
with the law, Charter or ordinance.
      (2)   The City Solicitor may be removed by super-majority vote (five
votes) of Council by resolution.
   C.   Department Director qualifications. Charter §§
604 and
705 speak to general qualifications. Section
801 of Charter says that the City Solicitor shall be a member of the Bar of the
Supreme Court of Pennsylvania and experienced in municipal law.
      Editor's Note: Sections
604 and
705 of the Charter provide:
      § 604. Qualifications.
      The heads of departments, offices, and agencies shall be selected solely
on the basis of education, training, experience and professional, executive and
administrative abilities; and such other qualifications as may be set forth in
this Charter. (See § 705.)
      § 705. Compensation of heads of departments, offices and agencies.
      The compensation of all heads of departments, offices and agencies under
the direction of the Mayor shall be proposed by the Mayor and approved by
ordinance. Compensation of all other employees shall be set in accordance with
the uniform pay plan established by City Council in the Personnel Code. All
such heads of departments, offices and agencies need not be residents of the
City at the time of appointment, but after appointment shall reside in the
City. City residency shall be required within 12 months of being appointed.
      Editor's Note: Section
801 of the Charter provides:
      § 801. Qualifications and responsibilities.
      (a)   The Mayor shall appoint, with the approval of Council, a Solicitor
who shall be a member of the Bar of the Supreme Court of Pennsylvania and
experienced in municipal law. The Solicitor, as head of the Legal Department,
shall serve as chief legal advisor to the Mayor, the Council, and all City
departments and agencies; and shall represent the City in all legal proceedings
and shall perform such other duties prescribed by law, by this Charter, by the
City Administrative Code or action of Council. It is the intent of this Charter
that only one person shall be the legal advisor of the City except as may be
otherwise required by law.
      (b)   The Mayor, with the approval of Council, shall have the power, if
needed, to engage other temporary solicitors to represent the City as the need
may be. Such appointments shall be temporary and shall be for the purpose of
representing the City in specific individual legal matters. Such representation
shall be secured by requests for proposal.
   D.   Department Director duties. The duties and responsibilities of the City
Solicitor shall include, but not be limited to, the following:
      (1)   Prepare, review and revise ordinances or resolutions when so
requested by the Mayor or Council.
      (2)   Attend Council meetings and/or hearings.
      (3)   Provide legal opinions upon any legal matter or question.
      (4)   Provide legal advice when requested by department heads who are
planning and/or preparing documents and/or positions.
      (5)   Be available for consultation to those department heads who file
complaints at the district justice level.
      (6)   Litigate all legal actions and claims brought by or against the
City except in those cases in which other legal counsel is retained.
      (7)   Approve for legality all contracts, agreements or other legal
documents to be executed by authorized City officials.
      (8)   Shall provide a written quarterly report to Mayor and Council on
the status of all legal matters on which the Department of Law, directly or
through temporary legal counsel, representing the City.
      (9)   Except as otherwise provided by City Council, shall be responsible
for the supervision of all temporary legal counsel, excluding independent legal
counsel for the Mayor or City Council, including approval of their billings.
      (10)   The City Solicitor or his legal designee shall provide legal
counsel to all boards, authorities and commissions not having a regular legal
advisor. The Solicitor or his designee shall attend any meetings of boards,
authorities and commissions when requested.
9.   Editor's Note: Amended during codification (see Ch. 1, General Provisions,
Part 2).
§ 5-818. Planning Division of the Department of Community Development. 10 
[Amended 5-29-2001 by Ord. No. 14-2001; 8-22-2016 by Ord. No. 34-2016]
   A.   Establishment of Division. There is hereby established in the
Department of Community Development of the City of Reading, the Division of
Planning.
   B.   Office of the Planning Division Manager. There is hereby established
the Office of the Planning Division Manager who shall serve as the Planning
Coordinator of the City of Reading.
   C.   Duties. The duty and responsibility of the Planning Division Manager
shall be as follows:
      (1)   To provide such technical planning services as the City shall
require.
      (2)   To provide such technical planning services as shall be required by
any authority of the City, commission, board or department of the City.
      (3)   To report to the Mayor and members of Council on the progress and
status of projects undertaken by all authorities heretofore or hereafter
established in relation to the overall planning and development of the City.11
      (4)   To attend all meetings of the Planning Commission of the City and
to advise and inform said Planning Commission of the progress and status of all
projects of the City or any of the Authorities with reference to planning and
municipal development.
      (5)   To be responsible for reviewing and coordinating all state and
federal applications for technical assistance necessary in carrying out the
City's planning and improvement programs.
      (6)   To service as Director of any City authority, commission or
committee if requested to do so by the Mayor and members of Council. [Amended
3-13-2002 by Ord. No. 6-2002]
      (7)   At the time of his appointment, he need not be a resident of the
City or the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, but during his tenure of office, he
may reside outside the City, only with the approval of Council.
   D.   Additional staff. The Planning Division shall, maintain and have such
planning staff as Council hereinafter direct.
10.    Editor's Note: The Planning Division was originally established 10-4-
1961 by Ord. No. 25-1961; it was codified as Ch. 1, Part 5H, of the 2001 Code
of Ordinances.
11.   Editor's Note: Amended during codification (see Ch. 1, General
Provisions, Part 2).
Part 9
Boards and Commissions
§ 5-901. Membership.
   A.   The establishment of boards and commissions/councils shall be as
provided in the Charter in §
1001, Establishment, with the exception of the Board of Ethics established in
Charter §
1201(c), Board of Ethics.
   Editor's Note: Section 1001 of the Charter provides:
   § 1001. Establishment.
   (a)   By ordinance.
      (i)   City Council shall encourage the participation of citizens in their
government through the establishment of boards and commissions to carry out
City business. Such boards and commissions shall be established by ordinance
including a clear statement of whether they shall be advisory in nature or they
shall have power and authority under City ordinance or state or federal code.
      (ii)   City Council may not change the powers or authority of any board
or commission except by ordinance.
      (iii)   City Council may by ordinance abolish any board or commission not
established by state or federal mandate or by this Charter.
   Editor's Note: Section 1201(c) of the Charter provides:
   (c)   Board of Ethics. The Mayor, with the approval of City Council, shall
establish an independent Board of Ethics consisting of five City residents
holding terms of three years, to administer and enforce the conflict of
interest provision this section of this Charter and the prohibition sections of
this Charter. No member of the Board may hold elective or City office under the
City or any other government or hold any political party office. Insofar as
possible under state law, the Mayor shall authorize the Board to issue binding
opinions, conduct investigations on its own initiative and on referral or
complaint, refer cases for prosecution, impose administrative fines, and to
consult with independent counsel. City Council shall appropriate sufficient
funds to the Board of Ethics to enable it to perform the duties assigned to it.
Members of the Board of Ethics may be removed by the Mayor with the consent of
City Council.
   B.   Membership on boards and commissions shall be as provided in the
Charter §
1002, Membership, with the exception of the Board of Ethics, whose membership
is appointed according to §
1201(c), Board of Ethics.
   Editor's Note: Section 1002 of the Charter provides:
   § 1002. Membership.
   (a)   Appointments. City Council shall approve all appointments for each
board and commission. Broad citizen participation shall be encouraged in
recruiting appointees and making appointments. No appointee of any board or
commission shall hold any other elected public office or any compensated
position for the City.
   (b)   Vacancies. Any vacancy caused by death or resignation shall be filled
promptly pursuant to the procedure set forth in § 309(b). The person so
appointed shall serve for the unexpired term of the person vacating such
position.
   (c)   Qualifications. As a general rule, members of boards and commissions
shall be residents of the City. At the discretion of Council, persons not
residents of the City, but who have a significant property or business interest
in the City, may be selected to serve. No person may concurrently serve on more
than one authority, board or commission.
   Editor's Note: Section 1201(c) of the Charter provides:
   (c)   Board of Ethics. The Mayor, with the approval of City Council, shall
establish an independent Board of Ethics consisting of five City residents
holding terms of three years, to administer and enforce the conflict of
interest provision this section of this Charter and the prohibition sections of
this Charter. No member of the Board may hold elective or City office under the
City or any other government or hold any political party office. Insofar as
possible under state law, the Mayor shall authorize the Board to issue binding
opinions, conduct investigations on its own initiative and on referral or
complaint, refer cases for prosecution, impose administrative fines, and to
consult with independent counsel. City Council shall appropriate sufficient
funds to the Board of Ethics to enable it to perform the duties assigned to it.
Members of the Board of Ethics may be removed by the Mayor with the consent of
City Council.
   C.   A member of any board or commission may be removed by the appointing
authority for cause.
   D.   The members of any board or commission shall serve without compensation
except as otherwise provided by law, the Charter or ordinance. Members may be
reimbursed for reasonable expenses incurred in the performance of their duties.
   E.   The terms of no more than a simple majority of the membership shall
expire during the same calendar year.
§ 5-902. Organization.
   A.   Each board or commission shall provide for rules and regulations
governing its operation. Such rules and regulations shall provide for the
keeping of records pertaining to its duties, the conduct of meetings and public
hearings and a periodic reporting to the residents of the City, the Mayor and
Council. All such rules and regulations shall be approved by Mayor and Council.
   B.   The Managing Director shall assign an appropriate unit of the
administrative service for the staff liaison to each board or commission.
§ 5-903. Boards, commissions and councils.
   A.   Board of Ethics; function. The Charter, §
1201(c), establishes this Board, its membership and its function. All
complaints submitted to this Board must be in writing and notarized. See §
5-1002 of this chapter for the Code of Ethics.
   Editor's Note: Section 1201(c) of the Charter provides:
   § 1201. Conflict of interest and Code of Ethics.
   (c)   Board of Ethics. The Mayor, with the approval of City Council, shall
establish an independent Board of Ethics consisting of five City residents
holding terms of three years, to administer and enforce the conflict of
interest provision this section of this Charter and the prohibition sections of
this Charter. No member of the Board may hold elective or City office under the
City or any other government or hold any political party office. Insofar as
possible under state law, the Mayor shall authorize the Board to issue binding
opinions, conduct investigations on its own initiative and on referral or
complaint, refer cases for prosecution, impose administrative fines, and to
consult with independent counsel. City Council shall appropriate sufficient
funds to the Board of Ethics to enable it to perform the duties assigned to it.
Members of the Board of Ethics may be removed by the Mayor with the consent of
City Council.
   B.   Board of Health; function. This Board reviews and decides upon requests
from the property maintenance inspection and Building Inspectors to demolish
unsafe structures.
   C.   Board of Appeals Fire Codes; function. To hear and decide appeals as a
result of the determination of the Fire Marshal on fire codes. Membership of
this Board is determined by the International Fire Code [see
Chapter 180, Part 14, International Fire Code]. 12
12. Editor's Note: Amended during codification (see
Ch. 1, General Provisions, Part 2).
   D.   Electrical Examining Board; function. To determine the fitness of
applicants for licenses and to investigate and report on all proposed
suspensions or revocations of licenses, and to administer tests and investigate
complaints against license holders.
   E.   Plumbing Board, examiners/standards; function. To determine the fitness
of applicants for licenses and to investigate and report on all proposed
suspensions or revocations of licenses, and to administer tests and investigate
complaints against license holders.
   F.   Zoning Hearing Board; function. To hear and decide appeals from
determinations of Zoning Administrator on variances, special use permits and
all other matters placed under its review.
   G.   Police Civil Service Board; function. To test for and compile initial
hiring and promotion lists for the Police Department.
   H.   Fire Civil Service Board; function. To test for and compile initial
hiring and promotion lists for the Fire Department.
   I.   Board of Historical Architectural Review; function. To exercise the
functions, duties, responsibilities, and activities set forth in the City
Historic District Ordinance (
Chapter 295, Historic Districts).
   J.   Firemen's Pension Fund; function. To register all members and to
administer the collection and distribution of the fund and to make reasonable
rules and regulations necessary to effectuate the provisions of the law.
   K.   Officers and Employees Retirement Board; function. To register all
members and to administer the collection and distribution of the fund and to
make reasonable rules and regulations necessary to effectuate the provisions of
the law.
   L.   Police Pension Fund Association Board; function. To register all
members and to administer the collection and distribution of the fund and to
make reasonable rules and regulations necessary to effectuate the provision of
the law.
   M.   Board of Trustees of the Reading Public Library; function. To serve all
residents of the City of Reading and the County of Berks by providing high-
demand library materials (fiction and nonfiction) in a variety of formats
needed resources for lifelong learning and the needs of elementary and high
school students, current information, and a strong support for culture and
local history.
   N.   Reading-Berks Human Relations Council; function. To lessen and, where
possible, end discrimination in Berks County through investigation,
reconciliation and referral.
   O.   Commission on Human Relations; function. To prohibit discrimination in
housing, employment, and public accommodations in accordance with the terms of
the City's Human Relations Ordinance (
Chapter 23, Part 5, Human Relations Commission; Discrimination).
   P.   Park and Recreation Advisory Council; function. To suggest new ideas
and methods and to help with grant applications.
   Q.   Penn Square Commission; function. To maintain and supervise the use of
Penn Square, Market Square, Cedar Street Park, and the Courtyard I and II.
   R.   Municipal Memorial Stadium Commission; function. To promote the City
and baseball and to be a liaison between the Reading Phillies and the City and
to meet with other organizations who are interested in renting the stadium for
charitable or profitable events.
   S.   Shade Tree Commission; function. The regulation, maintenance and
promotion of shade trees in the City.
   T.   Planning Commission; function. To exercise the functions, duties,
responsibilities, and administrative activities and powers as prescribed by the
Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code (Act 247 of 1968, as amended by Act
170 of 1988, as further amended by Act 208 of 1990 and Act 131 of 1992), 53
P.S. § 10101 et seq.
   U.   Blighted Property Review Committee (see
Ch. 23, Part 9). 13
   V.   Audit Committee; function. To establish a process for coordinating and
responding to external audits as required by the Act 47 Recovery Plan
Initiative CA02 (see
Chapter 23, Part 13, Audit Committee). [Added 5-14-2012 by Ord. No. 49-2012]
   W.   Animal Control Board. See
Chapter 141, Part 2, Animal Control. 14
   X.   Business Privilege License Appeals Board. See
Chapter 339, Part 2, Business Privilege License. 15
   Y.   Vending License Board of Appeals. See
Ch. 453, Sales, Part 2, Sidewalk Vendors, and Part 3, Mobile Vendors; and
Chapter 583, Part 2, Food Vending Permits. [Added 8-26-2013 by Ord. No. 35-
2013]
   Z.   Solid Waste and Recycling Appeals Board. See
Chapter 496, Part 2, Storage and Collection. [Added 8-26-2013 by Ord. No. 35-
2013]
13.   Editor's Note: Amended during codification (see
Ch. 1, General Provisions, Part 2).
14.   Editor's Note: Added during codification (see
Ch. 1, General Provisions, Part 2).
15.   Editor's Note: Added during codification (see
Ch. 1, General Provisions, Part 2).
§ 5-904. Authorities.
[Amended 5-29-2001 by Ord. No. 14-2001; 8-26-2013 by Ord. No. 35-2013]
Authorities are established according to the Municipality Authorities Act, Act
22 of 2001, 53 Pa.C.S.A. § 5601 et seq., or similar legislation.
   A.   Reading Regional Airport Authority; function. Planning, maintaining and
operating Reading Regional Airport.
   B.   Reading Parking Authority; function. To build, manage, supply and
supervise parking facilities within the City and maintain these facilities as
clean, safe, convenient, accessible, and reasonably priced.
   C.   Reading Housing Authority; function. To provide decent, safe and
sanitary housing.
   D.   Reading Redevelopment Authority; function. To promote elimination of
blighted areas by declaring acquisition, sound replanning and redevelopment of
such areas for the promotion of health, safety, convenience and welfare.
   E.   Reading Area Water Authority; function. Acquire, hold, construct,
improve, maintain, operate, own and lease, either in the capacity of lessor or
lessee, water mains, water systems or parts thereof and water treatment works.
16
   F.   Reading Downtown Improvement District. It is the intent of the Council
of the City of Reading to organize a downtown business improvement district
authority pursuant to the provisions of the Municipality Authorities Act, Act
22 of 2001, 53 Pa.C.S.A. § 5601 et seq., as amended (the "Act"). The authority
shall be created for the purpose of making business improvements and providing
administrative services, as these terms are defined in the Act, to the central
business district of the City of Reading.
   G.   Berks County Convention Center Authority.
16.   Editor's Note: Original Subsection F, Berks Area Reading Transportation
Authority, which immediately followed this subsection, was repealed 8-26-2013
by Ord. No. 35-2013.
Part 10
Code of Ethics
[Added 6-22-2009 by Ord. No. 27-2009]
§ 5-1001. Declaration of policy.
   A.   The proper operation of democratic government requires that public
officials and employees be independent, impartial and responsible to the
people; that government decisions and policy be made in the proper channels of
governmental structure; that public office not be used for personal gain; and
that the public have confidence in the integrity of its government.
   B.   Each official or employee of the City must be constantly on guard
against conflicts of interest. No official or employee should be involved in
any activity which might be seen as conflicting with his/her responsibilities
to the City. The people of Reading have a right to expect that their
representatives act with independence and fairness towards all groups and not
favor a few individuals or themselves.
   C.   The following principles, although not representing substantive rights,
are fundamental driving forces for officials and employees of the City of
Reading in everything they do. 17
      (1)   Public office as a public trust. Public servants should treat their
office as a public trust, only using the powers and resources of public office
to advance public interests and not to attain personal benefits or pursue any
other private interest incompatible with the public good.
      (2)   Independent objective judgment. Public servants should employ
independent objective judgment in performing their duties, deciding all matters
on the merits, free from avoidable conflicts of interest and both real and
apparent improper influences.
      (3)   Accountability and democratic leadership. Public servants should
honor and respect the principles and spirit of representative democracy and set
a positive example of good citizenship by scrupulously observing the letter and
spirit of laws and rules. [Amended 5-28-2013 by Ord. No. 28-201318]
      (4)   Respectability and fitness for public office. Public servants
should safeguard public confidence in the integrity of government by being
honest, fair, caring and respectful and by avoiding conduct creating the
appearance of impropriety or which is otherwise unbefitting a public official.
   D.   In recognition of these aforementioned goals and principles, there is
hereby established a Code of Ethics to be administered by the Board of Ethics.
The purpose of this code is to establish ethical standards of conduct for all
officials and employees of the City of Reading, its agencies and authorities,
whether elected or appointed, paid or unpaid, by providing guidelines to
clarify actions or inactions which are incompatible with the best interests of
the City and by directing disclosure of private, financial or other interests
in matters affecting the City. The provisions and purpose of this code and such
rules, regulations, opinions and disciplinary decisions as may be promulgated
by the Board pursuant hereto, interest of the City.
17.   Note: Josephson Institute for the Advancement of Ethics, Preserving the
Public Trust, 1990.
18.   Editor's Note: This ordinance also repealed former Subsection C(4),
Democratic leadership [See now Subsection C(3)], and redesignated former
Subsection C(5) as Subsection C(4).
§ 5-1002. Board of Ethics.
Reference is made to §
1201(c) of the Charter of the City of Reading.
   A.   Composition and structure of Board.
      (1)   Composition. The Board established under §
1201 of the City of Reading Home Rule Charter shall be composed of five
residents of the City of Reading.
      (2)   Terms of service. Members of the Board shall serve for terms of
three years, except that members shall continue to serve until their successors
are appointed and qualified. The terms of the initial members shall be
staggered, with one member serving a term of one year, two members serving for
two years, and two members serving for three years.
      (3)   Vacancy. An individual appointed to fill a vacancy occurring other
than by the expiration of a term of office shall be appointed for the unexpired
term of the member he/she succeeds and is eligible for appointment thereafter
according to the terms herein.
      (4)   Election of Chairperson and Vice Chairperson. The Board shall elect
a Chairperson and a Vice Chairperson annually at a meeting held in July of each
year. The Vice Chairperson shall act as chairperson in the absence of the
Chairperson or in the event of a vacancy in that position.
      (5)   Quorum. A majority of the members of the Board shall constitute a
quorum and, except as provided in §
5-1009C and D, the votes of a majority of the members present are required for
any action or recommendation of the Board.
      (6)   Staff. The Board shall appoint a Solicitor, a secretary and such
other staff as may be deemed necessary. The Solicitor, secretary and such other
staff as may be necessarily appointed need not be members of the Board.
      (7)   Meetings. The Board shall meet at the call of the Chairperson or at
the call of a majority of its members.
      (8)   Investigative Officer. The Board shall appoint an investigating
officer as set forth herein. The Board shall, from time to time, determine an
amount to be paid as reasonable compensation to the investigating officer as
payment for such services. The investigative officer shall be a member in good
standing of the Berks County Bar and shall have so been for at least five
years. The investigative officer need not be a resident of the City of Reading
and shall not be a Board member. The investigating officer is authorized to
retain the services of investigators and may only delegate nondiscretionary
functions.
      (9)   Removal of members. Any member may be removed for misconduct or
neglect of duty or for other just cause by a majority vote of Council taken
after the member has received 15 days' advance notice of the intent to take
such vote. Failure of a member to attend three consecutive regular meetings of
the Board will constitute grounds for immediate removal from the Board by City
Council. Failure of a member to attend at least 50% of the regular meetings of
the Board in a calendar year will constitute grounds for immediate removal from
the Board by City Council. The Chairperson of the Board shall inform the City
Clerk in writing when a member has failed to comply with this attendance
policy. Following such notification, City Council may vote to remove the member
and seek applicants to fill the vacant position. [Amended 9-27-2010 by Ord. No.
74-2010]
   B.   Powers and duties. The powers and the duties of the Board of Ethics may
be summarized as follows:
      (1)   Give advice as to the application of the ethics provisions of the
Charter of the City of Reading and this Code of Ethics.
      (2)   Receive and dispose of complaints of violations of the ethics
provisions of the Charter and Code of Ethics, and exercise discretion in
declining to pursue an investigation if such a course would be in the best
interest of the citizens of the City of Reading or where the activity
complained of amounts to no more than a de minimis violation.
      (3)   Appoint an investigating officer to conduct investigations and to
issue findings reports where appropriate.
      (4)   Hold hearings, issue subpoenas and compel the attendance of
witnesses, administer oaths, take testimony, require evidence on any matter
under investigation before the Board, and issue orders including, but not
limited to, those related to adjudications and penalties.
      (5)   Conduct educational programs to promote the ethical conduct of
public officials, City employees, and individuals and groups doing business
with the City.
      (6)   Adopt rules and regulations to administer, implement, enforce and
interpret the Code of Ethics.
      (7)   Annually review the statements of financial interest filed pursuant
to §
5-1004 of this Part 10.
   C.   Prohibitions. Due to their special position, Board members have a
higher duty than other public officials to avoid conflicts of interest. Respect
for the code can be maintained only if members are models of ethical behavior.
The prohibitions in this section are in addition to the duties,
responsibilities or obligations imposed upon the Board members as public
officials under other provisions of the code.
      (1)   No member may hold or campaign for any other public office.
      (2)   No member may hold office in any political party or political
organization or political committee.
      (3)   No member may hold a position of employment or appointment with any
municipal government or any board or commission formed by the City of Reading.
      (4)   No member may actively participate in or contribute to any
political campaign in the City of Reading for a candidate running for or from
the office of the Mayor, President of Council, Council member, or Auditor. This
does not abridge the right of a member of communicating a candidate's platform
or position on issues of public concern.
      (5)   No member shall receive compensation but shall be reimbursed by the
City for documented expenses actually incurred.
   D.   Preservation. Complaints and proceedings pending before the Board at
the time this code is adopted shall be preserved insofar as they are consistent
with recent orders of the Court of Common Pleas of Berks County. The Board
shall take any and all steps necessary to adjudicate all pending complaints so
as to comply with said orders, including the establishment of a committee of
Board members not previously involved in the disposition of said complaints to
adjudicate and dispose of the same. Said committee shall consist of at least
three Board members and shall act with the authority of the Board in
adjudicating said complaints and instituting penalties and restitution where
applicable.
§ 5-1003. Definitions.
For the purposes of this Code of Ethics, the following terms shall have the
following definitions. All other words and phrases shall have their normal
meaning unless further defined herein:
   APPEARANCE OF IMPROPRIETY — The perception that wrongdoing or misconduct may
have occurred. When a reasonable person could reasonably believe that improper
actions have taken or are taking place.
   BOARD — The Board of Ethics of the City of Reading.
   CANDIDATE — An individual who files nomination papers or petitions for City-
elected office or who publicly announces his or her candidacy for City-elected
office. [Amended 5-28-2013 by Ord. No. 28-2013]
   CANDIDATE CAMPAIGN CONTRIBUTION — Money, gifts, forgiveness of debts, loans
or things having a monetary value incurred or received by a candidate or his/
her agent for use in advocating or influencing the election of the candidate.
[Added 5-28-2013 by Ord. No. 28-2013]
   CANDIDATE POLITICAL COMMITTEE — The one political committee used by a
candidate to receive all contributions and make all expenditures. [Added 5-28-
2013 by Ord. No. 28-2013]
   CHARTER — City of Reading Home Rule Charter.
   CITY — The City of Reading, Pennsylvania. [Added 5-28-2013 by Ord. No. 28-
2013]
   CITY-ELECTED OFFICE — The offices of Mayor, City Council and City Auditor.
[Added 5-28-2013 by Ord. No. 28-2013]
   CODE — City of Reading Code of Ethics.
   CONFLICT OF INTEREST — Situation(s) or potential situation(s) in which a
public official or employee uses or may use his/her office or employment for
the private gain of himself/herself, a member of his/her immediate family or a
business of any type with which he/she or a member of his/her immediate family
has a material interest.
   CONTRACT — An agreement or arrangement for the acquisition, use or disposal
by the City or a City agency or instrumentality of consulting or other services
or of supplies, materials, equipment, land or other personal or real property.
This term shall not mean an agreement or arrangement between the City or City
agency or instrumentality as one party and a City official or City employee as
the other party, concerning his/her expense, reimbursement, salary, wage,
retirement or other benefit, tenure or other matters in consideration of his/
her current public employment with the City or a City agency or
instrumentality. [Added 5-28-2013 by Ord. No. 28-2013]
   CONTRIBUTION — Money, gifts, forgiveness of debts, loans or things having a
monetary value incurred or received by a candidate or his/her agent for use in
advocating or influencing the election or candidacy of the candidate. [Added 5-
28-2013 by Ord. No. 28-2013]
   COVERED ELECTION — Every primary, general, or special election for City-
elected office. [Added 5-28-2013 by Ord. No. 28-2013]
   ELECTED OFFICIAL — An official elected or appointed to fill a position
normally filled by election.
   EMPLOYEE — Any individual receiving salary or wages from the City of
Reading. GIFT — [Added 5-28-2013 by Ord. No. 28-2013]
      A.   The term "gift" for the purposes of this code shall mean any
gratuity, benefit, or any other thing of value, which is accepted by, paid for,
or given to a City employee or City official, or by another individual or
organization on behalf of a City employee or City official, either directly or
indirectly, without consideration of equal or greater value.
      B.   This definition may include, by way of illustration and without
limitation to, the following:
         (1)   Preferential rate or terms on a debt, loan, goods, or services,
which rate is below the customary rate and is not either a government rate
available to all other similarly situated government employees or officials or
a rate which is available to similarly situated members of the public by virtue
of occupation, affiliation, age, religion, sex, or national origin;
         (2)   Transportation, lodging or parking;
         (3)   Food or beverage, other than that consumed at a single sitting
or event;
         (4)   Membership dues or admissions to cultural or athletic events,
which exceed $250 per calendar year in the aggregate and $100 per calendar year
from any single person, agent or other interested party; and/or
         (5)   Political contributions in excess of those limitations set forth
hereinafter or in any other applicable laws or regulations, including, but not
limited to, the Code of the City of Reading.
   C.   The term "gift" for purposes of this code shall explicitly exclude:
      (1)   Gifts from direct family members;
      (2)   Nonpecuniary awards publicly presented in recognition of public
service;
      (3)   An occasional nonpecuniary gift of nominal value;
      (4)   Complimentary travel for official purposes; and/or
      (5)   Admissions to charitable, civic, political or other public events.
   IMMEDIATE FAMILY — A parent, spouse, living partner, child, brother or
sister, natural or adopted.
   INDIVIDUAL — A person. [Added 5-28-2013 by Ord. No. 28-2013; amended 12-12-
2016 by Ord. No. 65-2016]
   MATERIAL INTEREST — Direct or indirect ownership of more than 5% of the
total assets or capital stock of any business entity.
   NO-BID CONTRACT — A contract (as defined herein), which is not awarded or
entered into pursuant to an open and public process, in accordance with
Pennsylvania law, including prior public notice and subsequent public
disclosure of all proposals considered and contracts awarded related thereto.
[Added 5-28-2013 by Ord. No. 28-2013]
   OFFICER — Investigating officer appointed by the Board to oversee the
investigative procedures on behalf of the Board. The investigating officer need
not be a Board member and may be compensated as any other member of the staff.
   OFFICIAL — Any elected or appointed paid or unpaid member of the government
of the City of Reading, including without limitation members of any City
boards, authorities, and commissions. [Amended 5-28-2013 by Ord. No. 28-2013]
   ORGANIZATION — An individual, partnership, corporation, sole proprietorship,
whether for- profit or not-for-profit, or any other form of business
organization. [Added 5-28-2013 by Ord. No. 28-2013]
   POLITICAL ACTIVITY — Any activity which promotes the candidacy of any
individual seeking elective office, or the advocacy of any political party or
position including, but not limited to, the circulation of election petitions
and the sale or distribution of fund-raising items or tickets.
   POLITICAL COMMITTEE — Any committee, club, association, political party, or
other group of persons, which receives contributions or makes expenditures for
the purpose of influencing the outcome of a covered election, including but not
limited to: a) political action committees recognized under Section 527 of the
Internal Revenue Code; and b) the candidate political committee of a candidate
in a covered election. [Added 5-28-2013 by Ord. No. 28-2013]
   POSTCANDIDACY CONTRIBUTION — A contribution made to a former candidate or
political committee for use in retiring debt that was incurred to influence the
outcome of a covered election, or for the purpose of defraying the cost of
transition or inauguration of a candidate elected to City-elected office.
[Added 5-28-2013 by Ord. No. 28-2013]
   PRECANDIDACY CONTRIBUTION — A contribution made to a political committee
that: a) has been transferred to, or otherwise becomes available for
expenditure by, a candidate for City- elective office; and b) was made before
such candidate became a candidate. [Added 5-28-2013 by Ord. No. 28-2013]
   PRIVATE GAIN — Of personal benefit, whether economic, social, or otherwise.
   VIOLATION — A violation is any activity that is restricted by the ethics
provisions of the Charter and/or the code.
§ 5-1004. Statement of financial interests.
[Amended 12-19-2016 by Ord. No. 67-2016; 6-13-2022 by Ord. No. 47-2022]
Any official or employee of the City or authorities, boards or commissions with
decision-making authority, including advisory boards, shall file with the City
Clerk a Statement of Financial Interests for the preceding calendar year by May
1 of each year, as defined by the State Code of Ethics, and shall also file a
City of Reading Supplemental Statement of Financial Interest, as approved by
the Board of Ethics. Any individual appointed to such a position after May 1
has 15 working days to file both the Statement of Financial Interest and the
City of Reading Supplemental Statement of Financial Interest. All statements
must be made available for public inspection and copying at an amount not to
exceed actual costs.
§ 5-1005. Disclosure of confidential information.
   A.   City employees and officials often have access to important nonpublic
information regarding the property, operations, policies or affairs of the
City. Such information may concern, among other things, employees and
officials, real estate transactions, expansion of public facilities, or other
City projects. Using or furnishing information that would place employees or
recipients in an advantageous position over the general public constitutes a
violation of public trust. Anyone who is privy to confidential information may
not disclose that information to any private citizen and should disclose it to
other public employees only if appropriate and in the normal course of their
duties as employees or officials of the City of Reading.
   B.   Should an official or employee find himself/herself in any direct or
indirect financial interest with any person or other entity proposing to
contract with the City that individual must fully disclose said interest and
refrain from voting upon or otherwise participating in the transaction or the
making of such decision, contract or sale. Violation of this section shall
render the contract voidable by the decisionmaking body or upon review and
authority of the Board of Ethics.
§ 5-1006. Prohibited behaviors.
Every City official and employee is a public servant. Public servants must
treat members of the public fairly and equitably. Receipt of money, favors,
gifts, gratuities, invitations, food, drink, loans, promises, or other benefits
(collectively and subsequently referred to in this section as “gifts”) offered
to a public servant because of that person’s position, may create the
appearance of a conflict of interest, if not an actual conflict of interest
Similarly, solicitation of gifts by a public servant in that person’s capacity
as a public servant, for that person’s own benefit, likely establishes a
conflict of interest.
Public servants, in performing their duties, must work for the benefit of the
community as a whole, giving equal consideration to each member of the public,
and doing so without giving special regard because of finances, political
affiliations, gender, orientation, creed, or other categorization. Conflicts of
interest betray the trust of the public with its government and violate
traditional notions of fair play and substantial justice. [Added 10-9-2017 by
Ord. No. 91-2017]
   A.   Conflicts of interest.
      (1)   Employees and officials of the City may not bid on or have a
material interest in:
         (a)   The furnishing of any materials, supplies or services to be used
in the work of the City.
         (b)   Contracts for the construction of any City facility.
         (c)   The sale of any property to the City or the purchase of any
property from the City unless said property is offered to the general public at
auction or by competitive bid.
      (2)   Employees and officials of the City may not:
         (a)   Use or attempt to use their official position to secure special
privileges or exemptions for themselves or others.
         (b)   Accept employment or engage in any business or professional
activity which might reasonably be expected to require or induce the disclosure
of confidential information acquired by the public officer or employee by
reason of their official position.
         (c)   Disclose to others, or use for personal benefit, any
confidential information gained by reason of an official position.
         (d)   Accept other employment which might impair the independence or
judgment of the public officer or employee in the performance of public duty.
         (e)   Receive any compensation for official services to the City from
any source other than the City.
         (f)   Transact any business in an official capacity with any other
business entity of which the public officer or employee is an officer,
director, agent, member, or owns a material interest.
         (g)   Have personal investments in any enterprise which will create a
substantial conflict between any private interest and the public interest.
      (3)   Outside employment. City officials or employees may accept, have,
or hold any employment or contractual relationship with any individual,
partnership, association, corporation (profit or nonprofit), utility or other
organization, whether public or private, but only if the employment or
contractual relationship does not constitute a conflict of interest or impair
their efficiency.
      (4)   Officials and employees shall not engage in conduct prohibited
under §
1201(a) of the Charter.
   B.   Gifts: Solicitation/Acceptance. [Amended 10-9-2017 by Ord. No. 91-2017]
      (1)   Restriction on Acceptance/Solicitation of Gifts by City Officials
and Employees.
         (a)   No City official or employee or member of his/her immediate
family shall accept or solicit any gift, gratuity, money, favors, invitations,
food, drink, loans, promises, or other benefits (collectively referred to as
“gifts”) from any person, firm, corporation, or association which to his
knowledge is interested, directly or indirectly, in any manner whatsoever, in
business dealings with the City provided that City official or employee has any
influence, directly or indirectly, in any manner whatsoever, in the City’s
participation in those business dealings.
         (b)   No City official or employee or member of his/her immediate
family shall accept or solicit any gift that may in any circumstance appear to
be an attempt to influence that official or employee in the discharge of his or
her official duties.
         (c)   City officials and City employees are also subject to those
related, applicable ordinances of the City Charter, Codes of the City of
Reading, and the Pennsylvania Public Official and Employee Ethics Act (65
PaC.S.A. Sect. 1101.1 et seq, as amended), and all related statutes and
regulations.
      (2)   Exceptions. A City official, employee, or member of his/her
immediate family may accept, but not solicit, the following gifts,
notwithstanding that the person giving the gift may be seeking official action
from that officer or employee:
         (a)   Hospitality provided at a residence when the donor is present;
         (b)   Food, beverages, or entertainment provided at an event for which
attendees do not have to purchase a ticket;
         (c)   Food and beverages provided to all participants in the ordinary
course of a meeting where the food and beverages are provided at the site of
the meeting;
         (d)   Gifts of food (cookies, candy, etc) received shall be made
available for consumption on the premises to the public and employees when such
offer may not be reasonably seen as seeking to influence the public servants or
to induce more favorable treatment toward the donor.
         (e)   Gifts resulting solely from the officer’s or employee’s outside
employment, or from his or her membership in a bona fide charitable,
professional, educational, labor, or trade organization;
         (f)   Rebates or discounts offered to members of the general public or
a class of persons;
         (g)   Free admission to an event, including food, beverages, and
entertainment, if the officer or employee is a guest speaker;
         (h)   Free admission to political events, including food and
beverages, if the officer or employee is permitted to engage in political
activity in coordination with candidates, political parties, or partisan
political groups;
         (i)   Nominal, de minimis tokens of appreciation given at public
appearances;
         (j)   Gifts totaling less than $50 from a single individual during a
single calendar year.
      (3)   Return of Gifts: Reporting.
         (a)   In all but de minimis cases, all gifts received must be publicly
recorded and submitted to the City Clerk on a form from the City’s Board of
Ethics specifying: the donor; the address of the donor; the date received; a
concise description of the gift; and the value of the gift. A gift having a
value in excess of $50 may not be considered de minimis.
         (b)   The City Clerk shall file the gift disclosure form with the
Board of Ethics and have the gift form uploaded onto the City’s website.
         (c)   The Ethics Board shall designate two members (hereinafter the
Subcommittee) who will evaluate the propriety of gifts valued at $50 or more,
and determine if the gift must be returned to the donor. The Subcommittee shall
evaluate the propriety of the gift according to the provisions of (1)
Restrictions, and (2) Exceptions above.
         (d)   The Subcommittee shall issue a written opinion to the party that
submitted the form within 21 days unless a shorter timeline is agreed upon. The
opinion shall include all material facts relied on by the Subcommittee, and
articulate a basis for the decision. All opinions shall be posted on the City’s
website. The officer or employee shall have the right to appeal the decision to
the full Ethics Board.
      (4)   Political Candidates for City Offices.
         (a)   The provisions of (1), (2), and (3) above shall not apply to any
campaign contribution to any candidate for City office, whether or not he or
she is a City official or employee, provided the campaign contribution is legal
and appropriately reported according to the Pennsylvania Election Code at 25
P.S. 2600, et seq., as amended, and all related statutes and regulations, as
applicable and Ethics Code Section 12 Campaign Contributions and Reporting
Requirements.
         (b)   The provisions of (1), (2), and (3) above shall apply in full to
any other gift received by any candidate for City office, whether or not he or
she is a City official or employee.
         (c)   Upon certification of any individual’s candidacy for City
office, the City Clerk shall provide the candidate with a copy of this section
and a brief explanation of its requirements, receipt of which shall be
acknowledged by the candidate’s signature.
   C.   Nepotism. Hiring a relative is a special type of a conflict of interest
that should be avoided. No public official or employee shall appoint, hire,
advance or advocate the appointing, hiring or advancing of a member of his/her
immediate family or household member to a City position, as provided in the
City of Reading Personnel Code (
Chapter 70, Personnel).
   D.   Whistle blowing.
      (1)   Employees are expected to expose a violation of the Code of Ethics
by any employee or business entity with which the City is doing business if
such a violation creates a serious and specific danger to the public's health,
safety or welfare.
      (2)   Employees are expected to expose improper use of public office or
any other abuse or neglect on the part of a City employee or public official.
An employee with knowledge of actions or activities of ethical concern shall
report them to the Board of Ethics. The identity of the employee will be
confidential information of the Board of Ethics until a full investigation is
initiated.
      (3)   Retaliation against an employee who reports any violation, abuse or
other improper action is strictly prohibited. Any such action will be a
violation of the Code of Ethics and subject to the disciplinary and corrective
action as ordered by the Board of Ethics.
   E.   Fraudulent or other activity.
      (1)   City employees or officials are expected to act ethically in the
performance of all duties and responsibilities and avoid any involvement with,
or any appearance of, behavior constituting fraud, misappropriation or other
inappropriate conduct while carrying out the duties and obligations of their
employment or office.
      (2)   City employees or officials may not willfully or deliberately act,
attempt to act, conspire to act, or solicit with the intent to act, carry out,
or participate in any of the following activities:
         (a)   Embezzlement of money or resources for private purposes or use,
from any City official, City employee, City department, City contractor or
subcontractor, or third party agent doing business with the City government.
         (b)   Misappropriation of City funds, supplies, assets or resources.
         (c)   Falsification of any City record, including personnel records.
         (d)   Forgery or alteration of any check, bank draft, bank account, or
other financial document.
         (e)   Forgery or alteration of timecard data and/or information.
         (f)   Receipt of a bribe or kickback, or willing participation in a
scheme of bribery.
         (g)   Impropriety in the handling or reporting of money or financial
transactions.
         (h)   Using insider knowledge of City activities to earn or generate
any gift, profit or pecuniary benefit.
         (i)   Accepting, requesting, or seeking any material item or pecuniary
benefit from contractors, vendors or parties providing services or materials to
the City.
         (j)   Unauthorized destruction, removal or inappropriate use of City
property, including data records, furniture, fixtures and equipment.
         (k)   Making false or intentionally misleading written or oral
statements or representations in carrying out any official or employment duty
or obligation.
         (l)   Participation in any willful or deliberate act carried out with
the intention of obtaining an unearned or unauthorized benefit by way of
detention or other unethical means.
      (3)   City employees or officials are to be familiar with the types of
fraud and the potential activities and circumstances that may give rise to a
fraudulent activity within his or her department, bureau, and area of
responsibility.
      (4)   City employees or officials are charged with the duty to be alert
for any indication of fraudulent activity and all City employees or officials
have a duty to report immediately any suspected fraudulent activity to the City
Board of Ethics.
   F.   Use of City property and personnel. City employees or officials may not
use any personnel, equipment, supplies, facilities, vehicles, or any other
property owned and belonging to the City for their private purposes, use,
enjoyment, or benefit. City employees or officials who hold a supervisory
position may not use the time, effort and resources of any subordinate City
employees or official for their private purposes, use, enjoyment, or benefit.
The provisions of this subsection are to be read together and with any related
provision of the City of Reading Personnel Code. 19
   G.   Political activities. Sections
605(a) and
706 of the City Charter and §
70-108, Political activity, of
Chapter 70, Personnel, are incorporated herein by reference and made a part
hereof. City employees or officials are to adhere to the sections restricting
involvement in political activities as set forth in §§
605(a) and
706 of the City Charter and §
70-108 of the City Code. In the event that the City or City Council has failed
to take appropriate action in enforcing the aforementioned provisions, then the
Board of Ethics shall have jurisdiction to adjudicate any violation thereof.
   H.   Awarding contracts. [Added 5-28-2013 by Ord. No. 28-2013]
      (1)   To the extent that it is not inconsistent with federal or state
law, a City employee, a City official, any immediate family of a City employee
or City official, or any for- profit business entity in which the City
employee, City official, or any immediate family has a material interest, shall
not enter into any contract valued at $500 or more with the City or any City
agency or instrumentality, unless the contract has been awarded through an open
and public process, in accordance with Pennsylvania law, including prior public
notice and subsequent public disclosure of all proposals considered and
contracts awarded. In such a case, the City Official or City Employee shall not
have any supervisory or overall responsibility for the implementation or
administration of the contract. Any contract or subcontract made in violation
of this subsection may be subject to further penalties, pursuant to the terms
and provisions of the Pennsylvania Public Official and Employee Ethics Act (65
Pa.C.S.A. § 1101.1 et seq.).
      (2)   Prior to entering into or awarding any no-bid contract, the City
employee, official, agent or instrumentality entering into such no-bid contract
on behalf of the City must immediately provide the Board of Ethics with the
following information:
         (a)   The name and address of all contracting parties;
         (b)   A draft copy of the contract to be entered into;
         (c)   A report, in compliance with 25 P.S. § 3260a (Section 1641 of
the Pennsylvania Election Code), as amended, which shall provide the following:
            [1]   An itemized list of all political contributions known to each
contracting party by virtue of the knowledge possessed by every officer,
director, associate, partner, limited partner, or individual owner that has
been made by:
               [a]   Any officer, director, associate, partner, limited
partner, individual owner or members of the immediate family of the
aforementioned parties when the contributions exceed an aggregate of $1,000 by
any individual during the preceding year; or
               [b]   Any employee or members of his or her immediate family
whose political contribution exceeded $1,000 during the preceding year.
         (d)   Any other information that the Board of Ethics may require.
      (3)   In the event that the intended recipient of a City no-bid contract
or any officer, director, associate, partner, limited partner, individual
owner, member, employee, or Immediate Family of any of the aforementioned
parties has made a donation to a political committee of a City employee, City
official, agent or instrumentality, in excess of the contribution limitations
set forth in §
5-1012 during any of the preceding two calendar years from the date the draft
copy of the proposed contract is submitted to the Board of Ethics, then and in
that event the City is prohibited from awarding that no-bid contract to that
intended party.
      (4)   For purposes of this section, the office that is considered to have
ultimate responsibility for the award of the contract shall be as provided for
by the established purchasing policies of the City of Reading.
   I.   City Council District Events/Community Promotions Spending Policy.
Violation of the City Council District Events/Community Promotions Spending
Policy adopted June 26, 2023 and as may be amended from time to time. [Added 8-
14-2023 by Ord. No. 71-2023]
19.   Editor's Note: See
Ch. 70, Personnel.
§ 5-1007. Violations and penalties; restitution.
   A.   Penalties. Upon any violation of the City provisions, including the
undertaking of wrongful acts as described above or in the City of Reading Home
Rule Charter, any of the following penalties shall be available to the Ethics
Board for imposition:
      (1)   Admonition. In compliance with existing personnel practices,
collective bargaining agreements and/or statutes, a letter to the respondent,
the Mayor, the Managing Director, the Director of the Department in which the
respondent is employed, if any, and the complainant, if any, indicating that
the respondent has been found to have violated the City provisions.
      (2)   Public censure. In compliance with existing personnel practices,
collective bargaining agreements and/or statutes, notification to the
respondent, the Mayor, the Managing Director, the Director of the Department in
which the respondent is employed, if any, and the complainant, if any, and the
news media indicating that a violation of the City provisions took place and
that the Board strongly disapproves of the actions of the public official or
public employee.
      (3)   Recommendation to the Managing Director of suspension, without
compensation for a stated period of time not to exceed 30 days, in compliance
with existing personnel practices, collective bargaining agreements and/or
statutes, with notification to the respondent, the Mayor, the Managing
Director, the Director of the Department in which the respondent is employed,
if any, and the complainant. If any such suspension is not imposed by the City,
a written explanation of such decision shall be provided within five days to
the Board.
      (4)   Recommendation to the Managing Director of termination in
compliance with existing personnel practices, collective bargaining agreements
and/or statutes, with notification going to the respondent, the Managing
Director, the Mayor, the Director of the Department in which is respondent is
employed, if any, and the complainant, if any. If any such termination is not
imposed by the City, a written explanation of such decision shall be provided
within five days to the Board.
      (5)   Referral to the appropriate authorities for criminal prosecution in
cases where a violation of this Part 10 is also a violation of federal or state
law.
      (6)   Ineligibility for holding any office or position within the City
for a period of up to five years, as set forth in §
1202(b) of the Charter of the City of Reading.
      (7)   Impose a fine, not to exceed $1,000 per violation.
      (8)   Imposition of an administrative fine of not more than $1,000 to
defray the actual cost and expense of investigating any violation.
      (9)   Any person who realizes financial gain by way of a violation of any
provision of this Part 10, in addition to any other penalty provided by law or
this Part 10, shall pay into the Treasury of the City, a sum of money up to the
financial gain resulting from the violation. The Board shall determine the
amount of financial gain realized.
      (10)   Any public official, public employee, person, corporation, company
or other entity found to have participated in or benefitted from a violation of
this Part 10 may be barred from participating in business dealings with the
City for a period of time not to exceed five years, said period of time to be
determined by the Board, in addition to being subject to any other penalty
(prescribed by this Part 10) deemed appropriate by the Board.
   B.   Restitution; other penalties and remedies. After finding that an
individual has violated any provision of the Charter or this code within the
jurisdiction of the Board as provided for addition to penalties described in
Subsection A:
      (1)   Order the subject to make restitution to those incurring damage or
injury as a direct result of the actions of the subject that have been
adjudicated as a violation of the code or Charter.
      (2)   Order the subject to cease and desist from engaging in a particular
activity that is in violation of the code, Charter, or any order issued by the
Board.
      (3)   Order the subject to take specified action to bring him/her into
compliance with Board directives.
      (4)   Refer the matter for review or with specific recommendation for
action to law enforcement, regulatory or other authorities with jurisdiction of
the matters.
      (5)   Institute appropriate civil or equitable action to enforce the
order and decision of the Board.
      (6)   Recommend to City Council the forfeiture of the office or position
held by the subject with the City and recommend that the subject be ineligible
to hold any City office or position for a period of up to five years following
such decision.
§ 5-1008. Advisory opinions.
   A.   Upon the written request of any public official or City employee, or
without such request, should a majority of the Board deem it in the public
interest, the Board may render advisory opinions concerning matters of
governmental ethics, shall consider questions as to ethical conduct, conflicts
of interest and the application of ethical standards set forth in this Part 10,
and shall issue an advisory opinion in writing as to any such question. The
Board may in its discretion publish its advisory opinions with any redactions
necessary to prevent disclosure of the identity of the person who is the
subject of the opinion.
   B.   An advisory opinion may be used as a defense in any subsequent
investigation or prosecution, provided that the official or employee who sought
the opinion did so in good faith and only to the extent material facts were not
misrepresented in the request for the opinion.
§ 5-1009. Complaint and investigation procedure.
[Amended 12-19-2016 by Ord. No. 67-2016; 6-13-2022 by Ord. No. 47-2022]
   A.   Who may file. Any person may file a complaint about alleged ethics
violations of the Reading Code of Ethics or the City Charter. In addition, the
Board may initiate proceedings. A person signing a complaint shall:
      (1)   Reasonably believe in the existence of facts upon which the claim
is based.
      (2)   Reasonably believe that the complaint may be valid under the ethics
provisions of the Code of Ethics and the City Charter.
   B.   How to file.
      (1)   Complaints must be submitted on forms provided by the Board. The
Board shall make available this form upon request. The complaint shall state
the name, job or office held by the alleged violator and a description of the
facts that are alleged to constitute a violation. It must contain a notarized
signature subject to the penalties of 18 Pa.C.S.A. § 4904 relating to unsworn
falsification to authorities. The Board shall establish a separate P.O. box
through which to receive complaints. This P.O. box shall be generally
accessible by the investigative officer and/or the secretary, provided that the
secretary is not a Board member.
      (2)   Complaints must be filed within five years of the date on which the
alleged ethics violation that is the subject of the complaint occurred. Any
complaint filed after this date shall be rejected.
   C.   Jurisdiction; preliminary investigation.
      (1)   Each complaint filed with the Board shall be immediately directed
to and preliminarily reviewed by an investigating officer appointed by the
Board (the "Officer") to determine whether the complaint falls within the
jurisdiction of the Board. The aforesaid determinations shall be made within 30
days of the filing of the complaint. If the Officer determines that the Board
does not have jurisdiction over the matter underlying the complaint, the
complainant will be notified and no further action will be taken with regard to
the complaint. If, however, the Officer determines that the complaint falls
within the jurisdiction of the Board, the Officer shall authorize a preliminary
investigation.
      (2)   The preliminary investigation shall be initiated and accomplished
at the sole direction of the Officer. If the Officer, in his/her sole
discretion, finds that the violation(s), as alleged in the complaint, would, if
proved, constitute a de minimis infraction, he/she may decline to initiate a
preliminary investigation and dismiss the complaint, if to do so would be in
the best interest of the citizens of the City of Reading.
      (3)   At the onset of the preliminary investigation, the Officer shall
notify both the complainant and the subject of the investigation of the filing
of the complaint, the nature of the same, and the initiation of a preliminary
investigation.
      (4)   The preliminary investigation shall be completed within 60 days of
the Officer's finding of jurisdiction.
      (5)   If at any time during the preliminary investigation, an extension
is necessary and justified, the Officer shall have additional time in thirty-
day segments. The Officer shall timely notify both the complainant and the
subject of the investigation of each such extension.
      (6)   At the conclusion of the preliminary investigation, the Officer
shall determine whether there may exist facts to support the complaint. If the
inquiry fails to establish such facts, the Officer shall dismiss the complaint
and notify both the complainant and the subject of the complaint of the
dismissal of the complaint. If, however, at the conclusion of the preliminary
investigation, the Officer determines that there may exist facts to support the
complaint, the Officer shall authorize a full investigation.
   D.   Full investigation. If a preliminary investigation uncovers facts to
support the complaint, the Officer shall authorize a full investigation. The
complainant and the subject of the investigation shall be notified within three
days of the initiation of a full investigation and the subject shall be
notified of the identity of the complainant. Until the investigation is
concluded or terminated, the Officer will notify both the complainant and the
subject of the investigation of the status of the investigation at least every
90 days. Within 180 days of the initiation of the full investigation, the
Officer must either terminate the investigation or issue a findings report to
the subject.
   E.   Findings report. The findings report shall set forth the pertinent
findings of fact as determined by the Officer. The Officer shall deliver the
findings of fact to the complainant and the subject of the investigation. The
subject of the investigation may, within 30 days of the report, request an
evidentiary hearing, unless an extension is obtained from the Officer. When
such a request is received by the Officer, the Officer shall immediately notify
the Board of the request for a hearing, and the names of the parties involved.
The Board shall upon receipt of such notice engage two attorneys: one to
represent the facts in support of the complaint; and one to advise the Board in
matters related to the evidentiary hearing. The Board Solicitor shall not have
any involvement in a particular matter once the findings report has been
issued.
   F.   Evidentiary hearing.
      (1)   Timing. An evidentiary hearing must be held within 45 days of the
filing of a request for the same.
      (2)   Evidence. The subject of the investigation shall have reasonable
access to any evidence intended to be used at a hearing. The subject of the
investigation shall have the opportunity to be represented by counsel and to
subpoena witnesses, present evidence, cross examine witnesses against him/her,
submit argument and shall be entitled to exercise all rights of confrontation
and the like afforded him/her by the United States Constitution and the
Pennsylvania Constitution.
      (3)   Closed hearing. The hearing shall be closed to the public unless
the subject requests an open hearing in writing to the Board at least five days
before the hearing.
   G.   Decision by the Board; final order.
      (1)   At the conclusion of the evidentiary hearing, the Board will
determine by majority vote of those members presiding whether the evidence
supports a finding that the subject of the complaint violated provision(s) of
either the Charter or the code.
      (2)   Upon reaching a determination on the complaint, the Board shall
issue a final order. A copy of said final order shall be immediately delivered
to both the complainant and the subject of the complaint.
   H.   Petition for reconsideration. A subject, having been found to have
violated a provision of the Charter or code, may file a petition for
reconsideration of the Board's decision. Such petition shall be filed with the
Board within 10 days of the day the Board issues its final order.
   I.   Protection of complainant. No person may be penalized, nor any employee
of the City be discharged, suffer change in his/her official rank, grade or
compensation, denied a promotion, or threatened, for a good faith filing of a
complaint with the Board, or providing information or testifying in any Board
proceeding.
   J.   Mediation.
      (1)   In addition to the procedures set forth above regarding preliminary
investigation, full investigation, and findings report, the Officer may, in
his/her sole discretion, engage in mediation of a complaint at any time prior
to the issuance of the findings report. The purpose of mediation would be to
resolve the complaint in a voluntary manner, compliant with the Charter and the
code.
      (2)   In the event the Officer determines that mediation would be useful,
he/she shall notify both the complainant and the subject of the investigation
of his/her intent to mediate and obtain the consent of both parties to mediate.
If the complainant and the subject agree to mediation, the Officer shall
conduct the mediation in whatever manner he/she deems best under the
circumstances, considering the time in the investigative process when the
mediation will take place.
      (3)   (a)   If a resolution is achieved following mediation, the Officer
shall prepare and present to the Solicitor a written mediation report, which
shall be signed by the subject and the Officer. The Solicitor shall immediately
present the mediation report to the Board for review and approval.
         (b)   If a complete resolution is not achieved following mediation,
the Officer shall prepare and present to the Solicitor a statement indicating
only that mediation occurred, but the matter was not resolved at mediation. The
statement shall not state any particulars of the mediation, names, or
identifying information of the parties. The Solicitor shall immediately present
such statement to the Board for review. The matter shall then continue to
proceed in accordance Subsections A. to I. above.
      (4)   Any mediated resolution must be compliant with the Charter and the
Code. It shall be the sole province of the Board to determine if a mediated
resolution is compliant with the Charter and the code. At the Board's sole
discretion and direction, it may re-submit a matter to mediation to resolve any
aspect of a mediated resolution that is not compliant with the Charter or code
or as the Board may desire for other administrative reasons.
      (5)   If the Board approves a mediated resolution of the entire matter,
the Board shall issue a final order. A copy of said final order shall be
immediately delivered to both the complainant and the subject of the complaint.
In all respects, the general confidentiality provisions of the Code shall
apply. There shall be no release or settlement agreement. If the Board does not
approve a mediated resolution of the entire matter, the matter shall continue
to proceed in accordance with Subsections A. to I. above. However, nothing in
this Subsection J. shall prevent the Officer and the subject from entering into
a stipulated administrative settlement after the issuance of a findings report
and a subject's demand for evidentiary hearing.
      (6)   The timeframes set forth above in subsections C. to E. shall be
tolled while any mediation is taking place. However, the Officer shall ensure
that mediation does not unduly delay the process set forth in Subsections A. to
I. above.
      (7)   Miscellaneous Matters.
         (a)   Knowledge by the Board of the identity of the complainant or
subject is permitted, provided that the identity of the complainant or subject
is revealed to the Board only through a mediation report.
         (b)   Nothing herein shall preclude the Board from taking any action
permitted by the Charter or code with respect to the mediation, any resolution,
and the issues raised in the complaint.
         (c)   All mediations, and all information exchanged, created, or
transmitted in any way involving a mediation under these procedures, shall be
confidential except as provided by the code.
         (d)   The Officer shall not be permitted or compelled to testify in
any proceeding, before any court, tribunal, or hearing board, including the
Board, concerning any aspect of mediation.
         (e)   The Officer/Mediator shall not exchange any information with the
Board or Solicitor concerning the mediation except as reduced to writing as
provided in subsection J.(3) above.
         (f)   At all times, as between the Officer and the Solicitor and/or
Board, the Officer shall form, keep and maintain a wall of separation between
him/herself as it pertains to any information obtained, learned, reported,
supplied, or otherwise brought forth at the mediation except as reduced to a
writing as provided in subsection J.(3) above.
§ 5-1010. Confidentiality of Board information.
All Board proceedings and records relating to an investigation shall be
confidential until a final determination is made by the Board, except as may be
required to effect due process. The final order shall become a public record
once the subject has exhausted all appeal rights or has failed to timely
exercise such rights. All other file material shall remain confidential.
§ 5-1011. Wrongful use of Board of Ethics.
   A.   The purpose of the Board of Ethics is to endeavor to maintain a high
standard of ethical behavior by City employees and officials. This will be most
effective when City employees, officials and citizens work together to set and
maintain high ethical standards. Complaints directed to the Board must be based
on fact. Those filing complaints must have the intent to improve the ethical
climate of the City. Wrongful use of the code is prohibited and those
individuals engaged in such conduct may be subject to penalties as set forth in
§
5-1007.
   B.   Wrongful use of the Code of Ethics is defined as either:
      (1)   Filing an unfounded, frivolous or false complaint. A complaint is
unfounded, frivolous or false if it is filed in a grossly negligent manner
without a basis in law or fact and was made for a purpose other than reporting
a violation of this code. A person has not filed a frivolous complaint if he/
she reasonably believes that facts exist to support the claim and either
reasonably believes that under those facts the complaint is valid under this
code or acts upon the advice of counsel sought in good faith and given after
full disclosure of all relevant facts within his/her knowledge and information.
      (2)   Publicly disclosing or causing to be disclosed information
regarding the status of proceedings before the Board and facts underlying a
complaint before the Board, including the identity of persons involved and that
a complaint has been filed.
§ 5-1012. Campaign contributions and reporting requirements.
[Added 5-28-2013 by Ord. No. 28-2013; amended 12-12-2016 by Ord. No. 65-2016]
   A.   Campaign contribution limitations.
      (1)   During a calendar year in which a covered election is held:
         (a)   To the extent that it is not inconsistent with federal or state
law and except as provided in Subsection A(4), precandidacy contributions,
hereinafter, no individual shall make, and no candidate and/or no candidate
political committee shall accept, a candidate campaign contribution, including
those contributions made to or through one or more political committees by such
individual, in excess of $2,700. *
         (b)   To the extent that it is not inconsistent with federal or state
law and except as provided in Subsection A(4), precandidacy contributions,
hereinafter, no organization (excluding individuals covered by the Code of
Ethics as part of the Administrative Code, as amended), shall make, and no
candidate and/or no candidate campaign committee shall accept, a candidate
campaign contribution, including those contributions made to or through one or
more political committees by such organization, in excess of $11,000. *
         (c)   To the extent that it is not inconsistent with federal or state
law and except as provided in Subsection A(4) hereinafter, no political
committee (excluding candidate political committees) shall make, and no
candidate and/or no candidate campaign committee shall accept, a candidate
campaign contribution in excess of $10,000.
      (2)   During a calendar year in which a covered election is not held:
         (a)   Candidates for Mayor may receive candidate campaign
contributions totaling no more than $150,000 per year.
         (b)   Candidates for Auditor may receive candidate campaign
contributions totaling no more than $75,000 per year.
         (c)   Candidates for City Council President may receive candidate
campaign contributions totaling no more than $50,000 per year.
         (d)   Candidates for District City Council may receive candidate
campaign contributions totaling no more than $25,000 per year.
      (3)   Postelection intervals.
         (a)   During the interval between the general election (or primary/
special election, with respect to candidates and candidate campaign committees
who were not nominated) and the end of the calendar year in which the election
occurred, and in each calendar year thereafter, no individual shall make total
postcandidacy contributions, including those contributions made to or through
one or more political committees by such individual, of more than $2,600.
         (b)   During the interval between the general election (or primary/
special election, with respect to candidates and candidate campaign committees
who were not nominated) and the end of the calendar year in which the general
election occurred, and in each calendar year thereafter, no organization shall
make total postcandidacy contributions, including those contributions made to
or through one or more political committees by such organization, of more than
$10,600.
      (4)   Precandidacy contributions.
         (a)   No candidate or candidate political committee may spend any
excess precandidacy contributions for the purpose of influencing the outcome of
a covered election in which he or she is a candidate.
         (b)   No candidate or candidate campaign committee may spend any
excess precandidacy contributions or excess postcandidacy contributions for the
purposes of:
            [1]   Transition or inauguration expenses; or
            [2]   Retiring debt that was incurred to influence the outcome of
an already completed covered election, or cover transition or inauguration
expenses related to an already completed covered election.
         (c)   A precandidacy contribution made in the same calendar year that
a person becomes a candidate shall count toward those limitations on
contributions set forth in the Code of Ethics as part of the Administrative
Code, as amended.
      (5)   Candidate's personal resources. The limitations imposed by the Code
of Ethics as part of the Administrative Code, as amended, shall not apply to
contributions from a candidate's personal resources to his or her candidate
political committee. However, if such contributions from a candidate's personal
resources shall exceed $250,000 (regardless of the time period over which such
contributions were made), then the contribution limits set forth in the Code of
Ethics as part of the Administrative Code, as amended, for that City-elected
office, other than those listed above, shall double.
      (6)   Volunteer labor. The limitations imposed by this section shall not
apply to volunteer labor.
      (7)   Adjustments.
         (a)   On January 1, 2016, and on every January 1 every four years
thereafter, the maximum contribution amounts set forth in §
5-1012 shall be adjusted as follows: on the December 15 immediately preceding
the adjustment, the Finance Director shall calculate the “CPI multiplier” by
dividing the average consumer price index for Reading, Pennsylvania, during the
then- current calendar year by the average consumer price index for Reading,
Pennsylvania, during the calendar year of 2011. To determine the average
consumer price index for Reading, Pennsylvania, the City Finance Director shall
use the latest available figures for the Consumer Price Index for all Urban
Consumers (CPI-U), Reading, Pennsylvania, as measured by the United States
Department of Labor, Bureau of Labor Statistics. After calculating the CPI
multiplier, the City Finance Director shall calculate the new maximum amounts
as follows:
            [1]   The maximum amount for purposes of §
5-1012A(1)(a) shall equal $2,500, multiplied by the CPI multiplier, rounded to
the nearest $100.
            [2]   The maximum amount for purposes of §
5-1012A(1)(b) shall equal $10,000, multiplied by the CPI multiplier, rounded to
the nearest $100.
         (b)   The City Finance Director shall certify the new maximum amounts
in writing to the Mayor, the City Auditor, the City Council President, and the
City Clerk.
      (8)   Candidate political committees.
         (a)   A candidate shall have no more than one candidate political
committee and one checking account for the City-elected office sought, into
which all contributions and postcandidacy contributions for that sought office
shall be made, and out of which all expenditures for that sought office shall
be made, including expenditures for retiring debt and for transition or
inauguration to that office. If the candidate maintains other political or
nonpolitical accounts for which contributions are solicited, such funds
collected in these accounts shall not be used for the purpose of influencing
the outcome of a covered election, or to retire debt that was incurred to
influence the outcome of that covered election, or to cover transition or
inauguration expenses.
      (9)   Enforcement; injunctive relief.
         (a)   The provisions of this section shall be enforced by the City of
Reading Board of Ethics, in accordance with the Code of Ethics of the City
Administrative Code, as amended), including but not limited to the complaint,
investigation, restitution and penalties provisions thereof.
         (b)   In addition to the provisions of the Code of Ethics, any person
residing in the City of Reading, including the City Solicitor, may bring an
action for injunctive relief in any court of competent jurisdiction to enjoin
any violations of, or to compel compliance with, the provisions of this section
in accordance with the Code of Ethics as part of the Administrative Code, as
amended. The court may award to a prevailing plaintiff in any such action his
or her costs of litigation, including reasonable attorney's fees.
   B.   Reporting requirements.
      (1)   Statement of financial interests.
         (a)   Any City employee or City official must be in compliance with §
5-1004 (Statement of financial interests) prior to filing any nomination papers
or petitions for City-elected office or publicly announcing his or her
candidacy for City-elected office.
      (2)   Campaign finance disclosure.
         (a)   Whenever a candidate, treasurer of a candidate political
committee, or other representative of a candidate political committee files a
required report of receipts and expenditures with the Berks County Board of
Elections and/or Secretary of, the Commonwealth as required by the Pennsylvania
Election Code (25 P.S. § 3241 et seq.), or other applicable laws or
regulations, such person shall at the same time file with the City Clerk a copy
of all information set forth in such report(s), in that format mandated by the
Board of Ethics. Such filing with the City Clerk shall be accompanied by a
written statement, signed by the person making the filing that subscribes and
swears to the information set forth in such filing.
   C.   Required notice of contribution limits. The Board of Ethics shall post
on the City website, a notice setting forth the contribution limits set forth
in this code together with a plain English explanation of the provisions of
this section and the penalties and remedies for violations thereof. Such notice
shall remain posted and available for review on the website at all times.
 
Notes
  * Pursuant to requirements of the Home Rule Charter of the City of Reading,
  on January 1, 2016 and on every January 1 every four years thereafter, the
* maximum contribution amounts set forth in 5-1012 shall be adjusted in
  relation to the consumer price index for Reading, PA which falls in the
  Philadelphia metro area as measured by the Bureau of Labor Statistics in the
  US Department of Labor.
  * Pursuant to requirements of the Home Rule Charter of the City of Reading,
  on January 1, 2016 and on every January 1 every four years thereafter, the
* maximum contribution amounts set forth in 5-1012 shall be adjusted in
  relation to the consumer price index for Reading, PA which falls in the
  Philadelphia metro area as measured by the Bureau of Labor Statistics in the
  US Department of Labor.
Exhibit A
Purchasing Policy and Procedures Manual
[Amended 2-11-2008 by Ord. No. 9-2008; 2-13-2012 by Ord. No. 12-2012; 8-26-2013
by Ord. No. 35-2013; 4-14-2014 by Ord. No. 38-2014; 5-27-2014 by Ord. No. 44-
2014]
Editor’s Note: Ord. No. 34-2016, passed 8-22-2016, has relocated this material
to §
5-809. Appendices to Exhibit A follow here.
APPENDIX 1
Non-Collusion Affidavit
CITY OF READING, PA
RFP EVALUATION COMMITTEE CERTIFICATION OF CONFIDENTIALITY
AND
NO CONFLICT OF INTEREST
[IMAGE]
RFP Description
Evaluator Name
Date
In order to ensure fairness in the evaluation of proposals submitted in
response to a Request for Proposals (RFP), it is very important that proposals
be evaluated in an unbiased manner and without conflict of interest, and that
the contents of proposals remain confidential throughout the evaluation
process. You have been selected as an evaluator not only because of your
managerial/technical expertise, but also because the Purchasing Coordinator and
your supervisor are not aware of any bias, business or family relationships, or
any other conflicts that could affect, or which could be perceived to affect,
your fair, honest and impartial evaluation of the proposals. As a public
employee you are expected to: 1) discharge your duties impartially so as to
assure fair, competitive access to the City of Reading procurement by
responsible contractors, and 2) conduct yourself in a manner which fosters
public confidence in the integrity of the City's procurement process.
To provide needed assurance that no conflicts or bias exist, please read this
document in its entirety, check all boxes, make any needed disclosures on
Attachment A, sign it, make one copy for yourself and give the originally-
signed copy to the Purchasing Coordinator.
Part I
No Foreseeable Conflict of Interest or Bias
[]   I acknowledge that I have been selected to participate as a member of the
Evaluation
Committee for the referenced RFP.
I certify that I:
[]   Am not a current or former employee of any of the firms in the industry
that I would foresee as submitting a proposal, with the exception of
[Identify any exceptions by name of business firm and complete Attachment A].
[]   Am not a director, officer, owner, partner, agent, or representative of
any of the firms in the industry that I would foresee as submitting a proposal.
[]   Do not hold any stock or any financial interest in any of the firms in the
industry that
I would foresee as submitting a proposal, with the exception of
[identify any exceptions by name of business firm and complete Attachment A].
I certify that, to the best of my knowledge, my spouse and my dependent
children:
[]   Are not current employees of any firm in the industry that I would foresee
as submitting a proposal.
[]   Are not directors, officers, owners or partners of any firm that I would
foresee as submitting a proposal.
[]   Do not hold stock exceeding five percent of the equity at fair market
value of any of the firms in the industry that I would foresee as submitting a
proposal.
I certify that I will not:
[]   Solicit or accept, directly or indirectly, any promise of future
employment or business opportunity from, or engage, directly or indirectly, in
any discussion of future employment or business opportunity with, any director,
officer, owner, partner, employee, representative, agent or consultant of an
offeror that submits a proposal, or their proposed subcontractors.
[]   Ask for, demand, exact, solicit, seek, accept, receive, or agree to
receive, directly or indirectly, any money, gratuity, or other thing of value
from any director, officer, owner, partner, employee, representative, agent, or
consultant of an offeror that submits a proposal, or their proposed
subcontractors for this project. I will advise my immediate family that the
acceptance of any such gratuity may be imputed to me as a violation, and must
therefore be avoided by them.
[]   I understand that my obligations under this certification are of a
continuing nature. If at any time during the RFP process I receive a contact
from an offeror that submits a proposal, or their proposed subcontractors,
concerning employment or other business opportunity, the offer of a gift from
an offeror that submits a proposal, or their proposed subcontractors, or I
encounter circumstances where my participation might result in a real,
apparent, or potential conflict, I will immediately seek the advice of the
Purchasing Coordinator and Solicitor and report the circumstances to my
supervisor.
Part II Confidentiality
[]   I certify that I will not divulge nor make known, in any manner
whatsoever, to any person, other than a member of the RFP evaluation committee
or other individual who has signed a copy of this Confidentiality Statement for
the same acquisition, any information pertaining to any and all aspects of the
RFP (which has not already been made available to the public or all interested
offerors) including but not limited to: the contents of offerors' proposals,
the scoring method, points allotted, evaluator scores, costs, or any other
confidential information regarding the RFP process.
[]   I understand that unauthorized sharing of information may have the result
of giving an offeror an unfair advantage over another offeror and thereby
render the process invalid.
[]   I understand that any persons who divulge such information may be subject
to disciplinary action, including termination of their employment with the City
if the individual is a City employee. If the individual is the employee of a
consultant, the consultant may be requested to remove the employee from the
project and the contract for the consultant may be terminated.
Part III Signature and Certification
[]   I have read and completed the acknowledgement, certifications and
understanding contained in Part I, No Foreseeable Conflict of Interest or Bias,
and fully understand them. I have read and completed the certification and
understandings contained in Part II, Confidentiality, and fully understand
them. I further understand that I make the acknowledgement and certifications
and confirm the understandings herein subject to the provisions and penalties
of 18 Pa.C.S. Section 4904 (unsworn falsification to authorities).
Signature   Date
Name   RFP Name
This statement must be signed by every member of the RFP evaluation committee
and every other individual that requires non-public information on this RFP.
The Purchasing Coordinator shall direct any question/exception/unchecked box/
disclosure to the City Solicitor for advice.
ATTACHMENT A DISCLOSURE STATEMENT
List any prior employment with any of the firms in the industry who may
potentially submit proposals for this RFP. Include dates of employment and
position held:
List any direct or indirect financial interest or any other beneficial interest
with any of the firms in the industry who may potentially submit proposals for
this RFP.
Appendix 2
CONTRACT FOR PROFESSIONAL SERVICES
This agreement is made and entered into as of the   of _, 20 between the City
of Reading (hereinafter referred to as the "City", and Insert Vendor Here.,
hereinafter referred to as the "Contractor".
In consideration of the mutual covenants and conditions herein contained the
parties agree as follows:
1.   SCOPE OF WORK
Define Scope of Work
2.   DELIVERABLES
List all contract deliverables and their due dates.
3.   TERM OF CONTRACT
The term of the Contract shall commence on Date (hereinafter the Effective
Date) and shall end on Date (hereinafter the Expiration Date), subject to the
other provisions of the Contract. The Contracting Officer shall issue a written
Notice to Proceed to the Contractor directing the Contractor to start
performance on a date which is on or after the Effective Date. The Contractor
shall not start the performance of any work prior to the date set forth in the
Notice to Proceed and the City shall not be liable to pay the Contractor for
any service or work performed or expenses incurred before the date set forth in
the Notice to Proceed. No City employee has the authority to verbally direct
the commencement of any work under this Contract. The City reserves the right,
upon notice to the Contractor, to extend the term of the Contract for up to
three (3) months upon the same terms and conditions. This will be utilized to
prevent a lapse in Contract coverage and only for the time necessary, up to
three (3) months, to enter into a new contract.
4.   INDEPENDENT CONTRACTOR
In performing the services required by the Contract, the Contractor will act as
an independent contractor and not as an employee or agent of the City.
5.   COMPLIANCE WITH LAW
The Contractor shall comply with all applicable federal and state laws and
regulations and local ordinances in the performance of the Contract.
6.   ENVIRONMENTAL PROVISIONS
In the performance of the Contract, the Contractor shall minimize pollution and
shall strictly comply with all applicable environmental laws and regulations.
7. COMPENSATION/EXPENSES
The Contractor shall be required to perform the specified services at the price
(s) quoted in the Contract, Appendix A. All services shall be performed within
the time period(s) specified in the Contract. The Contractor shall be
compensated only for work performed to the satisfaction of the City. The
Contractor shall not be allowed or paid travel or per diem expenses except as
specifically set forth in the Contract.
8. INVOICES
The Contractor shall submit monthly invoices to the City for services performed
during each billing period. Invoices shall be forwarded to the following
contact and address:
Name
City of Reading, Accounting Department
815 Washington Street, Room 2-51
Reading, PA 19601
Each invoice shall be under cover of a letter on the vendor's letterhead and
itemized listing the services performed by date, hours worked, and by rate.
9. PAYMENT
The City shall put forth reasonable efforts to make payment by the required
payment date. The required payment date is: (a) the date on which payment is
due under the terms of the Contract; (b) thirty (30) days after a proper
invoice actually is received at the "Provide Service and Bill To" address if a
date on which payment is due is not specified in the Contract (a "proper"
invoice is not received until the City accepts the service as satisfactorily
performed); or (c) the payment date specified on the invoice if later than the
dates established by (a) and (b) above. Payment may be delayed if the payment
amount on an invoice is not based upon the price(s) as stated in the Contract.
Payment should not be construed by the Contractor as acceptance of the service
performed by the Contractor. The City reserves the right to conduct further
testing and inspection after payment, but within a reasonable time after
performance, and to reject the service if such post payment testing or
inspection discloses a defect or a failure to meet specifications. The
Contractor agrees that the City may set off the amount of any state tax
liability or other obligation of the Contractor or its subsidiaries to the City
against any payments due the Contractor under any contract with the City.
10. TAXES
The City is exempt from all excise taxes imposed by the Internal Revenue
Service and has accordingly registered with the Internal Revenue Service to
make tax free purchases. With the exception of purchases of the following
items, no exemption certificates are required and none will be issued: undyed
diesel fuel, tires, trucks, gas guzzler emergency vehicles, and sports fishing
equipment. The City is also exempt from Pennsylvania state sales tax, local
sales tax, public transportation assistance taxes and fees and vehicle rental
tax. The Pennsylvania Department of Revenue regulations provide that exemption
certificates are not required for sales made to governmental entities and none
will be issued. Nothing in this paragraph is meant to exempt a construction
contractor from the payment of any of these taxes or fees which are required to
be paid with respect to the purchase, use, rental, or lease of tangible
personal property or taxable services used or transferred in connection with
the performance of a construction contract.
11. WARRANTY
The Contractor warrants that all services performed by the Contractor, its
agents and subcontractors shall be free and clear of any defects in workmanship
or materials. Unless otherwise stated in the contract, all services and parts
are warranted for a period of one year following completion of performance by
the Contractor and acceptance by the City. The Contractor shall correct any
problem with the service and/or replace any defective part with a part of
equivalent or superior quality without any additional cost to the City.
12. PATENT, COPYRIGHT, AND TRADEMARK INDEMNITY
The Contractor warrants that it is the sole owner or author of, or has entered
into a suitable legal agreement concerning either: a) the design of any product
or process provided or used in the performance of the Contract which is covered
by a patent, copyright, or trademark registration or other right duly
authorized by state or federal law or b) any copyrighted matter in any report
document or other material provided to the City under the contract. The
Contractor shall defend any suit or proceeding brought against the City on
account of any alleged patent, copyright or trademark infringement in the
United States of any of the products provided or used in the performance of the
Contract. This is upon condition that the City shall provide prompt
notification in writing of such suit or proceeding; full right, authorization
and opportunity to conduct the defense thereof; and full information and all
reasonable cooperation for the defense of same. As principles of governmental
or public law are involved, the City may participate in or choose to conduct,
in its sole discretion, the defense of any such action. If information and
assistance are furnished by the City at the Contractor's written request, it
shall be at the Contractor's expense, but the responsibility for such expense
shall be only that within the Contractor's written authorization. The
Contractor shall indemnify and hold the City harmless from all damages, costs,
and expenses, including attorney's fees that the Contractor or the City may pay
or incur by reason of any infringement or violation of the rights occurring to
any holder of copyright, trademark, or patent interests and rights in any
products provided or used in the performance of the Contract. If any of the
products provided by the Contractor in such suit or proceeding are held to
constitute infringement and the use is enjoined, the Contractor shall, at its
own expense and at its option, either procure the right to continue use of such
infringement products, replace them with non-infringement equal performance
products or modify them so that they are no longer infringing. If the
Contractor is unable to do any of the preceding, the Contractor agrees to
remove all the equipment or software which are obtained contemporaneously with
the infringing product, or, at the option of the City, only those items of
equipment or software which are held to be infringing, and to pay the City: 1)
any amounts paid by the City towards the purchase of the product, less straight
line depreciation; 2) any license fee paid by the City for the use of any
software, less an amount for the period of usage; and 3) the pro rata portion
of any maintenance fee representing the time remaining in any period of
maintenance paid for. The obligations of the Contractor under this paragraph
continue without time limit. No costs or expenses shall be incurred for the
account of the Contractor without its written consent.
13. OWNERSHIP RIGHTS
The City shall have unrestricted authority to reproduce, distribute, and use
any submitted report, data, or material, and any software or modifications and
any associated documentation that is designed or developed and delivered to the
City as part of the performance of the Contract.
14. ASSIGNMENT OF ANTITRUST CLAIMS
The Contractor and the City recognize that in actual economic practice,
overcharges by the Contractor's suppliers resulting from violations of state or
federal antitrust laws are in fact borne by the City. As part of the
consideration for the award of the Contract, and intending to be legally bound,
the Contractor assigns to the City all right, title and interest in and to any
claims the Contractor now has, or may acquire, under state or federal antitrust
laws relating to the products and services which are the subject of this
Contract.
15. HOLD HARMLESS PROVISION
The Contractor shall hold the City harmless from and indemnify the City against
any and all claims, demands and actions based upon or arising out of any
activities performed by the Contractor and its employees and agents under this
Contract and shall, at the request of the City, defend any and all actions
brought against the City based upon any such claims or demands.
16. AUDIT PROVISIONS
The City shall have the right, at reasonable times and at a site designated by
the City, to audit the books, documents and records of the Contractor to the
extent that the books, documents and records relate to costs or pricing data
for the Contract. The Contractor agrees to maintain records which will support
the prices charged and costs incurred for the Contract. The Contractor shall
preserve books, documents, and records that relate to costs or pricing data for
the Contract for a period of three (3) years from date of final payment. The
Contractor shall give full and free access to all records to the City and/or
their authorized representatives.
17. DEFAULT
   A.   The City may, subject to the provisions of Paragraph 18, Force Majeure,
and in addition to its other rights under the Contract, declare the Contractor
in default by written notice thereof to the Contractor, and terminate (as
provided in Paragraph 19, Termination Provisions) the whole or any part of this
Contract for any of the following reasons:
      1.   Failure to begin work within the time specified in the Contract or
as otherwise specified;
      2.   Failure to perform the work with sufficient labor, equipment, or
material to insure the completion of the specified work in accordance with the
Contract terms;
      3.   Unsatisfactory performance of the work;
      4.   Failure or refusal to remove material, or remove and replace any
work rejected as defective or unsatisfactory;
      5.   Discontinuance of work without approval;
      6.   Failure to resume work, which has been discontinued, within a
reasonable time after notice to do so;
      7.   Insolvency or bankruptcy;
      8.   Assignment made for the benefit of creditors;
      9.   Failure or refusal within 10 days after written notice by the
Contracting Officer, to make payment or show cause why payment should not be
made, of any amounts due for materials furnished, labor supplied or performed,
for equipment rentals, or for utility services rendered;
      10.   Failure to protect, to repair, or to make good any damage or injury
to property; or
      11.   Breach of any provision of this Contract.
   B.   In the event that the City terminates this Contract in whole or in part
as provided in Subparagraph A. above, the City may procure, upon such terms and
in such manner as it determines, services similar or identical to those so
terminated, and the Contractor shall be liable to the City for any reasonable
excess costs for such similar or identical services included within the
terminated part of the Contract.
   C.   If the Contract is terminated as provided in Subparagraph A. above, the
City, in addition to any other rights provided in this paragraph, may require
the Contractor to transfer title and deliver immediately to the City in the
manner and to the extent directed by the Issuing Office, such partially
completed work, including, where applicable, reports, working papers and other
documentation, as the Contractor has specifically produced or specifically
acquired for the performance of such part of the Contract as has been
terminated. Except as provided below, payment for completed work accepted by
the City shall be at the Contract price. Except as provided below, payment for
partially completed work including, where applicable, reports and working
papers, delivered to and accepted by the City shall be in an amount agreed upon
by the Contractor and Contracting Officer. The City may withhold from amounts
otherwise due the Contractor for such completed or partially completed works,
such sum as the Contracting Officer determines to be necessary to protect the
City against loss.
   D.   The rights and remedies of the City provided in this paragraph shall
not be exclusive and are in addition to any other rights and remedies provided
by law or under this Contract.
   E.   The City's failure to exercise any rights or remedies provided in this
paragraph shall not be construed to be a walver by the City of its rights and
remedies in regard to the event of default or any succeeding event of default.
18. FORCE MAJEURE
Neither party will incur any liability to the other if its performance of any
obligation under this Contract is prevented or delayed by causes beyond its
control and without the fault or negligence of either party. Causes beyond a
party's control may include, but aren't limited to, acts of God or war, changes
in controlling law, regulations, orders or the requirements of any governmental
entity, severe weather conditions, civil disorders, natural disasters, fire,
epidemics and quarantines, general strikes throughout the trade, and freight
embargoes.
The Contractor shall notify the City orally within five (5) days and in writing
within ten (10) days of the date on which the Contractor becomes aware, or
should have reasonably become aware, that such cause would prevent or delay its
performance. Such notification shall (i) describe fully such cause(s) and its
effect on performance, (ii) state whether performance under the contract is
prevented or delayed and (iii) if performance is delayed, state a reasonable
estimate of the duration of the delay. The Contractor shall have the burden of
proving that such cause(s) delayed or prevented its performance despite its
diligent efforts to perform and shall produce such supporting documentation as
the City may reasonably request. After receipt of such notification, the City
may elect either to cancel the Contract or to extend the time for performance
as reasonably necessary to compensate for the Contractor's delay.
In the event of a declared emergency by competent governmental authorities, the
City by notice to the Contractor, may suspend all or a portion of the Contract.
19. TERMINATION PROVISIONS
The City has the right to terminate this Contract for any of the following
reasons. Termination shall be effective upon written notice to the Contractor.
   A.   TERMINATION FOR CONVENIENCE: The City shall have the right to terminate
the Contract for its convenience if the City determines termination to be in
its best interest. The Contractor shall be paid for work satisfactorily
completed prior to the effective date of the termination, but in no event shall
the Contractor be entitled to recover loss of profits.
   B.   NON-APPROPRIATION: The City's obligation to make payments during any
City fiscal year succeeding the current fiscal year shall be subject to
availability and appropriation of funds. When funds are not appropriated or
otherwise made available to support continuation of performance in a subsequent
fiscal year period, the City shall have the right to terminate the contract.
The contractor shall be reimbursed for the reasonable value of any nonrecurring
costs incurred but not amortized in the price of the supplies or services
delivered under this contract. Such reimbursement shall not include loss of
profit, loss of use of money, or administrative or overhead costs. The
reimbursement amount may be paid for any appropriations available for that
purpose.
   C.   TERMINATION FOR CAUSE: The City shall have the right to terminate the
Contract for Contractor default under Paragraph 17, Default, upon written
notice to the Contractor. The City shall also have the right, upon written
notice to the by law. If it is later determined that the City erred in
terminating the Contract for cause, then, at the City's discretion, the
Contract shall be deemed to have been terminated for convenience under the
Subparagraph 19.a.
20. CONTRACT CONTROVERSIES
   A.   In the event of a controversy or claim arising from the Contract, the
Contractor must, within six months after the cause of action accrues, file a
written claim with the contracting officer for a determination. The claim shall
state all grounds upon which the Contractor asserts a controversy exists. If
the Contractor fails to file a claim or files an untimely claim, the Contractor
is deemed to have waived its right to assert a claim in any forum.
   B.   The contracting officer shall review timely-filed claims and issue a
final determination, in writing, regarding the claim. The final determination
shall be issued within 120 days of the receipt of the claim, unless extended by
consent of the contracting officer and the Contractor. The contracting officer
shall send his/her written determination to the Contractor. If the contracting
officer fails to issue a final determination within the 120 days (unless
extended by consent of the parties), the claim shall be deemed denied. The
contracting officer's determination shall be the final order of the purchasing
agency.
21. ASSIGNABILITY AND SUBCONTRACTING
   A.   Subject to the terms and conditions of this Paragraph 21, this Contract
shall be binding upon the parties and their respective successors and assigns.
   B.   The Contractor shall not subcontract with any person or entity to
perform all or any part of the work to be performed under this Contract without
the prior written consent of the Contracting Officer, which consent may be
withheld at the sole and absolute discretion of the Contracting Officer.
   C.   The Contractor may not assign, in whole or in part, this Contract or
its rights, duties, obligations, or responsibilities hereunder without the
prior written consent of the Contracting Officer, which consent may be withheld
at the sole and absolute discretion of the Contracting Officer.
   D.   Notwithstanding the foregoing, the Contractor may, without the consent
of the Contracting Officer, assign its rights to payment to be received under
the Contract, provided that the Contractor provides written notice of such
assignment to the Contracting Officer together with a written acknowledgement
from the assignee that any such payments are subject to all of the terms and
conditions of this Contract.
   E.   For the purposes of this Contract, the term "assign" shall include, but
shall not be limited to, the sale, gift, assignment, pledge, or other transfer
of any ownership interest in the Contractor provided, however, that the term
shall not apply to the sale or other transfer of stock of a publicly traded
company.
   F.   Any assignment consented to by the Contracting Officer shall be
evidenced by a written assignment agreement executed by the Contractor and its
assignee in which the assignee agrees to be legally bound by all of the terms
and conditions of the Contract and to assume the duties, obligations, and
responsibilities being assigned.
   G.   A change of name by the Contractor, following which the Contractor's
federal identification number remains unchanged, shall not be considered to be
an assignment hereunder. The Contractor shall give the Contracting Officer
written notice of any such change of name.
22. NONDISCRIMINATION/SEXUAL HARASSMENT CLAUSE During the term of the Contract,
the Contractor agrees as follows:
   A.   In the hiring of any employee(s) for the manufacture of supplies,
performance of work, or any other activity required under the contract or any
subcontract, the Contractor, each subcontractor, or any person acting on behalf
of the Contractor or subcontractor shall not, by reason of gender, race, creed,
or color, discriminate against any citizen of this City who is qualified and
available to perform the work to which the employment relates.
   B.   Neither the Contractor nor any subcontractor nor any person on their
behalf shall in any manner discriminate against or intimidate any employee
involved in the manufacture of supplies, the performance of work, or any other
activity required under the contract on account of gender, race, creed, or
color.
   C.   The Contractor and each subcontractor shall establish and maintain a
written sexual harassment policy and shall inform their employees of the
policy. The policy must contain a notice that sexual harassment will not be
tolerated and employees who practice it will be disciplined.
   D.   The Contractor and each subcontractor shall not discriminate by reason
of gender, race, creed, or color against any subcontractor or supplier who is
qualified to perform the work to which the contract relates.
   E.   The Contractor shall include the provisions of this Nondiscrimination/
Sexual Harassment Clause in every subcontract so that those provisions
applicable to subcontractors will be binding upon each subcontractor.
23. CONTRACTOR INTEGRITY PROVISIONS
It is essential that those who seek to contract with the City observe high
standards of honesty and integrity. They must conduct themselves in a manner
that fosters public confidence in the integrity of the City procurement
process. In furtherance of this policy, Contractor agrees to the following:
   A.   Contractor shall maintain the highest standards of honesty and
integrity during the performance of this contract and shall take no action in
violation of state or federal laws or regulations or any other applicable laws
or regulations, or other requirements applicable to Contractor or that governs
contracting with the City.
   B.   Contractor shall establish and implement a written business integrity
policy, which includes, at a minimum, the requirements of these provisions as
they relate to Contractor employee activity with the City and City employees,
and which is distributed and made known to all Contractor employees.
   C.   Contractor, its affiliates, agents and employees shall not influence,
or attempt to influence, any City employee to breach the standards of ethical
conduct for City employees set forth in the City of Reading Code of Ethics,
available on the City's website at ReadingPA.gov and Public Official and
Employees Ethics Act, 65 Pa.C.S.§§ 1101 et seq.; the State Adverse Interest
Act, 71 P.S. § 776.1 et seq.; or to breach any other local, state or federal
law or regulation.
   D.   Contractor, its affiliates, agents and employees shall not offer, give,
or agree or promise to give any gratuity to a City official or employee or to
any other person at the direction or request of any City official or employee.
   E.   Contractor, its affiliates, agents and employees shall not offer, give,
or agree or promise to give any gratuity to a City official or employee or to
any other person, the acceptance of which would violate any statute,
regulation, statement of policy, management directive or any other published
standard of the City or Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
   F.   Contractor, its affiliates, agents, employees, or anyone in privity
with him or her shall not accept or agree to accept from any person, any
gratuity in connection with the performance of work under the contract, except
as provided in the contract.
   G.   Contractor shall not have a financial interest in any other contractor,
subcontractor, or supplier providing services, labor, or material on this
project, unless the financial interest is disclosed to the City in writing and
the City consents to Contractor's financial interest prior to City's execution
of the contract. Contractor shall disclose the financial interest to the City
at the time of bid or proposal submission, or if no bids or proposals are
solicited, no later than Contractor's submission of the contract signed by
Contractor.
   H.   Contractor, its affiliates, agents and employees shall not disclose to
others any information, documents, reports, data, or records provided to, or
prepared by, Contractor under this contract without the prior written approval
of the City, except as required by the Pennsylvania Right-to-Know Law, 65 P.S.
§§ 67.101-3104, or other applicable law or as otherwise provided in this
contract. Any information, documents, reports, data, or records secured by
Contractor from the City or a third party in connection with the performance of
this contract shall be kept confidential unless disclosure of such information
is:
      1.   Approved in writing by the City prior to its disclosure; or
      2.   Directed by a court or other tribunal of competent jurisdiction
unless the contract requires prior City approval; or
      3.   Required for compliance with federal or state securities laws or the
requirements of national securities exchanges; or
      4.   Necessary for purposes of Contractor's internal assessment and
review; or
      5.   Deemed necessary by Contractor in any action to enforce the
provisions of this contract or to defend or prosecute claims by or against
parties other than the City; or
      6.   Permitted by the valid authorization of a third party to whom the
information, documents, reports, data, or records pertain; or
      7.   Otherwise required by law.
   J.   Contractor certifies that neither it nor any of its officers,
directors, associates, partners, limited partners or individual owners has been
officially notified of, charged with, or convicted of any of the following and
agrees to immediately notify the City contracting officer in writing if and
when it or any officer, director, associate, partner, limited partner or
individual owner has been officially notified of, charged with, convicted of,
or officially notified of a governmental determination of any of the following:
      1.   Commission of embezzlement, theft, forgery, bribery, falsification
or destruction of records, making false statements or receiving stolen
property.
      2.   Commission of fraud or a criminal offense or other improper conduct
or knowledge of, approval of or acquiescence in such activities by Contractor
or any affiliate, officer, director, associate, partner, limited partner,
individual owner, or employee or other individual or entity associated with:
         A.   obtaining;
         B.   attempting to obtain; or
         C.   performing a public contract or subcontract.
Contractor's acceptance of the benefits derived from the conduct shall be
deemed evidence of such knowledge, approval or acquiescence.
      3.   Violation of federal or state antitrust statutes.
      4.   Violation of any federal or state law regulating campaign
contributions.
      5.   Violation of any federal or state environmental law.
      6.   Violation of any federal or state law regulating hours of labor,
minimum wage standards or prevailing wage standards; discrimination in wages;
or child labor violations.
      7.   Violation of the Act of June 2, 1915 (P.L.736, No. 338), known as
the Workers' Compensation Act, 77 P.S. 1 et seq.
      8.   Violation of any federal, state, or City law prohibiting
discrimination in employment.
      9.   Disbarment by any agency or department of the federal government or
by any other state.
      10.   Any other crime involving moral turpitude or business honesty or
integrity. Contractor acknowledges that the City may, in its sole discretion,
terminate the contract for cause upon such notification or when the City
otherwise learns that Contractor has been officially notified, charged, or
convicted.
   K.   When Contractor has reason to believe that any breach of ethical
standards as set forth in law or in these provisions has occurred or may occur,
including but not limited to contact by a City officer or employee which, if
acted upon, would violate such ethical standards, Contractor shall immediately
notify the City contracting officer or City Solicitor in writing.
   L.   Contractor, by submission of its bid or proposal and/or execution of
this contract and by the submission of any bills, invoices or requests for
payment pursuant to the contract, certifies and represents that it has not
violated any of these contractor integrity provisions in connection with the
submission of the bid or proposal, during any contract negotiations or during
the term of the contract.
   M.   Contractor shall cooperate with the City Solicitor in its investigation
of any alleged City employee breach of ethical standards and any alleged
Contractor non- compliance with these provisions. Contractor agrees to make
identified Contractor employees available for interviews at reasonable times
and places. Contractor, upon the inquiry or request of the City Solicitor,
shall provide, or if appropriate, make promptly available for inspection or
copying, any information of any type or form deemed relevant by the City
Solicitor to Contractor's integrity and compliance with these provisions. Such
information may include, but shall not be limited to, Contractor's business or
financial records, documents or files of any type or form that refers to or
concern this contract.
   N.   For violation of any of these Contractor Integrity Provisions, the City
may terminate this and any other contract with Contractor, claim liquidated
damages in an amount equal to the value of anything received in breach of these
provisions, claim damages for all additional costs and expenses incurred in
obtaining another contractor to complete performance under this contract, and
disbar and suspend Contractor from doing business with the City. These rights
and remedies are cumulative, and the use or non-use of any one shall not
preclude the use of all or any other. These rights and remedies are in addition
to those the City may have under law, statute, regulation, or otherwise.
   O.   For purposes of these Contractor Integrity Provisions, the following
terms shall have the meanings found in this Paragraph.
      1.   "Confidential information" means information that a) is not already
in the public domain; b) is not available to the public upon request; c) is not
or does not become generally known to Contractor from a third party without an
obligation to maintain its confidentiality; d) has not become generally known
to the public through an act or omission of Contractor; or e) has not been
independently developed by Contractor without the use of confidential
information of the City.
      2.   "Consent" means written permission signed by a duly authorized
officer or employee of the City, provided that where the material facts have
been disclosed, in writing, by pre-qualification, bid, proposal, or contractual
terms, the City shall be deemed to have consented by virtue of execution of
this contract.
      3.   "Contractor" means the individual or entity that has entered into
this contract with the City, including those directors, officers, partners,
managers, and owners having more than a five percent interest in Contractor.
      4. "Financial interest" means:
         A.   Ownership of more than a five percent interest in any business;
or
         B.   Holding a position as an officer, director, trustee, partner,
employee, or holding any position of management.
      5.   "Gratuity" means tendering, giving or providing anything of more
than nominal monetary value including, but not limited to, cash, travel,
entertainment, gifts, meals, lodging, loans, subscriptions, advances, deposits
of money, services, employment, or contracts of any kind.
      6.    "Immediate family" means a spouse and any unemancipated child.
      7.   "Non-bid basis" means a contract awarded or executed by the City
with Contractor without seeking bids or proposals from any other potential
bidder or offeror.
      8.   "Political contribution" means any payment, gift, subscription,
assessment, contract, payment for services, dues, loan, forbearance, advance or
deposit of money or any valuable thing, to a candidate for public office or to
a political committee, including but not limited to a political action
committee, made for the purpose of influencing any election in the City of
Reading or for paying debts incurred by or for a candidate or committee before
or after any election.
24. CONTRACTOR RESPONSIBILITY PROVISIONS
   A.   The Contractor certifies, for itself and all its subcontractors, that
as of the date of its execution of this Bid/Contract, that neither the
Contractor, nor any subcontractors, nor any suppliers are under suspension or
disbarment by the City or any governmental entity, instrumentality, or
authority and, if the Contractor cannot so certify, then it agrees to submit,
along with its Bid, a written explanation of why such certification cannot be
made.
   B.   The Contractor also certifies, that as of the date of its execution of
this Bid/Contract, it has no tax liabilities or other City obligations.
   C.   The Contractor's obligations pursuant to these provisions are ongoing
from and after the effective date of the contract through the termination date
thereof. Accordingly, the Contractor shall have an obligation to inform the
City if, at any time during the term of the Contract, it becomes delinquent in
the payment of taxes, or other City obligations, or if it or any of its
subcontractors are suspended or disbarred by the City, the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania, the federal government, or any other state or governmental
entity. Such notification shall be made within 15 days of the date of
suspension or disbarment.
   D.   The failure of the Contractor to notify the City of its suspension or
disbarment by the City, Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, any other state, or the
federal government shall constitute an event of default of the Contract with
the City.
   E.   The Contractor agrees to reimburse the City for the reasonable costs of
investigation incurred by the City Solicitor for investigations of the
Contractor's compliance with the terms of this or any other agreement between
the Contractor and the City, which results in the suspension or disbarment of
the Contractor. Such costs shall include, but shall not be limited to, salaries
of investigators, including overtime; travel and lodging expenses; and expert
witness and documentary fees. The Contractor shall not be responsible for
investigative costs for investigations that do not result in the Contractor's
suspension or disbarment.
25. AMERICANS WITH DISABILITIES ACT
   A.   Pursuant to federal regulations promulgated under the authority of The
Americans With Disabilities Act, 28 C.F.R. § 35.101 et seq., the Contractor
understands and agrees that it shall not cause any individual with a disability
to be excluded from participation in this Contract or from activities provided
for under this Contract on the basis of the disability. As a condition of
accepting this contract, the Contractor agrees to comply with the "General
Prohibitions Against Discrimination," 28 C.F.R. § 35.130, and all other
regulations promulgated under Title II of The Americans With Disabilities Act
which are applicable to all benefits, services, programs, and activities
provided by the City of Reading through contracts with outside contractors.
   B.   The Contractor shall be responsible for and agrees to indemnify and
hold harmless the City of Reading from all losses, damages, expenses, claims,
demands, suits, and actions brought by any party against the City of Reading as
a result of the Contractor's failure to comply with the provisions of
Subparagraph A above.
26. COVENANT AGAINST CONTINGENT FEES
The Contractor warrants that no person or selling agency has been employed or
retained to solicit or secure the Contract upon an agreement or understanding
for a commission, percentage, brokerage, or contingent fee, except bona fide
employees or bona fide established commercial or selling agencies maintained by
the Contractor for the purpose of securing business. For breach or violation of
this warranty, the City shall have the right to terminate the Contract without
liability or in its discretion to deduct from the Contract price or
consideration, or otherwise recover the full amount of such commission,
percentage, brokerage, or contingent fee.
27. APPLICABLE LAW
This Contract shall be governed by and interpreted and enforced in accordance
with the laws of the City of Reading and of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania
(without regard to any conflict of laws provisions) and the decisions of the
Pennsylvania courts. The Contractor consents to the jurisdiction of any court
of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania and any federal courts in Pennsylvania,
waiving any claim or defense that such forum is not convenient or proper. The
Contractor agrees that any such court shall have in personam jurisdiction over
it, and consents to service of process in any manner authorized by Pennsylvania
law.
28. INTEGRATION
The Contract, including all referenced documents, constitutes the entire
agreement between the parties. No agent, representative, employee or officer of
either the City or the Contractor has authority to make, or has made, any
statement, agreement or representation, oral or written, in connection with the
Contract, which in any way can be deemed to modify, add to or detract from, or
otherwise change or alter its terms and conditions. No negotiations between the
parties, nor any custom or usage, shall be permitted to modify or contradict
any of the terms and conditions of the Contract. No modifications, alterations,
changes, or waiver to the Contract or any of its terms shall be valid or
binding unless accomplished by a written amendment signed by both parties. All
such amendments will be made using the appropriate City form.
29. CHANGE ORDERS [Amended 5-9-2016 by Ord. No. 18-2016]
The City reserves the right to issue change orders at any time during the term
of the Contract or any renewals or extensions thereof: 1) to increase or
decrease the quantities resulting from variations between any estimated
quantities in the Contract and actual quantities; 2) to make changes to the
services within the scope of the Contract; 3) to notify the Contractor that the
City is exercising any Contract renewal or extension option; or 4) to modify
the time of performance that does not alter the scope of the Contract to extend
the completion date beyond the Expiration Date of the Contract or any renewals
or extensions thereof. Any such change order, or any change order submitted by
the Contractor, shall be in writing and no changes in the work covered by the
approved Contract documents shall be made, or authorized, without having prior
written approval of the Mayor, or his or her designee. The change order shall
be effective as of the date appearing on the change order, unless the change
order specifies a later effective date. Such increases, decreases, changes, or
modifications will not invalidate the Contract, nor, if performance security is
being furnished in conjunction with the Contract, release the security
obligation. The Contractor agrees to provide the service in accordance with the
change order. Any dispute by the Contractor in regard to the performance
required under any change order shall be handled through Paragraph 19,
"Contract Controversies".
For purposes of this Contract, "change order" is defined as a written order
signed by the Mayor, or his or her designee, directing the Contractor to make
changes authorized under this clause.
30. RIGHT TO KNOW LAW 8-K-1532
   A.   The Pennsylvania Right-to-Know Law, 65 P.S. §§ 67.101-3104, ("RTKL")
applies to this Contract. For the purpose of these provisions, the term "the
City" shall refer to the City of Reading.
   B.   If the City needs the Contractor's assistance in any matter arising out
of the RTKL related to this Contract, it shall notify the Contractor using the
legal contact information provided in this Contract. The Contractor, at any
time, may designate a different contact for such purpose upon reasonable prior
written notice to the City.
   C.   Upon written notification from the City that it requires the
Contractor's assistance in responding to a request under the RTKL for
information related to this Contract that may be in the Contractor's
possession, constituting, or alleged to constitute, a public record in
accordance with the RTKL ("Requested Information"), the Contractor shall:
      1.   Provide the City, within ten (10) calendar days after receipt of
written notification, access to, and copies of, any document or information in
the Contractor's possession arising out of this Contract that the City
reasonably believes is Requested Information and may be a public record under
the RTKL; and
      2.   Provide such other assistance as the City may reasonably request, in
order to comply with the RTKL with respect to this Contract.
   D.   If the Contractor considers the Requested Information to include a
request for a Trade Secret or Confidential Proprietary Information, as those
terms are defined by the RTKL, or other information that the Contractor
considers exempt from production under the RTKL, the Contractor must notify the
City and provide, within seven (7) calendar days of receiving the written
notification, a written statement signed by a representative of the Contractor
explaining why the requested material is exempt from public disclosure under
the RTKL.
   E.   The City will rely upon the written statement from the Contractor in
denying a RTKL request for the Requested Information unless the City of Reading
determines that the Requested Information is clearly not protected from
disclosure under the RTKL. Should the City determine that the Requested
Information is clearly not exempt from disclosure, the Contractor shall provide
the Requested Information within five (5) business days of receipt of written
notification of the City's determination.
   F.   If the Contractor fails to provide the Requested Information within the
time period required by these provisions, the Contractor shall indemnify and
hold the City harmless for any damages, penalties, costs, detriment or harm
that the City may incur as a result of the Contractor's failure, including any
statutory damages assessed against the City.
   G.   The City will reimburse the Contractor for any costs associated with
complying with these provisions only to the extent allowed under the fee
schedule established by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania Office of Open Records
or as otherwise provided by the RTKL if the fee schedule is inapplicable.
   H.   The Contractor may file a legal challenge to any City decision to
release a record to the public with the Office of Open Records, or in the
Pennsylvania Courts, however, the Contractor shall indemnify the City for any
legal expenses incurred by the City as a result of such a challenge and shall
hold the City harmless for any damages, penalties, costs, detriment or harm
that the City may incur as a result of the Contractor's failure, including any
statutory damages assessed against the City, regardless of the outcome of such
legal challenge. As between the parties, the Contractor agrees to waive all
rights or remedies that may be available to it as a result of the City's
disclosure of Requested Information pursuant to the RTKL.
   I.   The Contractor's duties relating to the RTKL are continuing duties that
survive the expiration of this Contract and shall continue as long as the
Contractor has Requested Information in its possession.
IN WITNESS WHEREOF, the CITY OF READING, and VENDOR, have caused this Contract
to be executed on the date and year first above written.
VENDOR   CITY OF READING
By:     
By:     
Title:     
Managing Director
By:
City Solicitor
WITNESS
City Clerk
CONTRACT APPENDIX A
BUDGET AND BILLING
Describe Contract Budget and Specific Billing Terms and Conditions Here.
Sample RFP
REQUEST FOR PROPOSALS
RFP Title
CITY OF READING
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/6541e9c0b130f7197f9155a8a6441bb6dc5ca83c/
IMAGES/0-0-0-5250.png]
TABLE OF CONTENTS
Page
Purpose
Proposal Submission
Pre-Proposal Conference
Proposer's Clarification
Insurance
Workers Compensation and Public Liability and Property Damage Insurance
Equal Employment Opportunity
Employment of Certain Persons Prohibited
Alterations or Modifications
Subcontracts
Right to Audit Records
Dissemination of Information
Business Privilege Tax
Permits/Licenses
Observance of Laws, Ordinances and Regulations
Withdrawal of Proposals
Proposal Rejection
Execution of Contract
Contract Termination
Scope of Services
Form of Proposal
Information Required of Proposer
Assignment of Key Staff
City Information
Evaluation of Proposals
Selection Committee
Questions Regarding Specifications
Forms
Non-Collusion Affidavit
Certificate of Non-Indebtedness
Non Discrimination Statement
Indemnity Agreement & Hold Harmless
Stipulation Against Liens
PURPOSE
The City of Reading (the City) is requesting proposals from vendors for the
purpose of supplying, installing and maintaining the City Hall Access Control
System.
PROPOSAL SUBMISSION
The original proposal, one (1) printed copy, and one (1) electronic copy on
compact disc shall be submitted in a sealed envelope that shall plainly
indicate on it the title of the proposal and the date for receiving. This shall
be delivered to the City Purchasing Coordinator, Room 2-45, City Hall, 815
Washington Street, Reading, PA, until 3:00 P.M., prevailing time on Thursday,
March 14, 2013. The envelope shall be clearly labeled as RFP for City Hall
Access Control System.
Proposals received at the Office of the Purchasing Coordinator after the hour
specified will not be considered. Proposers are invited to be present at the
RFP opening.
PRE-PROPOSAL CONFERENCE
A mandatory pre-bid conference will be held on February 20, 2013 at 10 A.M. To
facilitate the clarification of requirements, proposers are requested to
submit, in writing, any questions they may have by 10:00 A.M. on Wednesday,
February 27, 2013. Any interpretation made to prospective proposers, will be
expressed in the form of an addendum which, if issued, will be conveyed in
writing to all prospective proposers no later than 2:00 P.M. on Wednesday,
March 6, 2013.
PROPOSER'S CLARIFICATION
By submitting a proposal, the proposer certifies that the RFP has been fully
read and that the proposer understands the proposal method and has full
knowledge of the scope, nature and quality of work to be performed.
INSURANCE
The Successful Proposer, at the time of execution of the contract, shall also
furnish the City with insurance certificates of adequate limits, as later
indicated, to protect the City of Reading, its agents, and employees from any
litigation involving Worker's Compensation, Public Liability and Property
Damage, involved in the work. All subcontractors must also furnish copies of
their liability insurance and Worker's Compensation Insurance certificates to
the City. No subcontractor will be allowed to perform any work under this
contract by the City unless such certificates are submitted to and approved by
the City beforehand.
WORKER'S COMPENSATION AND PUBLIC LIABILITY AND PROPERTY DAMAGE INSURANCE
The status of the Proposer in the work to be performed is that of any
independent Proposer and as such, he shall properly safeguard against any and
all injury or damage to the public, to public and private property, materials
and things, and as such he alone shall be responsible for any and all damage,
loss or injury to persons or property that may arise, or be incurred, in or
during the conduct or progress of said work without regard to whether or not
the Proposer, subcontractors, agents, or employees have been negligent, and the
Proposer shall keep the City free and discharged of and from any and all
responsibility and liability therefore of any sort or kind. The Proposer shall
assume all responsibility for risks or casualties of every description, for any
or all damage, loss or injury to persons or property arising out of the nature
of the work from the action of the elements, or from any unforeseen or unusual
difficulty, including all legal defense costs incurred by the City. The
Proposer shall assume and be liable for all blame and loss of whatsoever nature
by reason of neglect or violation of any Federal, State, County or Local laws,
regulations, or ordinances; the Proposer shall indemnify and hold harmless the
City from all suits or actions at law of any kind whatsoever in connection with
this work and shall if required by the City, produce evidence of settlement of
any such action before final payment shall be made the City. Proposer's
Liability Insurance Certificate shall include the hold harmless clause and
shall be filed with the City.
The Proposer shall maintain such insurance as will protect the proposer from
claims under worker's compensation acts and from claims for damages because of
bodily injury, including death, and property damage, which may arise from and
during operations under this Contract, whether such operations be by himself,
by any subcontractor or anyone directly, or indirectly employed by either of
them. Proposer's liability insurance shall be in the names of the Proposer and
the City as their respective interests may appear. Each policy and Certificate
of Insurance shall contain an endorsement naming the City of Reading as
additionally insured. Certificates of such insurance shall be filed with the
City.
The minimum amount of liability insurance to be maintained by the Contractor
during the life of the contract shall be as follows:
Comprehensive General Liability - for bodily injury and property damage -
including any liability normally covered by a general liability policy with
limits of not less than $1,000,000 per occurrence and $2,000,000 in the annual
aggregate.
Professional Liability - in minimum amounts of $1,000,000 per occurrence and
$2,000,000 aggregate.
Prior to commencement of performance of this Agreement, Contractor shall
furnish to the City a certificate of insurance evidencing all required coverage
in at least the limits required herein, naming the City of Reading, its elected
officials, agents, and employees as additional insureds under the Comprehensive
General Liability coverage, and providing that no policies may be modified or
cancelled without thirty (30) days advance written notice to the City. Such
certificate shall be issued to: City of Reading, 815 Washington Street,
Reading, PA 19601. All policies shall be in effect with companies holding an
A.M. Best rating of "A-" or better and shall be licensed to do business in the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania. Such companies shall also be acceptable to the
City.
Please forward a certificate of insurance verifying these insurance
requirements.
All subcontractors performing work under this contract must furnish to the City
a copy if their Certificate of Insurance for Worker's Compensation and
liability for bodily injury and property damage.
EQUAL EMPLOYMENT OPPORTUNITY
During the performance of this Contract, the Proposer agrees as follows:
The Proposer will not discriminate against any employees or applicant for
employment because of race, color, religion, sex, or national origin. The
Proposer will take affirmative action to ensure that applicants are employed,
and that employees are treated during employment without regard to race, color,
religion, sex or national origin. Such action shall include, but not be limited
to, the following: employment, upgrading, demotion, or transfer, recruitment or
recruitment advertising; layoff or termination; rates of pay or other forms of
compensation; and selection for training, including apprenticeship. The
Proposer agrees to post in conspicuous places, available to employees and
applicants for employment, notices which may be provided by the City setting
forth the provisions of this nondiscrimination clause.
The Proposer will, in all solicitations or advertisements for employees placed
by or on behalf of the Proposer, state that all qualified applicants will
receive consideration for employment without regard to race, color, religion,
sex, or national origin.
In the event of the Proposer's noncompliance with the non-discrimination
clauses of this Contract or with any of the said rules, regulations, or orders,
this Contract may be canceled, terminated, or suspended in whole, or in part
and the Proposer may be declared ineligible for further City contracts.
The Proposer will include the provisions of these paragraphs in every
subcontract or purchase order unless exempted.
EMPLOYMENT OF CERTAIN PERSONS PROHIBITED
No person who is or has serving/served sentence in a penal or correctional
institution or has been found guilty or plead guilty or no contest for any type
of theft shall be employed on the work covered by this Contract.
ALTERATIONS OR MODIFICATIONS
This contract will be under the direct supervision of the Finance Director, or
their designated representative. Any alterations or modifications of the work
performed under this contract shall be made only by written agreement between
the Proposer and the Finance Director or their designated representative, and
shall be made prior to commencement of the altered or modified work. No claims
for extra work or materials shall be allowed unless covered by written
agreement.
SUBCONTRACTS
The Proposer will not be allowed to subcontract work under this contract unless
written approval is granted by the City Purchasing Coordinator.
RIGHT TO AUDIT RECORDS
The City shall be entitled to audit the books and records of a proposer or any
sub-proposer to the extent that such books and records relate to or affect the
performance of such contract or sub-contract. Such books and records shall be
maintained by the proposer for a period of three (3) years from the date of
final payment under the prime contract and by the sub-proposer for a period of
three (3) years from the date of final payment under the sub-contract unless a
shorter period is otherwise authorized in writing.
The City of Reading is tax exempt.
DISSEMINATION OF INFORMATION
During the term of the resulting contract, the successful proposer may not
release any information related to the services or performance of services
under the contract, nor publish any report or documents relating to the City,
the account or performance of services under the agreement without prior
written consent of the City; and shall indemnify and hold harmless the City,
its officers, agents, and employees from all liability which may be incurred by
reason of dissemination, publication and distribution, or circulation, in any
manner whatsoever, of any information, data, documents, or material pertaining
to the City, the account or the contract by the proposer or its agents or
employees.
BUSINESS PRIVILEGE TAX
The City of Reading imposes a Business Privilege License, currently at $55.00
per calendar year. In addition, a Business Privilege Tax is imposed at the rate
of 2 1/4 mills upon the gross receipts attributable to business conducted
within the City of Reading.
PERMITS/LICENSES
The Proposer shall, at their expense, pay all fees and procure all necessary
licenses and permits needed to conduct the work required under the terms of
this contract. The Proposer shall give any and all necessary formal notices
required in conjunction with the lawful prosecution of the work of this
contract.
OBSERVANCE OF LAWS, ORDINANCES AND REGULATIONS
The Proposer at all times during the term of this contract shall observe and
abide by all Federal, State, and Local laws which in any way affect the conduct
of the work and shall comply with all decrees and orders of courts of competent
jurisdiction. The Proposer shall comply fully and completely with any and all
applicable State and Federal statutes, rules and regulations as they relate to
hiring, wages, and any other applicable conditions of employment.
WITHDRAWAL OF PROPOSALS
Proposers will be given permission to withdraw any proposals after they have
been received by the City's Purchasing Coordinator at his/her office, provided
said request is in writing and properly signed or by telegram and is received
at least two (2) hours prior to the time and date set for the opening. Request
by telegram must be confirmed in writing, properly signed, which must be
delivered within twenty-four (24) hours of the time and date set for the
opening. No proposals may be withdrawn for a period of ninety (90) days
following the formal opening and receipt of proposals by the City of Reading.
PROPOSAL REJECTION
The City of Reading reserves the right to reject any or all proposals and to
accept or reject any part of any proposal. It also reserves the right to waive
any technical defects or minor irregularities, which in its discretion, is in
the best interest of the City.
EXECUTION OF CONTRACT
The successful Proposer shall, within ten (10) calendar days after mailing of
contract documents by the City to the Principal, enter into contract with the
City.
The contract, along with this RFP, its attachments and addendums, when
executed, shall be deemed to include the entire agreement between the parties;
the Proposer shall not base any claim for modification of the contract upon any
prior representation or promise made by the representatives of the City, or
other persons.
CONTRACT TERMINATION
The City shall have the right to terminate a contract or a part thereof before
the work is completed in the event:
A.   Previous unknown circumstances arise making it desirable in the public
interest to void the contract.
B.   The proposer is not complying with the specifications.
C.   The proposer refuses, neglects, or fails to supply properly trained or
skilled supervisory personnel and/or workers or proper equipment.
D.   The proposer in the judgment of the City is unnecessarily or willfully
delaying the performance and completion of the work.
E.   The proposer refuses to proceed with work when and as directed by the
City.
F.   The proposer abandons the work or fails to provide timely reports and
revenue to the City demonstrating effective and fair collection efforts.
G.   The proposer fails to adhere to the policies and procedures of the Fair
Debt Collections Practices Act.
Proposers who have questions concerning various aspects of this Contract should
contact the following person:
Tammi Reinhart, Purchasing Coordinator City Hall, 815 Washington Street
Reading, PA 19601-3690
Phone 610/655-6207
FAX 610/655-6427
Tammi.reinhart@readingpa.org
SCOPE OF SERVICES
1. Scope of needed services
FORM OF PROPOSAL
All proposers shall be aware that the RFP and the responses thereto are in the
public domain; therefore, proposers shall identify specifically any information
contained in the proposal which is to be considered confidential or proprietary
and exempt from disclosure. Blanket statements that entire submittals are
confidential shall be unacceptable.
All proposals will become the exclusive property of the City and will not be
returned.
Proposals shall be prepared simply and economically, providing a
straightforward, concise description of the proposer's ability to fulfill the
requirements of the Request for Proposal. In order to insure a uniform review
process and to obtain the maximum degree of comparability, it is required that
proposals be organized in the manner specified.
Title Page
Show the name of proposer's agency/firm, address, telephone number, name of
person authorized to obligate the firm, date, and the subject: REQUEST FOR
PROPOSALS - City Hall Access Control System
Table of Contents
Include a clear identification of the material by section and by page number.
Letter of Transmittal
Limit to one or two pages briefly stating the proposer's understanding of the
work to be done and making a positive commitment to perform the work. Give the
names of the persons who will be authorized to make representations for the
proposer, their titles, mailing addresses, telephone numbers and email
addresses.
General Information
Name of business
Mailing address/phone & fax number
Name of person to contact
Business hours of business
State if business is local, national, or international and indicate the
business legal status
(corporation, partnership, etc.)
Give the date business was organized and/or incorporated, and where
Give the location of the office from which the work is to be done and the
number of professional staff employees at the office
Indicate whether the business is a parent or subsidiary in a group of firms/
agencies
INFORMATION REQUIRED OF PROPOSER
A.   Cost
Submit fee for this service as described within.
B.   The City of Reading will not be responsible for any out-of-pocket expenses
incurred by the proposer.
C. Financial Soundness of Proposer
The proposer's most recent certified annual report, including balance sheets
and profit and loss statements, should be submitted with its proposal. All
information pertaining to the financial soundness of Proposer shall remain
confidential. The City of Reading will contract only with a Proposer found to
be financially sound. In addition, the City should be notified if there is a
major claim(s) against the firm that could impact their ability to perform.
ASSIGNMENT OF KEY STAFF
The key member(s) of the contract identified must be assigned to the contract
and must remain assigned to the contract for its duration, unless the City
agrees in writing to modify the assignment. If a key member leaves during the
course of the contract, the City must be notified immediately, and the
contractor must submit the replacement name and credentials for approval by the
City prior to that person starting work on the contract.
CITY INFORMATION
An executed Non-Collusion Affidavit and Non Discrimination Statement, as
attached must be submitted with the proposal. Successful proposer will be
required to submit an Indemnity Agreement, Stipulation Against Liens and a
certificate of insurance as described.
EVALUATION OF PROPOSALS
The award may or may not be made to the firm submitting the lowest proposal.
Award shall be made to the responsible offeror whose proposal is determined to
be the most advantageous to the City, taking into consideration the evaluation
factors set below. Only submissions that are complete and returned within the
time limit will be considered.
The selection will be made by the City based on the following criteria:
A.   Experience, Qualifications and References
B.   Charges for Services including hardware & software costs
C.   MWE\WBE
D.   Reading based provider
E.   Completeness of RFP response   ***A - E are required on all
bids\proposals***
F.   List any other selection criteria
SELECTION COMMITTEE AND PROCEDURE FOR REVIEW OF PROPOSALS
A Selection Committee will be established to review and evaluate all proposals
submitted in response to this Request for Proposals (RFP). The Committee shall
conduct a preliminary evaluation of all proposals on the basis of the
"Evaluation of Proposals" section of this RFP. Failure to comply with any
requirements shall disqualify a proposal.
The City may arrange for a meeting with the submitting parties or entities to
clarify any aspect of the proposals. The selection committee has the
responsibility to negotiate the most favorable cost, terms and conditions to
the City of Reading. The negotiating process may involve one or more RFP
responses, and may continue until the actual award of the contract.
The City reserves the right to reject any and all proposals. The City further
reserves the right to seek new proposals when such a procedure is reasonably in
the best interest of the City to do so.
QUESTIONS REGARDING SPECIFICATIONS OR PROPOSAL PROCESS
To ensure fair consideration for all firms, the City prohibits communication to
or with any department, division, office or agency, and employee during the
submission process with the exception of those questions relative to
interpretation of specifications or the proposal process. Such communications
initiated by a firm may be grounds for disqualifying the offending firm from
consideration for award of the proposal and/or any future proposal.
No interpretations of the meaning of the RFP documents will be made to any
bidder orally. Every request for such interpretation shall be in writing to the
City of Reading Purchasing Office, and to be given consideration must be
received in writing prior to 10:00 A.M. on Wednesday, February 27, 2013. Direct
inquiries to:
Tammi Reinhart Purchasing Coordinator City Hall, Rm. 2-45
815 Washington Street
Reading, PA 19601
Phone - 610/655-6206
FAX - 610/655-6427
Any and all such interpretation will be in the form of an Addendum to the
Contract Documents and will be faxed or emailed to all prospective firms at the
number furnished by them by Wednesday, _______, 20___.
Additionally, the City prohibits communications by a proposer to any City
Official or employee evaluating or considering the proposals prior to the time
an award decision has been made. Any communication between proposer and the
City will be initiated by the Purchasing Coordinator in order to obtain
information or clarification needed to develop a proper, accurate evaluation of
the proposal. Any communications outside of the Purchasing Coordinator with a
proposer shall be grounds for disqualifying the offending proposer from
consideration for award of the proposal and/or any future proposal.
NON-COLLUSION AFFIDAVIT
INSTRUCTIONS FOR NON-COLLUSION AFFIDAVIT
1.   This Non-Collusion Affidavit is material to any contract pursuant to this
bid. According to the Pennsylvania Antibid-Rigging Act, 62 Pa.C.S. §§ 4501 et
seq., governmental agencies may require Non-Collusion Affidavits to be
submitted together with bids.
2.   This Non-Collusion Affidavit must be executed by the member officer, or
employee of the bidder who is authorized to legally bind the bidder.
3.   Bid rigging and other efforts to restrain competition, and the making of
false sworn statements in connection with the submission of bids are unlawful
and may be subject to criminal prosecution. The person who signs the Affidavit
should examine it carefully before signing and assure himself or herself that
each statement is true and accurate, making diligent inquiry, as necessary, of
all other persons employed by or associated with the bidder with
responsibilities for the preparation, approval or submission of the bid.
4.   In the case of a bid submitted by a joint venture, each party to the
venture must be identified in the bid documents, and an Affidavit must be
submitted separately on behalf of each party.
5.   The term "complementary bid" as used in the Affidavit has the meaning
commonly associated with that term in the bidding process, and includes the
knowing submission of bids higher than the bid of another firm, any
intentionally high or noncompetitive bid, and any form of bid submitted for the
purpose of giving a false appearance of competition.
6.   Failure to file an Affidavit in compliance with these instructions will
result in disqualification of the bid.
NON-COLLUSION AFFIDAVIT OF PRIME BIDDER
State of  __________________
County of ________________
______________________________ , being first duly sworn, deposes and says that:
(1)   He/She is _____________________________________________
      (Owner, Partner, Officer, Representative or Agent)
of ___________________________________________________, the Bidder that has
submitted the attached Bid or Bids;
(2) He/She is fully informed respecting the preparation and contents of the
attached Bid and of all pertinent circumstances respecting such Bid;
(3)   Such Bid is genuine and is not a collusive or sham Bid;
(4) Neither the said Bidder nor any of its officers; partners, owners, agents,
representatives, employees or parties in interest, including this affiant, has
in any way colluded, conspired, connived or agreed, directly or indirectly,
with any other Bidder, firm or person to submit a collusive or sham Bid in
connection with the Contract for which the attached Bid has been submitted or
to refrain from bidding in connection with such Contract, or has in any manner,
directly or indirectly, sought by agreement or collusion or communication of
conference with any other Bidder, firm or person to fix the price or prices in
the attached Bid or of any other Bidder, or to fix any overheld profit or cost
element of the Bid price or the Bid price of any other Bidder, or to secure
through any collusion, conspiracy, connivance or unlawful agreement any
advantage against the City of Reading or any person interested in the proposed
Contract;
(5) The price or prices quoted in the attached Bid are fair and proper and are
not tainted by any collusion, conspiracy, connivance or unlawful agreement on
the part of the Bidder or any of its agents, representatives, owners,
employees, or parties in interest, including this affiant; and,
(6) Neither the said Bidder nor any of its officers, partners, owners, agents
or parties in interest, have any interest, present or prospective, that can be
reasonably construed to result in a conflict of interest between them and the
City of Reading, which the Bidder will be required to perform.
I state that ________________________________
      (Name of Firm)
Understands and acknowledges that the above representations are material and
important, and will be relied on by the City of Reading in awarding the
Contract(s) for which this Bid is submitted. I understand and my firm
understands that any misstatement in this Affidavit is and shall be treated as
fraudulent concealment from the City of Reading of the true facts relating to
the submission of bids for this Contract.
_____________________________________________
(Name and Company Position)
SWORN TO AND SUBSCRIBED BEFORE ME THIS _________ DAY
OF _______________, 20_ ______
_________________________________
Notary Public
My Commission Expires:
PROVIDER'S CERTIFICATION OF NON- INDEBTEDNESS TO THE CITY OF READING
Provider hereby certifies and represents that Provider and Provider's parent
company(ies) and subsidiary(ies) are not currently indebted to the City of
Reading (the "City"), and will not at any time during the term of this Contract
(including any extensions or renewals thereof) be indebted to the City, for or
on account of any delinquent taxes, liens, judgments, fees or other debts for
which no written agreement or payment plan satisfactory to the City has been
established. In addition to any other rights or remedies available to the City
at law or in equity, Provider acknowledges that any breach or failure to
conform to this certification may, at the option of the City, result in the
withholding of payments otherwise due to Provider and, if such breach or
failure is not resolved to the City's satisfaction within a reasonable time
frame specified by the City in writing, may result in the offset of any such
indebtedness against said payments and/or the termination of this Contract for
default (in which case Provider shall be liable for all excess costs and other
damages resulting from the termination).
_________________________________________
Name of Provider
By: _____________________________________
   Authorized Signatory
Title: _______________________________________
   President or Vice President
Attest: _______________________
NON DISCRIMINATION STATEMENT
The undersigned hereby certifies that it shall not discriminate against any
employee or applicant for employment because of race, color, religion, sex,
handicap, familial status, or national origin. The undersigned shall take
affirmative action to insure that applicants for employment are employed, and
that employees are treated during employment, without regard to their race,
color, religion, sex, handicap, familial status, or national origin.
_______________________________
BIDDER
_______________________________
TITLE
INDEMNITY AGREEMENT & HOLD HARMLESS
KNOW ALL MEN BY THESE PRESENTS:
WHEREAS, the undersigned has entered into a contract with the CITY OF READING,
dated __________, 20____, providing for the
_____________________________________________
___________________________________________ City of Reading, Pennsylvania.
NOW, THEREFORE, in consideration of the award of said contract to the
undersigned, ______________________, as well as in further consideration of the
sum of ONE DOLLAR ($1.00) in hand paid to the said _____________ by the City of
Reading, receipt whereof is hereby acknowledged, the said
___________________________ agrees to indemnify and save harmless the CITY OF
READING, its officers, agents, servants, and employees against any and all
loss, damage, costs and expenses which the said CITY may hereafter suffer,
incur, be put to or pay by reason of any bodily injury (including death) or
damage to property arising out of any act or omission in performance of the
work undertaken under the aforesaid contract.
EXECUTED this __________ day of _________, 20___________.
By: _______________________________
Title:  _______________________________
ATTEST:
_______________________________
_______________________________
(Title)
STIPULATION AGAINST LIENS
WHEREAS, _____________________________, hereinafter called the CONTRACTOR, has
entered into a CONTRACT, dated _________, 20___, with
_____________________________ hereinafter called the CITY, to provide materials
and perform labor necessary for the manufacture and furnishing of the:
_____________________________________________________________________________________________
_____________________________________________________________________________________________
as set forth in the CONTRACT DOCUMENTS as prepared by the City of Reading.
NOW, THEREFORE, it is hereby stipulated and agreed by and between the said
parties, as part of the said CONTRACT, and for the consideration therein set
forth, that neither the undersigned CONTRACTOR, any SUBCONTRACTOR or material
man, nor any other person furnishing labor or materials to the said CONTRACTOR
under this CONTRACT shall file a lien, commonly called a mechanic's lien, for
WORK done or materials furnished for the above manufacture.
This stipulation is made and shall be filed with the Berks County Prothonotary
within ten (10) days after execution, in accordance with the requirements of
Section 1402 of the Mechanics Lien Law of 1963 of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania in such case provided.
IN WITNESS WHEREOF, the parties hereto have caused the signature of their
proper officers to be affixed thereto on this                      day
                                           of 20           .
________________________________________________
(CITY OF READING)
ATTEST:
BY: _______________________________
TITLE: _______________________________
BY: _______________________________
TITLE: _______________________________
_______________________________
(CONTRACTOR)
ATTEST:
BY: _______________________________
TITLE: _______________________________
BY: _______________________________
TITLE: _______________________________
BY: _______________________________
TITLE: _______________________________
City of Reading
Organization Charts
[Amended 5-29-2001 by Ord. No. 14-2001; 8-27-2001 by Ord. No. 28-2001; 10-11-
2004 by Ord. No. 42-2004; 6-25-2006 by Ord. No. 63-2006; 7-24-2006 by Ord. No.
52-2006; 1-26-2009 by Ord. No. 5-2009; 2-28-2011 by Ord. No. 14-2011; 9-10-2012
by Ord. No. 93-2012; amended during codification (see
Ch. 1, General Provisions, Part 2)]
City of Reading, Pennsylvania Organization Chart
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/6541e9c0b130f7197f9155a8a6441bb6dc5ca83c/
IMAGES/0-0-0-40.png]
Department of Administrative Services
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/6541e9c0b130f7197f9155a8a6441bb6dc5ca83c/
IMAGES/0-0-0-42.png]
Department of Community Development
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/6541e9c0b130f7197f9155a8a6441bb6dc5ca83c/
IMAGES/0-0-0-44.png]
Department of Fire and Rescue Services
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/6541e9c0b130f7197f9155a8a6441bb6dc5ca83c/
IMAGES/0-0-0-46.png]
Department of Public Works
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/6541e9c0b130f7197f9155a8a6441bb6dc5ca83c/
IMAGES/0-0-0-5351.png]
 
Police Department
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/6541e9c0b130f7197f9155a8a6441bb6dc5ca83c/
IMAGES/0-0-0-50.png]
Public Library
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/6541e9c0b130f7197f9155a8a6441bb6dc5ca83c/
IMAGES/0-0-0-52.png]
Water Authority
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/6541e9c0b130f7197f9155a8a6441bb6dc5ca83c/
IMAGES/0-0-0-54.png]
Chapter 14
AUTHORITIES
Part 1
Reading Parking Authority
§
14-101.   Intent.
§
14-102.   Articles of Incorporation.
§
14-103.   Publishing required.
§
14-104.   Notice of Articles of Incorporation.
§
14-105.   Filing of Articles of Incorporation.
§
14-106.   Members of the Board.
§
14-107.   Term of existence.
Part 2
(Reserved)
Part 3
Reading Area Water Authority
§
14-301.   Intent.
§
14-302.   Articles of Incorporation.
§
14-303.   Notice of Articles of Incorporation.
§
14-304.   Filing of Articles of Incorporation.
§
14-305.   Members of the Board.
Part 4
Berks County Convention Center Authority
§
14-401.   Intent.
§
14-402.   Execution of Articles of Incorporation.
§
14-403.   Filing of Articles of Incorporation.
§
14-404.   Members of the Board of the Authority.
§
14-405.   Articles of Incorporation.
Part 5
Reading Downtown Improvement District Authority
§
14-501.   Reestablishment of Reading Downtown Improvement District Authority.
§
14-502.   Reestablishment of Neighborhood Improvement District.
§
14-503.   Responsibilities of Reading Downtown Improvement District Authority.
§
14-504.   Authorization of City Solicitor.
§
14-505.   Management.
§
14-506.   Levy of special assessment.
§
14-507.   Collection of assessments.
§
14-508.   Sunset provision.
§
14-509.   Municipal services agreement.
§
14-510.   No reduction in services.
§
14-511.   Severability.
§
14-512.   Contingency of final plan approval.
Part 6
Local Reading Redevelopment Authority
§
14-601.   Establishment of Authority.
§
14-602.   Members of Authority.
§
14-603.   Authority as advisory planning body.
§
14-604.   Redevelopment plan.
Part 7
City of Reading Revitalization Improvement Zone Authority
§
14-701.   Intent.
§
14-702.   Name of Authority.
§
14-703.   Articles of Incorporation.
§
14-704.   Members.
§
14-705.   Authority to effect the incorporation of Authority.
§
14-706.   Purposes and projects authorized.
[HISTORY: Adopted by the City Council of the City of Reading as indicated in
part histories. Amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES Boards, commissions, committees and councils — See
Ch. 23.
STATE LAW REFERENCES
Municipality Authorities Act — See 53 Pa.C.S.A. § 5601 et seq.
Neighborhood Improvement District Act of 2000 — See 73 P.S. § 831 et seq.
Parking Authority Law of 1947 — See 53 Pa.C.S.A. § 5501 et seq.
Third Class County Convention Center Authority Act — See 16 P.S. § 2399.1 et
seq.
Part 1
Reading Parking Authority
[Adopted 9-9-1953 by Ord. No. 24-1953 (Ch. 1, Part 4B, of the 2001 Code of
Ordinances)]
§ 14-101. Intent.
The City Council of the City of Reading hereby signifies its intention and
desire to organize a parking authority under the provisions of the Parking
Authority Law of 1947, as amended. 1
1.   Editor's Note: See now 53 Pa.C.S.A. § 5501 et seq.
§ 14-102. Articles of Incorporation.
The Mayor and the City Clerk are hereby authorized and directed to execute on
behalf of the
City of Reading Articles of Incorporation for said authority, in substantially
the following form:
ARTICLES OF INCORPORATION
TO THE SECRETARY OF THE COMMONWEALTH, COMMONWEALTH OF PENNSYLVANIA
In compliance with the requirements of the Act of June 19, 2001, P.L. 287 known
as the Parking Authority Law, as amended, the City of Reading, Berks County,
Pennsylvania, desiring to incorporate an authority thereunder, does hereby
certify:
      (1)   The name of the authority is the "Reading Parking Authority."
      (2)   Said Authority is formed under the provisions of the Act of June 5,
1947, P.L. 458, as amended.
      (3)   The name of the incorporating municipality is City of Reading,
Berks County, Pennsylvania.
      (4)   The names and addresses of its municipal authorities, including its
Council members, are as follows: [Here followed the names, addresses and
offices of the City's municipal authorities.]
      (5)   The names, addresses and terms of office of the first members of
the Board of the Parking Authority to be formed hereby are as follows: [Here
followed the name, addresses and terms of office of the members of the Board.]
§ 14-103. Publishing required.
The proper officers of the City are hereby directed to cause this Part to be
published as required by law but setting forth only briefly the substance of
the proposed Articles of Incorporation, as permitted by § 4 of the Parking
Authority Law, as amended. 2
2.   Editor's Note: See now 53 Pa.C.S.A. § 5504.
§ 14-104. Notice of Articles of Incorporation.
The proper officers of the City are hereby directed to cause a notice of the
proposed filing of the above Articles of Incorporation to be published once in
the Berks County Law Journal and once in a newspaper of general circulation in
Berks County, as required by § 4 of the Parking Authority Law, as amended. 3
3.   Editor's Note: See now 53 Pa.C.S.A. § 5504.
§ 14-105. Filing of Articles of Incorporation.
The Mayor and City Clerk are directed to file said Articles of Incorporation,
together with the necessary proof of publication, with the Secretary of the
Commonwealth and to do all other acts and things necessary or appropriate to
effect the incorporation of the Reading Parking Authority.
§ 14-106. Members of the Board.
[Amended 11-25-1953 by Ord. No. 34-1953]
The following named persons be and they are hereby appointed as the first
members of the Board of the Parking Authority whose terms of office shall
commence on the date of appointment and shall be computed from June 1, 1953.
[Here followed the names, addresses and terms of office of the first Board.]
§ 14-107. Term of existence.
[Added 6-15-1977 by Ord. No. 19-1977; amended 8-29-1990 by Ord. No. 111-1990]
The term of existence of said Reading Parking Authority shall be for a period
ending on August 15, 2040.
Part 2
(Reserved) 4
4.   Editor’s Note: Former Part 2, Reading Regional Airport Authority, was
eliminated as part of the 2017 updating of this code, since there is now a
county authority with no city representation.
Part 3
Reading Area Water Authority
[Adopted 5-5-1994 by Ord. No. 46-1994 (
Ch. 1, Part 4C, of the 2001 Code of Ordinances)]
§ 14-301. Intent.
The Council of this City (the "Council") signifies the intention and desire to
organize an authority under provisions of the Act of Assembly approved May 2,
1945, P.L. 382, as amended and supplemented, known as the Municipality
Authorities Act of 1945 (the "Authorities Act"). 6
6.   Editor's Note: See now 53 Pa.C.S.A. § 5601 et seq.
§ 14-302. Articles of Incorporation.
[Amended 8-25-2014 by Ord. No. 64-2014; 8-26-2015 by Ord. No. 1-2015]
The Mayor and Vice President of Council and the City Clerk, respectively, of
this City are authorized and directed to execute, in behalf of this City,
Articles of Incorporation for such Authority in substantially the following
form:
ARTICLES OF INCORPORATION
TO THE SECRETARY OF THE COMMONWEALTH OF PENNSYLVANIA:
In compliance with requirements of the Act of Assembly approved May 2, 1945,
P.L. 382, as amended and supplemented, known as the Municipalities Authorities
Act of 1945, and pursuant to an ordinance duly enacted by the municipal
authorities of the City of Reading, Berks County, Pennsylvania (the "City"),
expressing the intention and desire of the municipal authorities of said
municipality to organize an authority under provisions of said Act, said
municipality certifies:
      (1)   The name of the authority is "Reading Area Water Authority."
      (2)   The Authority is formed under provisions of the Act of Assembly
approved May 2, 1945, P.L. 382, as amended and supplemented, known as the
Municipality Authorities Act of 1945. The Authority shall have all the powers
provided for under such Act; provided, however, that the Authority shall be
prohibited, without prior approval from City Council, from:
         (a)   Undertaking any project which is not related to waterworks,
water supply works or water distribution systems.
         (b)   Undertaking any project, whether or not related to waterworks,
water supply works or water distribution systems, which involves the incurrence
of any long- term debt.
      (3)   The City is the sole incorporating municipality of the Reading
Regional Airport Authority, and is a joint incorporating municipality of the
Berks Area Reading Transportation Authority. Other than the aforementioned
municipal authorities, no other authority has been organized under provisions
of the Act of Assembly approved May 2, 1945, P.L. 382, as amended and
supplemented, known as the Municipality Authorities Act of 1945, or under
provisions provided of the Act of Assembly approved June 28, 1935, P.L. 436, as
amended and supplemented, and is in existence in or for the incorporating
municipality.
      (4)   The name of said incorporating municipality is City of Reading.
Berks County, Pennsylvania.
      (5)   The offices, names and addresses of the municipal authorities of
said incorporating municipality are: [Here followed the offices, names and
addresses of the municipal authorities.]
      (6)   The names, addresses and terms of office of first members of the
Board of the Authority, each of whom is a citizen of said incorporating
municipality are as follows: [Here followed the names, addresses and terms of
office of the first Board members.]
      (7)   The Board of Directors of the Authority shall consist of seven
members effective as of September 1, 2014. The two newly created positions
shall serve for initial terms, as follows: one new appointee shall serve for a
term ending the first Monday in January 2018 and the other new appointee shall
serve for a term ending the first Monday in January 2019. Thereafter
appointments and reappointments to the two newly created Board positions shall
serve for terms of five years.
§ 14-303. Notice of Articles of Incorporation.
The appropriate officers of the Council are authorized and directed to cause
notice of the substance of this Part, including the substance of the foregoing
Articles of Incorporation, and of the proposed filing of such Articles of
Incorporation, to be published as required by the Municipality Authorities Act.
§ 14-304. Filing of Articles of Incorporation.
The appropriate officers of the Council are authorized and directed to file
such Articles of Incorporation and the necessary proofs of publication with the
Secretary of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania and to do all other things
necessary to effect the incorporation of such Authority, including payment of
filing fees.
§ 14-305. Members of the Board.
The following named persons are appointed the first members of the Board of the
Authority for the following terms of office:
[Here followed the names of the first appointed members of the Board.]
Part 4
Berks County Convention Center Authority
[Adopted 6-24-1996 by Ord. No. 116-1996 (
Ch. 1, Part 4E, of the 2001 Code of Ordinances)]
§ 14-401. Intent.
The Council of this City ("the Council") signifies the intention and desire to
organize an authority jointly with the County of Berks, Pennsylvania ("the
County") under provisions of the Act of Assembly approved December 27, 1994,
P.L. 1375, as amended and supplemented, known as the "Third Class County
Convention Center Authority Act" (the "Act"). 7
7.   Editor's Note: See now 16 P.S. § 2399.1 et seq.
§ 14-402. Execution of Articles of Incorporation.
The Mayor and the City Clerk, respectively, of this City are authorized and
directed to execute, on behalf of the City, Articles of Incorporation for such
Authority in substantially the form set forth on Exhibit "A" attached hereto
and made a part thereof. 8
8.   Editor's Note: The Articles of Incorporation are included in §
14-405 of this chapter.
§ 14-403. Filing of Articles of Incorporation.
The appropriate officers of the Council acting jointly with appropriate
officers of the County, are authorized and directed to file such Articles of
Incorporation with the Secretary of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania and to do
all other things necessary to effect the incorporation of such Authority,
including payment of required filing fees.
§ 14-404. Members of the Board of the Authority.
The following named persons are appointed the first members to represent this
City on the Board of the Authority for the following terms of office: [Here
followed the names and terms of office of the first appointed Board.]
§ 14-405. Articles of Incorporation.
ARTICLES OF INCORPORATION
TO THE SECRETARY OF THE COMMONWEALTH OF PENNSYLVANIA:
In compliance with the requirements of the Act of Assembly approved December
27, 1994. P.L. 1375, as amended and supplemented, known as the Third Class
County Convention Center Authority Act, and pursuant to ordinances duly enacted
by the governing bodies of the County of Berks, Pennsylvania (the "County") and
the City of Reading, Berks County, Pennsylvania (the "City"), expressing the
intention and desire of the governing bodies of said municipalities to organize
an authority jointly under provisions of said Act, said municipalities certify:
      (1)   The name of the authority is "Berks County Convention Center
Authority."
      (2)   The Authority is formed under provisions of Act of Assembly
approved December 27, 1994, P.L. 1375, as amended and supplemented, known as
the Third Class County Convention Center Authority Act.
      (3)   No other Authority has been organized under provisions of the Act
of Assembly approved December 27, 1994, P.L. 1375, as amended and supplemented,
known as the Third Class County Convention Center Authority Act.
      (4)   The names of the incorporating municipalities are: County of Berks,
Pennsylvania and City of Reading, Berks County, Pennsylvania.
      (5)   The offices, names and addresses of the officers of the governing
bodies of said incorporating municipalities are: [Here followed the offices,
names and addresses of the incorporating municipalities.]
      (6)   The members of the Board of the Authority shall be seven in number
and shall be apportioned as follows:
County of Berks, Pennsylvania   3
City of Reading, Berks County, Pennsylvania   3
The terms of the first three members appointed by the governing body of the
County of Berks, Pennsylvania, shall be allocated between them for a two-year,
three-year and four-year term, respectively. The terms of the first three
members appointed by the governing body of the City of Reading, Berks County,
Pennsylvania, shall be allocated between them for a two-year, three-year and
four-year term, respectively.
The governing bodies of the incorporating municipalities shall alternate in the
appointment of the seventh member. The governing body of the County of Berks,
Pennsylvania, shall make the first appointment of the seventh member, whose
term shall be four years.
      (7)   The names, addresses and terms of office of the first members of
the Board of the Authority, each of whom is a citizen of said incorporating
municipality are as follows: [Here followed the names, addresses and terms of
office of the first members of the Board of the Authority.]
Part 5
Reading Downtown Improvement District Authority
[Adopted 6-27-2005 by Ord. No. 41-2005 (
Ch. 1, Part 4D, of the 2001 Code of Ordinances); amended in its entirety 11-9-
2015 by Ord. No. 48-2015]
§ 14-501. Reestablishment of Reading Downtown Improvement District Authority.
The Reading Downtown Improvement District Authority ("Authority"), originally
established by Ordinance No. 41-2005, titled "An Ordinance Authorizing the City
of Reading to Organize an Authority to be Known as the Reading Downtown
Improvement District Authority," and as amended (which amendments are
incorporated by reference) is hereby reestablished pursuant to the Municipality
Authorities Act 9  and the Neighborhood Improvement District Act, 10  pursuant
to the terms set forth herein.
9.   Editor's Note: See 53 Pa.C.S.A. § 5601 et seq.
10. Editor's Note: See 73 P.S. § 831 et seq.
§ 14-502. Reestablishment of Neighborhood Improvement District.
   A.   As authorized by Act 2000-130, 73 P.S. § 831 et seq., known as the
Neighborhood Improvement District Act of 2000 (hereinafter the "Act"),
Authority, as reestablished, shall be organized and exist for the purposes of
providing cleaning, maintenance, and security, as well as other services as
authorized, in the area described hereinbelow, which shall be known as the
"Reading Downtown Improvement District" ("District"):
BEGINNING at the intersection of Washington Street and North Second Street;
along North Second Street to Walnut Street to North Third Street to Washington
Street to Madison Avenue; to Elm Street excluding 430, 432 and 438 Elm Street;
along Elm Street to Church Street to Walnut Street to Poplar Street to
Washington Street to Moss Street to Court Street, excluding 906, 908, 910, 912,
914, 916, 918 and 920 Washington Street and 40 Moss Street; along Court Street
to North Eleventh Street, excluding 11, 15, 17, 19, 21 and 23 North Tenth
Street and 24, 22, 20, 18, 16, 14, 12, 10 and 6 North Eleventh Street; along
North Eleventh Street crossing Penn Street to South Eleventh Street; along
South Eleventh Street to Cherry Street to South Ninth Street, excluding 1013
Cherry Street, 25, 23, 21, 19, 17, 15, 13, 11 and 9 South Tenth Street, 915,
913, 911, 909, 907 Cherry Street, 914 rear Penn Street, and 25, 23, 21, 19, 17
and 13 South Ninth Street; along South Ninth Street to Franklin Street to South
Seventh Street to Chestnut Street to Plum Street to Franklin Street, including
112 and 108 Plum and 614, 618 and 622 Franklin Street; along Franklin Street to
Pearl Street excluding 514, 516, 518, 520, and 522 Franklin Street; along Pearl
Street to Chestnut Street to Wood Street, excluding 521, 519, 517, 433, 431,
429, 427, 425 and 421 Chestnut Street; along Wood Street to Franklin Street to
South Fourth Street to Cherry Street to Carpenter Street to South Third Street,
excluding 341, 339, 337, 335, 333, 331, 329 and 327 Franklin Street and
including 30 South Fourth Street; continuing along Cherry Street to South
Second Street to Franklin Street, excluding 27, 25, 23, 21, 19, 17, 15, 13 and
11 South Second Street; along Franklin Street to South Front Street to North
Front Street to Washington Street to North Second Street, place of BEGINNING.
   B.   A map showing the general boundaries, site, and situation of the
proposed District is attached hereto, incorporated herein, and marked as
Exhibit A. 11
11. Editor's Note: Exhibit A is on file in the City offices.
   C.   The Authority may recommend to City Council more specific boundaries of
the designated District. The Authority shall have the authority to develop and
make business improvements and provide administrative services, including
additional security, cleaning and maintenance, marketing, and other management
services. The Authority shall have the authority to impose an assessment on
each benefited property in the designated district described in this section.
§ 14-503. Responsibilities of Reading Downtown Improvement District Authority.
The responsibilities of the Reading Downtown Improvement District Authority
shall be to facilitate a "clean and safe" downtown, as set forth in the final
plan for the Downtown Improvement District, which will be attached hereto,
incorporated herein, and marked as Exhibit B 12  and the Municipal Services
Agreement between the City and the Reading Downtown Improvement District
Authority, which will be attached hereto, incorporated herein, and marked as
Exhibit C. 13  The Board of Directors of the Reading Downtown Improvement
District Authority shall continue to provide fiduciary and administrative
oversight to the Reading Main Street Program, and the Executive Director of the
Reading Downtown Improvement District shall continue to serve as Program
Manager for the Reading Main Street Program, all for compensation as set forth
in the attached Municipal Services Agreement, and any amendments thereto.
12. Editor's Note: Exhibit B is on file in the City offices.
13. Editor's Note: Exhibit C is on file in the City offices.
§ 14-504. Authorization of City Solicitor.
The City Solicitor is authorized and directed to cause notice of this Part to
be published to the extent required by and in accordance with the Neighborhood
Improvement District Act 14  and the Municipality Authorities Act. 15  The
Authority and its Solicitor are further authorized and directed to take all
steps necessary for the filing, in accordance with the Neighborhood Improvement
District Act and the Municipality Authorities Act, of amendments to the
Articles of Incorporation of the Authority and bylaws of the Authority as
required by the Neighborhood Improvement District Act, the Municipality
Authorities Act, or other applicable law.
14. Editor's Note: See 73 P.S. § 831 et seq.
15. Editor's Note: See 53 Pa.C.S.A. § 5601 et seq.
§ 14-505. Management.
The Authority, an existing municipal authority established pursuant to the Act
of May 2, 1945 (P.L. 382, No. 164, known as the "Municipality Authorities Act
of 1945"), shall be reauthorized, and shall be appointed as Neighborhood
Improvement District Management Association of the City of Reading Downtown
Improvement District and authorized to exercise all powers provided for in
Section 7 of the Act, 73 P.S. § 837, provided that the final plan for the
District is approved by City Council after notice to the public and public
hearings.
§ 14-506. Levy of special assessment.
[Amended 8-14-2017 by Ord. No. 76-2017]
In accordance with the provisions of 73 P.S. § 834(5) and 73 P.S. § 834(10), an
assessment fee shall be imposed on all nonexcluded properties located within
the boundaries of the District provided that the final plan for the District is
approved by City Council after notice to the public and public hearings.
   A.   Amount and method of assessment. The assessment shall be made as of
January 1, 2016, and is based on the cost estimates provided in the final plan
of the Reading Downtown Improvement District and shall be as follows:
      (1)   Commercial properties, industrial properties, and commercial
apartment buildings within the District shall be assessed at the rate of 4.754
mills for each $1,000 of assessed value as set by the Berks County Assessment
Office.
      (2)   Owner-occupied residential properties shall be excluded from the
payment of the special property assessment provided such properties are carried
as "residential" in the assessment records for the County of Berks,
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
      (3)   Tax-exempt property owners within the District shall be allowed and
encouraged to provide in-kind services or a financial contribution to the
Authority in lieu of assessment.
   B.   Payment of assessment. Payment of the entirety of the assessment,
beginning with sums due on January 1, 2016, and each January 1 of each year
thereafter, shall be due no later than 60 days following the date of mailing of
the notice of assessment.
   C.   Liens. Assessments shall constitute liens and encumbrances upon the
assessed property and shall be collectable in accordance with the provisions of
Section 7(d) of the Act, 73 P.S. § 837(d), and in general may be collected in
the same manner as municipal tax claims notwithstanding the provision of this
section as to installment payments.
   D.   Delinquent payment of assessments. In the event of delinquency or
failure to remit assessments, the property shall be subject to lien and the
property owner shall be additionally assessed for costs of collection, interest
at a rate of 10% per annum, as authorized by the Municipal Claims and Tax Liens
Law, and counsel fees.
§ 14-507. Collection of assessments.
The Authority is designated as the collector for assessments provided for
herein.
§ 14-508. Sunset provision.
[Amended 8-14-2017 by Ord. No. 76-2017]
   A.   The Authority shall automatically terminate on December 31, 2020,
unless continued or extended by subsequent action of the City Council of the
City of Reading, as set forth in the Act at 73 P.S. § 834(9).
   B.   In the event of termination, all property of the Authority shall pass
to the City of Reading and the District shall cease to exist.
§ 14-509. Municipal services agreement.
An agreement shall be prepared and approved by between the City Council of the
City of Reading and the Board of the Authority which will govern respective
specific powers, duties and responsibilities of the City of Reading and the
Authority. This services agreement shall be attached to this Part as Exhibit C
16  and shall be hereby incorporated by reference as though the same were set
forth herein at length.
16. Editor's Note: Exhibit C is on file in the City offices.
§ 14-510. No reduction in services.
The City of Reading shall in no way reduce or suspend the current level of
services currently being provided to the geographic area of the District as a
result of the reestablishment of the Authority. Services provided by the
Authority shall be in addition to services provided by the City of Reading. The
Authority shall periodically monitor the quantity and quality of City services
outlined in the agreement.
§ 14-511. Severability.
If any sentence, clause, section or part of this Part is for any reason found
to be illegal, invalid or unconstitutional, such illegality, invalidity or
unconstitutionality shall not affect or impair any of the remaining provisions,
sentences, clauses, sections of this Part. It is hereby declared to be the
intent of the City Council of the City of Reading that this Part would have
been adopted had such illegal, invalid or unconstitutional sentence, clause,
section or part thereof not been included therein.
§ 14-512. Contingency of final plan approval.
This Part shall take effect immediately, however, the existence of the
Authority shall cease in the event the plan for the District, as put forth by
the Authority is not approved after public review, as required by the Act. This
Part shall be null and void, and of no legal force or effect unless the final
plan for the District is approved by the City Council and property owners
within the above- described area encompassing the District, in accordance with
applicable law, including but not limited to the Neighborhood Improvement
District Act. 17
17. Editor's Note: See 73 P.S. § 831 et seq.
Part 6
Local Reading Redevelopment Authority
[Adopted 5-27-2008 by Ord. No. 39-2008]
§ 14-601. Establishment of Authority.
The City of Reading hereby establishes the City of Reading Local Redevelopment
Authority to advise the City of Reading City Council about the best reuse of
the military facility located on Kenhorst Boulevard within the municipal
boundaries of the City.
§ 14-602. Members of Authority.
[Amended 3-23-2009 by Ord. No. 14-2009]
The City of Reading Local Redevelopment Authority shall be composed of seven
voting members. The members shall each serve five-year terms. The terms of the
initial members shall be staggered, with the representatives of Council serving
three-year terms, the representatives from the Redevelopment Authority and
Planning Commission servicing four-year terms and the two representatives of
the Mayor serving five-year terms. The composition shall be defined as follows:
[Here followed the names and terms of office of the first appointed members.]
§ 14-603. Authority as advisory planning body.
The City of Reading Local Redevelopment Authority shall serve as an advisory
planning body. Its redevelopment plan will be considered for adoption as
official land use or development policy by the City Council of Reading,
Pennsylvania.
§ 14-604. Redevelopment plan.
The City of Reading Local Redevelopment Authority will adopt the redevelopment
plan and send it to the City of Reading City Council for approval, after which
it shall submit the redevelopment plan to the Department of the Army, and to
the Department of Housing and Urban Development for review, pursuant to federal
BRAC law and regulations. The City of Reading Local Redevelopment Authority
shall take all steps needed to complete this assignment within the period of
time prescribed by statute and regulations.
Part 7
City of Reading Revitalization Improvement Zone Authority
[Adopted 11-12-2013 by Ord. No. 59-2013]
§ 14-701. Intent.
It is the intent of the City Council of the City to organize an authority under
provisions of the Municipality Authorities Act. 18
18. Editor's Note: See 53 Pa.C.S.A. § 5601 et seq.
§ 14-702. Name of Authority.
The name of the authority shall be the "City of Reading Revitalization and
Improvement Zone Authority."
§ 14-703. Articles of Incorporation.
The proposed Articles of Incorporation of said City of Reading Revitalization
and Improvement Zone Authority are as follows:
CITY OF READING REVITALIZATION AND IMPROVEMENT ZONE AUTHORITY ARTICLES OF
INCORPORATION
TO THE SECRETARY OF THE COMMONWEALTH OF PENNSYLVANIA. In compliance with
requirements of the Pennsylvania Municipality Authorities Act, 53 Pa.C.S.A. §
5601 et seq., Act 22 of 2001, effective June 19, 2001, which codifies and
amends the Municipality Authorities Act of 1945, as amended and supplemented
(the "Municipality Authorities Act"), and pursuant to the ordinance enacted by
the City Council of the City of Reading, Berks County, Pennsylvania, expressing
the intention and desire of the City Council of said municipality to organize a
municipality authority under said Municipality Authorities Act, the
incorporating municipality does hereby certify:
         (a)   The name of the Authority is "City of Reading Revitalization and
Improvement Zone Authority."
         (b)   The Authority is formed under provisions of the Pennsylvania
Municipality Authorities Act, 53 Pa.C.S.A. § 5601 et seq., Act 22 of 2001,
effective June 19, 2001, which codifies and amends the Municipality Authorities
Act of 1945, as amended and supplemented, with all powers authorized by said
Municipality Authorities Act.
         (c)   No other authorities have been organized under said Municipality
Authorities Act, under the former Act of June 28, 1935 (P.L. 463, No. 191), or
under the Act of May 2, 1945 (P.L. 382, No. 164), known as the "Municipality
Authorities Act of 1945," and is in existence in or for the incorporating
municipality, except that the incorporating municipality has heretofore
organized (i) the Reading Water Authority and (ii) the Reading Regional Airport
Authority, and (iii) the Downtown Improvement District Authority, as the sole
incorporating municipality, and (iv) the Berks Area Reading Transportation
Authority, as a joint incorporating municipality, each under the provisions of
the Act of May 2, 1945 (P.L. 382, No. 164), known as the "Municipality
Authorities Act of 1945," which authorities are in existence in or for said
incorporating municipality.
         (d)   The name of the incorporating municipality is the City of
Reading, Berks County, Pennsylvania.
         (e)   The names and addresses of the members of the City Council of
the City of Reading, the incorporating municipality, are as follows: [Here
followed the names and addresses of the members of the City Council.]
         (f)   The names, addresses and terms of office of the first members of
the Board of the City of Reading Revitalization and Improvement Zone Authority
are as follows: [Here followed the names, addresses and terms of office of the
first members of the City of Reading Revitalization and Improvement Zone
Authority.]
         (g)   The terms of office of the first members of the Board of said
City of Reading Revitalization and Improvement Zone Authority shall commence on
the date of appointment and shall be computed from the first Monday in January
of 2014.
         (h)   The term of existence of the City of Reading Revitalization and
Improvement Zone Authority shall be for a period of 50 years.
         (i)   Advertisement of notice of filing these Articles of
Incorporation is submitted herewith.
§ 14-704. Members.
[Amended 10-9-2023 by Ord. No. 95-2023]
The first members of the Board of said City of Reading Revitalization and
Improvement Zone Authority, named in the aforesaid Articles of Incorporation,
are hereby specifically appointed members of said Board for the terms set after
their respective names, commencing on the date of appointment and computed from
the first Monday in January, 2014.
Appointment:
   A.   The CRIZ Authority shall consist of nine members appointed as follows:
      1.   Three (3) members shall be appointed by the Mayor of the City of
Reading.
         1 member appointed by the Mayor shall serve a 2-year term.
         1 member appointed by the Mayor shall serve a 3-year term.
         1 member appointed by the Mayor shall serve 5-year term.
      2.   Three (3) members appointed by the State Representative of the 127th
District.
         1 member appointed by the State Representative of the 127th District
shall serve a 2-year term.
         1 member appointed by the State Representative of the 127th District
shall serve a 3-year term.
         1 member appointed by the State Representative of the 127th District
shall serve 5-year term
      3.   Three (3) members appointed by the Senator from the 11th Senatorial
District.
         1 member appointed by the Senator from the 11th Senatorial District
shall serve a 2-year term.
         1 member appointed by the Senator from the 11th Senatorial District
shall serve a 3-year term.
         1 member appointed by the Senator from the 11th Senatorial District
shall serve 5-year term
      4.   At least five (5) members shall be residents of the City of Reading.
   B.   All appointments shall be approved by a resolution of City Council.
   C.   Terms of Office.
      Members of the CRIZ Authority shall serve the terms specified in
subsection A. above, and their terms shall commence on the date of their
appointment.
      Members may be reappointed for successive terms as specified in
subsection A.
§ 14-705. Authority to effect the incorporation of Authority.
   A.   The Mayor of the City is hereby authorized and directed to execute the
Articles of Incorporation of the proposed City of Reading Revitalization and
Improvement Zone Authority in substantially the form set forth in this Part,
and the City Clerk of the City is hereby authorized and directed to attest the
same and to affix thereto the seal of the City. Such officers are authorized
and directed to execute and deliver such other documents, agreements,
certificates and instruments, and to do all acts necessary or appropriate to
effect the incorporation of the proposed City of Reading Revitalization and
Improvement Zone Authority, including, but not limited to, to cause notice of
the substance of this Part, including the substance of the foregoing Articles
of Incorporation, and the proposed filing of such Articles of Incorporation, to
be published as required by the Municipality Authorities Act.
   B.   The Mayor of the City and the City Clerk of the City are authorized and
directed to file such Articles of Incorporation and the necessary proofs of
publication with the Secretary of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania and to do
all other things necessary to effect the incorporation of the City of Reading
Revitalization and Improvement Zone Authority, including payment of the
required filing fees.
§ 14-706. Purposes and projects authorized.
The City of Reading Revitalization and Improvement Zone Authority shall have
all the purposes, powers, and rights, as provided by Article XVIII-C of House
Bill No. 465, Session of 2013, including, but not limited to, the designation
of revitalization and improvement zones in the City, engaging in and financing
the construction, including related site preparation and infrastructure,
reconstruction or renovation of facilities within such revitalization and
improvement zones, for purposes of taking any and all actions and performing
any and all duties authorized by a Contracting Authority as defined in and
authorized by Article XVIII-C of House Bill No. 465, Session of 2013, and shall
have all the purposes, powers, and rights as provided by the Municipality
Authorities Act.
Chapter 23
BOARDS, COMMISSIONS, COMMITTEES AND COUNCILS
Part 1
Planning Commission
§
23-101.   Creation of Commission.
§
23-102.   Removal of members.
Part 2
Penn Square Commission
§
23-201.   Creation and name.
§
23-202.   Purpose.
§
23-203.   Powers and duties.
§
23-204.   Membership.
§
23-205.   Term of office.
§
23-206.   Compensation.
§
23-207.   Conduct of business.
§
23-208.   Indemnification.
Part 3
Citizens’ Initiative Commission
§
23-301.   Creation.
§
23-302.   Purpose.
§
23-303.   Citizen Initiatives Commission Appointments.
§
23-304.   Officers.
§
23-305.   Meetings.
§
23-306.   Removal of members.
Part 4
First Energy Stadium Commission
§
23-401.   Creation and members.
§
23-402.   Appointments and vacancies.
§
23-403.   Removal of members.
§
23-404.   Compensation.
§
23-405.   Officers and procedural rules.
§
23-406.   Powers and duties.
Part 5
Human Relations Commission; Discrimination
§
23-501.   Legislative findings and declaration of policy.
§
23-502.   Scope.
§
23-503.   Definitions.
§
23-504.   Human Relations Commission.
§
23-505.   Powers and duties of Commission.
§
23-506.   Unlawful employment practices.
§
23-507.   Unlawful housing practices.
§
23-508.   Unlawful lending practices.
§
23-509.   Unlawful public accommodation practices.
§
23-510.   Obstruction of fair practices.
§
23-511.   City contracts.
§
23-512.   Procedure.
§
23-513.   Enforcement.
§
23-514.   Violations and penalties.
Part 6
Charter Board
§
23-601.   Title; purpose.
§
23-602.   Organization of Charter Board.
§
23-603.   Powers and duties of Charter Board.
§
23-604.   Standards for interpretation of Reading City Charter and
Administrative Code.
§
23-605.   Enforcement.
§
23-606.   Educational duties of Charter Board.
Part 7
Equal Business Opportunity Advisory Board
§
23-701.   Policy.
§
23-702.   Definitions.
§
23-703.   Purpose.
§
23-704.   Membership and Officers.
§
23-705.   Meetings.
§
23-706.   Powers and duties of Board.
§
23-707.   City contracts.
Part 8
Board of Health
§
23-801.   Establishment; members.
§
23-802.   Purpose.
§
23-803.   Organization.
§
23-804.   Powers and duties.
§
23-805.   Meetings.
§
23-806.   Advisors.
Part 9
Blighted Property Review Committee
§
23-901.   Short title.
§
23-902.   Purpose.
§
23-903.   Creation, members, duties, term and expenditures.
§
23-904.   Definitions.
§
23-905.   Blighted property removal.
§
23-906.   Restrictions.
§
23-907.   Reuse of acquired property.
§
23-908.   Conflict with other laws.
Part 10
Diversity Board
§
23-1001.   Purpose.
§
23-1002.   Responsibilities.
§
23-1003.   Membership; removal.
§
23-1004.   Organization of Board.
§
23-1005.   Powers and duties.
§
23-1006.   Meetings.
§
23-1007.   Expenditures for services.
Part 11
Environmental Advisory Council
§
23-1101.   Purpose.
§
23-1102.   Membership.
§
23-1103.   Meetings and voting.
§
23-1104.   Officers and compensation.
§
23-1105.   Duties.
§
23-1106.   Bylaws.
§
23-1107.   Hearings.
§
23-1108.   Intermunicipal cooperation.
Part 12
Downtown Revitalization Public Private Partnership
§
23-1201.   Authorization.
§
23-1202.   Officers.
§
23-1203.   Committees.
§
23-1204.   Quorum.
§
23-1205.   Purpose.
§
23-1206.   Duties.
Part 13
Audit Committee
§
23-1301.   Purpose.
§
23-1302.   Membership.
§
23-1303.   Functions.
§
23-1304.   Authority.
Part 14
Code and License Appeals Board
§
23-1401.   Organization.
§
23-1402.   Powers.
Part 15
Youth Commission
§
23-1501.   Purpose.
§
23-1502.   Youth Commission Members.
§
23-1503.   City Council Liaison.
§
23-1504.   Meetings.
§
23-1505.   Duties and functions.
§
23-1506.   Removal of members.
[HISTORY: Adopted by the City Council of the City of Reading as indicated in
part histories. Amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Board of Ethics — See
Ch. 5, Part 10.
Officers and Employees Retirement Board — See
Ch. 62, Part 2.
Firemen's Pension Fund Board of Managers — See
Ch. 62, Part 3.
Animal Control Board — See
Ch. 141, Part 2.
Board of Appeals — See
Ch. 180.
Board of Historical Architectural Review — See
Ch. 295.
Board of Trustees of the Reading Public Library — See
Ch. 332.
Shade Tree Commission — See
Ch. 555.
STATE LAW REFERENCES
Planning Commission — See 53 P.S. § 10201 et seq.
Sunshine Act/Open Meeting Law — See 65 Pa.C.S.A. § 701 et seq.
Human Relations Act — See 43 P.S. § 951 et seq.
Rental housing discrimination — See 35 P.S. § 1680.402a et seq.
Service uniform discrimination — See 18 Pa.C.S.A. § 7323. Blighted properly
removal — See 35 P.S. § 1712.1.
Board of Health — See 53 P.S. § 37301 et seq.
Municipalities Financial Recovery Act — See 53 P.S. § 11701.101 et seq.
Part 1
Planning Commission
[Adopted 2-18-1914 by Ord. No. 46a; amended in its entirety 12-13-2010 by Ord.
No. 103-2010; amended 1-10-2022 by Ord. No. -2022; 10-10-2022 by Ord. No. 118-
2022; (
Ch. 1, Part 5G, of the 2001 Code of Ordinances)]
§ 23-101. Creation of Commission.
A City Planning Commission to be composed of seven members, appointed as
provided by law (53 P.S. § 10202), is hereby created in and for the City. The
Planning Commission shall perform all duties and may exercise all powers
conferred by law upon City planning agencies; provided, the Planning Commission
previously created in and for the said City shall constitute the tenure of any
of the members thereof, but any and all vacancies in the said Commission,
hereafter occurring, shall be filled in the manner and for the term provided in
the law governing City planning commissions in effect at the time of the
happening of said vacancy.
§ 23-102. Removal of members.
Any member may be removed for malfeasance, misfeasance or nonfeasance in office
or for other just cause by a majority vote of Council taken after the member
has received 15 days' advance notice of the intent to take such vote, as per
the PA Municipalities Planning Code. Failure of a member to attend three
consecutive regular meetings of the Planning Commission will constitute grounds
for immediate removal from the Planning Commission by City Council. Failure of
a member to attend at least 50% of the regular meetings of the Planning
Commission in a calendar year will constitute grounds for immediate removal
from the Planning Commission by City Council. The Chairperson of the Planning
Commission shall inform the City Clerk in writing when a member has failed to
comply with this attendance policy. Following such notification, City Council
may vote to remove the member and seek applicants to fill the vacant position.
Part 2
Penn Square Commission
[Adopted 3-19-1975 by Ord. No. 10-1975 by Ord. No. 10-1975; amended in its
entirety 5-29-2001 by Ord. No. 14-2001 (
Ch. 1, Part 5F, of the 2001 Code of Ordinances)]
§ 23-201. Creation and name.
There is hereby created, pursuant to the provisions of the Third Class City
Code, 1  to be known as "The Penn Square Commission of the City of Reading,"
hereinafter referred to as "Commission."
1.   Editor's Note: See 11 Pa.C.S. §§ 10101 et seq.
§ 23-202. Purpose.
The purpose of the Penn Square Commission is to organize, promote and give
direction to the efforts of both private and public organizations interested in
fostering the civic, social, cultural and economic development within the
City's new public commons in its downtown area; and to renew, preserve and
enhance the economic and aesthetic value of the City's central business
district.
§ 23-203. Powers and duties.
   A.   The Penn Square Commission shall administer and supervise the use,
operation and maintenance of Penn Square, Market Square and such other public
spaces as may be designated by resolution of Council. The powers and duties of
the Commission shall include, without limiting the generality of the foregoing,
the establishment of use, operation and maintenance policies; the promotion of
activities; solicitation of funds; the procurement and scheduling of all
programs and events; the issuance of use permits; the establishment of a
schedule of rental rates and charges; and the establishment of rules of conduct
and safety. Provided, however, any leases or contracts in excess of one year
shall be subject to the approval of Council.
   B.   The Commission, within the annual budgetary appropriations established
by Council, may employ such persons and make such expenditures as may be
necessary for the conduct of all business within its jurisdiction. Any such
persons employed by the Commission shall be subject to the wages, hours and
conditions of employment as established by Council. The Commission shall submit
to Council, not later than October 1 of each year, its recommendations for the
budgetary appropriations, the personnel complement, and the wage and salary
classifications within its jurisdiction for the succeeding year. The Commission
shall make an annual report to Council in December of each year on the
operations of the Commission.
§ 23-204. Membership.
Membership on the Penn Square Commission shall consist of 11 residents and/or
business persons engaged in business in Downtown Reading, at least six of whom
shall be residents of the City. At least five such members, if available, shall
be members of the Reading Market Association (RMA) or equivalent downtown
business organization. At least one such member, if available, shall be a
representative of the Chamber of Commerce of Reading and Berks County. All
members of the Commission shall be appointed by the Mayor with the approval of
Council.
§ 23-205. Term of office.
The initial appointment of members serving on the Penn Square Commission shall
consist of three members appointed for a term of one year, two of whom shall be
representatives of the Chamber of Commerce of Reading and Berks County and
Downtown Association of Reading Endeavors; two members appointed for a term of
two years; and two members appointed for a term of three years. Thereafter, the
representatives from the Chamber of Commerce of Reading and Berks County shall
be appointed on an annual basis for one year and the remaining 10 members shall
be appointed for a term of two years and shall serve until their successors are
appointed. Any vacancy occurring other than by expiration of term shall be
filled by appointment for the unexpired term in the manner as provided herein
for original appointments.
§ 23-206. Compensation.
The members of the Penn Square Commission shall serve without compensation.
§ 23-207. Conduct of business.
The members of the Penn Square Commission shall elect their own Chairman and
Secretary and shall select all other officers necessary to conduct business, to
serve for a term not exceeding the term of their appointment. The Commission
shall adopt rules and regulations for its internal organization and procedure
and for the conduct of all business within its jurisdiction. The Commission in
its discretion may appoint persons to act as advisors to subcommittees
appointed by the Commission.
§ 23-208. Indemnification.
The City shall indemnify and save harmless any officer, director or member of
the Penn Square Commission from and against any claims or liabilities
(including reasonable attorney fees) on any judgment, decree, fine or penalties
imposed on him for any act or omission committed or incurred while acting as
such, and reimburse him for all legal and other expenses reasonably incurred by
him in defense thereof, at such terms as provided by governing law; provided
that there shall be no obligation to reimburse, partially or wholly, such
persons for claims or liabilities determined by a court to have constituted
willful misconduct or recklessness.
Part 3
Citizen’s Initiative Commission
[Adopted 5-22-17 by Ord. 46-2017]
§ 23-301. Creation.
City Council creates a Citizen Initiative Commission to act as a communication
vehicle between City government and City residents on City-wide policies and
issues related to neighborhood quality of life and economic health programs as
well as assisting in an advisory capacity with any other community issues or
programs.
§ 23-302. Purpose.
The Citizens Initiative Commission shall work to improve the overall
effectiveness of local government by:
   A.   Recommending policy changes to the Administration and legislative
recommendations to City Council.
   B.   Suggesting operational improvements to the Administration.
   C.   Educating the general public on the mechanics of City government, as
well as the status of major issues being addressed by City government.
   D.   Shall dedicate one session annually to review the Charter.
§ 23-303. Citizen Initiatives Commission Appointments.
   A.   Two members of City Council shall be appointed by City Council as
liaisons to the Commission.
   B.   Three citizens shall be appointed by the Mayor for four-year terms and
affirmed by City Council.
   C.   Six citizens, one citizen nominated by each of the six District
Councilors shall be appointed by City Council for four-year terms.
   D.   Each member shall continue to serve until a successor is duly appointed
or until some other formal action is taken by Council.
   E.   The terms of the initial members shall be staggered, with one member
serving a term of one year, one member serving for two years, and one members
serving for three years.
   F.   Members may be appointed to successive terms with no term limits.
   G.   A simple majority shall constitute a quorum.
   H.   Any member absent from three consecutive regularly scheduled meetings
shall be recommended to Council for formal dismissal.
   I.   All appointees must have been City residents for a minimum of one year
prior to their appointment and they must remain a City resident to remain a
viable member of the Citizens Initiative Commission.
§ 23-304. Officers.
   A.   The Commission will establish their own operational procedures and
elect both a Chairman and Vice Chairman to facilitate committee activities.
   B.   The Chair shall preside at all meetings of the Commission and shall
have the duties and powers normally invested in the office of Chair. He or she
shall enforce the adopted operational procedures and regulations of the
Commission and shall be the official spokesperson for the Commission,
   C.   The Vice-Chair shall carry out the Chair’s duties in case of absence,
incapacity, or resignation.
   D.   The Commission shall elect a Secretary who will be responsible for
keeping the official minutes of the Commission and for preparing all
correspondence on behalf of the Commission.
§ 23-305. Meetings.
   A.   All Citizens Initiative Commission meetings shall adhere to State
regulations as defined in the Act of June 3,1986, P.L. 388, No. 84, known as
the “Sunshine Act,” 65 Pa.C.S. §§ 701 et seq.
   B.   Regular meetings of the Commission shall be determined by the
membership. Notices of meetings will be posted on the City of Reading website.
   C.   Minutes from meetings will be kept and copies of the meeting minutes
will be sent to the City Clerk’s office when they are distributed to the
members.
§ 23-306. Removal of members.
[Added 7-8-2024 by Ord. No. 34A-2024]
Any member may be removed for misconduct or neglect of duty or for other just
cause by a majority vote of Council taken after the member has received 15
days' advance notice of the intent to take such vote. Failure of a member to
attend three consecutive regular meetings of the Commission will constitute
grounds for immediate removal from the Commission by City Council. Failure of a
member to attend at least 50% of the regular meetings of the Commission in a
calendar year will constitute grounds for immediate removal from the Commission
by City Council. The Chairperson of the Commission shall inform the City Clerk
in writing when a member has failed to comply with this attendance policy.
Following such notification, City Council may vote to remove the member and
seek applicants to fill the vacant position.
Part 4
First Energy Stadium Commission
[Adopted 2-28-2000 by Ord. No. 2-2000 (Ch. 1, Part 5I, of the 2001 Code of
Ordinances); amended in its entirety 10-13-2014 by Ord. No. 74-2014; 3-28-2016
by Ord. No. 8-2016; 1-23-2017 by Ord. 4-2017]
§ 23-401. Creation and members.
[Amended 10-26-2020 by Ord. No. 67-2020]
A First Energy Stadium Commission (“Commission”) is hereby created which shall
consist of five qualified electors of the City of Reading (“City”) to serve as
liaison between the “City” and the Reading Fightin Phils or other baseball
franchise organization.
§ 23-402. Appointments and vacancies.
The members of the Commission shall be appointed by the Mayor and confirmed
(four affirmative votes) by Council. Three of the members first appointed under
this section shall serve for terms of one year, three for terms of three years,
and three for terms of five years, respectively, from the date of the approval
of this section and until their respective successors have been duly appointed.
Appointments of successors, in each case, will be for a period of five years.
Any vacancy occurring otherwise than by expiration of term shall be filled for
the unexpired term in the same manner as original appointments. An ex-officio
member representing the Public Works Department will be designated by the Mayor
and an ex-officio member representing Council will be appointed via resolution.
§ 23-403. Removal of members.
Any member may be removed for misconduct or neglect of duty or for other just
cause by a majority vote of Council taken after the member has received 15
days' advance notice of the intent to take such vote. Failure of a member to
attend three consecutive regular meetings of the Board will constitute grounds
for immediate removal from the Commission by City Council. Failure of a member
to attend at least 50% of the regular meetings of the Board in a calendar year
will constitute grounds for immediate removal from the Commission by City
Council. The Chairperson of the Board shall inform the City Clerk in writing
when a member has failed to comply with this attendance policy. Following such
notification, City Council may vote to remove the member and seek applicants to
fill the vacant position.
§ 23-404. Compensation.
Members of the Commission shall serve without compensation.
§ 23-405. Officers and procedural rules.
The members of the Commission shall elect their own Chairman and Vice Chairman/
Secretary and select all other necessary officers to serve for a period of one
year. The Commission shall adopt rules and regulations for its internal
organization and procedure and for the conduct of all business within its
jurisdiction.
§ 23-406. Powers and duties.
[Amended 9-14-2020 by Ord. No. 61-2020]
   A.   The Commission, in cooperation with the City and the Reading Fightin
Phils or other baseball franchise organization, shall supervise the operation
of the First Energy Stadium. The Commission will assist the City and the
Reading Fightin Phils or other baseball franchise organizationin identifying
the capital needs and repairs for the stadium, as listed in the revised and
restated lease agreement dated October 25, 1999, "lease agreement." The
Commission shall define capital project with the Reading Fightin Phils or other
baseball franchise organization and shall submit to the Public Works Director
and City Council, no later than July 1 of each year, its recommendation for
capital repairs and improvements to the stadium for inclusion in the City's
operating budget and five-year capital plan.
   B.   The lease agreement transfers the responsibility of the beer sales from
the City and the prior Stadium Commission to the Reading Fightin Phils or other
baseball franchise organization. The $4,200 retained by the prior Stadium
Commission to purchase beer products for the 2000 season shall be placed in an
account titled “Stadium Capital” within the City’s Capital Improvement Project
fund. These monies will be expended for the capital repairs to the stadium as
identified by the Commission, Reading Fightin Phils or other baseball franchise
organization and approved by the Public Works Operations Division Manager, as
outlined in the lease agreement. This account will remain independent from all
other City accounts and funds and will not be combined with the City’s general
fund at the end of any fiscal year. The City administration will appropriate a
minimum of $5,000 per year in this account for each fiscal year.
C.   The Commission will supply a copy of all meeting minutes to the City Clerk
and shall make an annual report to Council on the operations of the Commission.
Part 5
Human Relations Commission; Discrimination
[Adopted 3-13-2002 by Ord. No. 6-2002 (
Ch. 1, Part 5C, of the 2001 Code of Ordinances)]
§ 23-501. Legislative findings and declaration of policy.
[Amended 9-28-2009 by Ord. No. 53-2009]
   A.   Legislative findings.
      (1)   The population of the City consists of people of many races,
colors, religions, ancestries, sexual orientations, gender identities or
expressions, national origins, ages, sex and familial status. Some suffer from
handicaps. Others have previously filed charges of discrimination with the
Commission of Human Relations or a similar state or federal agency. Some of
these citizens, for one or more of the above mentioned reasons, are
discriminated against in employment opportunities, places of business, public
accommodations, resort, recreation and amusement, housing facilities and the
obtaining of loans and the extending of credit for housing accommodations.
      (2)   Discrimination because of race, color, religion, ancestry, sexual
orientation, gender identity or expression, national origin, age, sex, familial
status, handicap or previous opposition to individual discriminatory practices
is contrary to the constitutions, laws and policies of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania and the United States of America.
      (3)   Discrimination in employment prevents the gainful employment of
segments of the residents of the City, tends to impair the City's productive
capacity, reduces the public revenues, imposes substantial financial burden
upon the public for relief and welfare, and tends to create breaches of the
peace and depressed living conditions which breed crime, vice, juvenile
delinquency and disease, and is detrimental to the public safety, economic
growth and general welfare of the City.
      (4)   Discrimination in housing results in overcrowded, segregated areas
with substandard, unsafe, and unsanitary living conditions, which cause
increased mortality, disease, crime, vice and juvenile delinquency, fires and
risk of fire, intergroup tensions and other evils, all of which increase the
cost of government and reduce the public revenues, and result in injury to the
public safety, health and welfare of the City.
      (5)   Discrimination in places of public accommodation, resort,
recreation, amusement and places of business, causes humiliation, embarrassment
and inconvenience to residents and visitors of the City, tends to create
breaches of the peace, intergroup tensions and conflicts and similar evils, and
is detrimental to the public safety, general welfare and economic growth of the
City.
   B.   Declaration of policy.
      (1)   It is hereby declared to be the policy of the City, in the exercise
of its powers for the protection of the public safety and the general welfare,
for the maintenance of peace and good government and for the promotion of the
City's trade, commerce and manufacture, to assure the right and opportunity of
all persons to participate in the social, cultural, recreational and economic
life of the City and to insure equal opportunity for all persons to live in
decent housing facilities, free from restrictions because of race, color,
religion, ancestry, sexual orientation, gender identity or expression, national
origin, age, sex, familial status, handicap or previous filing of a complaint
of discrimination.
      (2)   To accomplish these goals, it shall be the public policy of the
City to prohibit discrimination because of race, color, religion, ancestry,
sexual orientation, gender identity or expression, national origin, age, sex,
familial status, handicap or previous filing of a complaint of discrimination
in employment, housing and places of business, public accommodation, resort,
recreation or amusement.
§ 23-502. Scope.
This Part applies to discriminatory practices including, but not limited to,
discrimination in employment, housing and public accommodations, including
places of business, which occur within the territorial limits of the City and
to employment, contracted for, performed or to be performed within these
limits, and to housing accommodations and places of business, public
accommodation, resort, recreation and amusement located within the territorial
limits of the City.
§ 23-503. Definitions.
[Amended 9-28-2009 by Ord. No. 53-2009]
As used in this Part, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated,
unless a different meaning clearly appears from context:
   ACCESSIBLE — When used with respect to the public and common use areas of a
building containing covered multifamily dwellings, means that the public or
common use areas of the building can be approached, entered, and used by
individuals with physical handicaps. 2
2.   Editor's Note: Amended during codification (see
Ch. 1, General Provisions, Part 2).
   AGE — Includes any person 40 and above and shall also include any other
person so protected by further amendment to the Federal Age Discrimination in
the Employment Act.
   AGGRIEVED PERSON — Such person or persons who believe that they have been
injured or will be injured by a discriminatory employment, housing or public
accommodations act or practice that has occurred or is about to occur.
   COMMISSION — The Commission of Human Relations established in the office of
the Mayor of the City by this Part.
   COMPENSATORY DAMAGES — A sum of money awarded in a civil action by a court
to indemnify a person for the particular loss, detriment or injury suffered as
a result of the unlawful conduct of another. [Added 7-11-2011 by Ord. No. 31A-
2011]
   COMPLAINANT — The person (including the Commission) who files a complaint
under §
23-512. [Added 7-11-2011 by Ord. No. 31A-2011]
   CONCILIATION — The attempted resolution of issues raised by a complaint, or
by the investigation of such complaint, through informal negotiations involving
the aggrieved person, the respondent, and the Commission. [Added 7-11-2011 by
Ord. No. 31A-2011]
   CONCILIATION AGREEMENT — A written agreement setting forth the resolution of
the issues in conciliation. [Added 7-11-2011 by Ord. No. 31A-2011]
   DISCRIMINATE and DISCRIMINATION — Includes any difference in treatment based
on race, color, religion, ancestry, sexual orientation, gender identity or
expression, national origin, age, sex, familial status, handicap or previous
filing of a complaint of discrimination.
   DISCRIMINATORY HOUSING PRACTICE — An act that is either unlawful under the
provisions of this Part or is unlawful under §§ 804, 805, 806 or 818 of the
Federal Fair Housing Act, or § 955 or 955(h) of the Pennsylvania Human
Relations Act. 3
3.   Editor's Note: See 43 P.S. § 955 or 955(h).
   DWELLING — Any building, structure, or portion thereof which is occupied as,
or designed or intended for occupancy as a residence by one or more families
and any vacant land which is offered for sale or lease for the construction or
location thereon of any such building, structure or portion thereof. [Added 7-
11-2011 by Ord. No. 31A-2011]
   EMPLOYER — Any person who employs five or more employees, exclusive of the
parents, spouse or children of such person, including the City, its department,
boards, commissions and authorities, and any other governmental agency within
its jurisdiction. The term "employer," with respect to discriminatory practices
based on a class protected under this Part, includes religious, fraternal,
charitable and sectarian corporations and associations employing four or more
persons in the City.
   EMPLOYMENT AGENCY — Any person regularly undertaking, with or without
compensation, to procure opportunities for employment or to procure, recruit,
refer or place employees.
   FAMILIAL STATUS — One or more individuals, who have not obtained the age of
18 years being domiciled with:
   A.   A parent or another person having legal custody of such individual or
individuals.
   B.   The designee of such parent or other person having such custody, with
the written permission of such parent or other person.
   C.   Any person who is pregnant or is in the process of securing legal
custody of any individual who has not attained the age of 18 years.
   FAMILY — Includes a single individual. [Added 7-11-2011 by Ord. No. 31A-
2011]
   FEDERAL FAIR HOUSING ACT — Title VIII of the Civil Rights Act of 1968, as
amended by the Fair Housing Amendments Act of 1988, 42 U.S.C. §§ 3600 through
3620.
   GENDER IDENTITY OR EXPRESSION — The actual or perceived gender identity,
appearance, behavior, expression or physical characteristics whether or not
associated with an individual's assigned sex at birth.
   HANDICAP — With respect to a person, a physical or mental impairment which
substantially limits one or more major life activities, a record of having such
an impairment, or being regarded as having such an impairment, but such term
does not include current or illegal use of addiction to a controlled substance
(as defined in the Pennsylvania Consolidated Statutes). [Amended 7-11-2011 by
Ord. No. 31A-2011]
   HOUSING ACCOMMODATION — Any building, structure, or portion thereof which is
occupied as or designed or intended for occupancy as a resident by one or more
families, and any vacant land which is offered for sale or lease for the
construction or location thereon of any such building, structure, or portion
thereof.
   LABOR ORGANIZATION — Any organization which exists for the purpose, in whole
or in part, of collective bargaining or of dealing with employers concerning
grievances, terms of conditions of employment, or of other mutual aid or
protection in relation to employment.
   LENDING INSTITUTION — Any bank, insurance company, savings and loan
association, or any other person regularly engaged in the business of lending
money or guaranteeing loans.
   NON-JOB-RELATED HANDICAP OR DISABILITY — Any handicap or disability which
does not substantially interfere with the ability to perform the essential
functions of the employment which a handicapped person applies for, is engaged
in, or has been engaged in. Uninsurability or increased cost of insurance under
a group or employee insurance plan does not render a handicap or disability
job-related.
   OWNER — Includes the owner, co-owner, lessee, sublessee, mortgagee,
assignee, manager, agent or any other person having equitable or security
interest in any housing accommodation, including the City and its departments,
boards, commissions and authorities.
   PENNSYLVANIA HUMAN RELATIONS ACT — The Act of 1955, October 27, P.L. 744,
No. 222, § 1, as amended, 43 P.S. § 951 et seq.
   PERSON — Any individual, partnership, corporation, labor organization or
other organization or association including those acting in a fiduciary or
representative capacity, whether appointed by a court or otherwise. The term
"person," as applied to partnerships or other organizations or associations,
includes their members, and as applied to corporations, includes their
officers.
   PUBLIC ACCOMMODATION, RESORT OR AMUSEMENT — Any accommodation, resort or
amusement which is open to, accepts or solicits the patronage of the general
public including, but not limited to, inns, taverns, hotels, motels, whether
conducted for the entertainment of transient guests or for the accommodation of
those seeking health, recreation or rest, or consumption on the premises; bars,
stores, parks or anywhere that liquor is sold; ice cream parlors, soda
fountains and all stores where beverages of any kind are sold for consumption
on the premises; drugstores, clinics, hospitals, swimming pools; barber shops,
beauty parlors; retail stores; theaters, movie houses; race courses, skating
rinks, amusement, recreation parks and fairs; bowling alleys, gymnasiums,
shooting galleries and billiard and pool halls; public libraries,
kindergartens, primary and secondary schools, high schools, academies, colleges
and universities, extension courses and all education institutions under the
supervision of this City; nonsectarian cemeteries; garages and all public
conveyances operated on land or water or in the air as well as the stations,
terminals and airports thereof; financial institutions; and all City facilities
and services including such facilities and services of all political
subdivisions thereof; but shall not include any accommodations which are in the
nature distinctly private.
   REAL ESTATE BROKER — Any natural person, partnership, corporation or other
association which for a fee or other valuable consideration manages, sells,
purchases, exchanges or rents or negotiates, or offers or attempts to negotiate
the sale, purchase, exchange or rental of, the real property of another, or
holds itself out as engaged in the business of managing, selling, purchasing,
exchanging or renting the real property of another, or collects rent for the
use of the real property of another, and includes real estate salesmen or
agents or any other person employed by real estate broker to perform or to
assist in the performance of his business.
   RESPONDENT — The person or other entity in a complaint of an unfair housing
or employment practice and any other person or entity identified in the course
of investigation and notified as required with respect to respondents so
identified under §
23-512. [Added 7-11-2011 by Ord. No. 31A-2011]
   SEXUAL ORIENTATION — Actual or perceived heterosexuality, homosexuality or
bisexuality.
§ 23-504. Human Relations Commission.
   A.   There is hereby established in the City of Reading, under the
supervision of the Managing Director, a Human Relations Commission to
administer, implement and enforce the provisions of this Part.
   B.   The Commission shall consist of seven members each to be appointed by
the Mayor for a four-year term. Commissioners may be reappointed to successive
terms of office. Each member of the Commission shall continue to serve after
his term until his successor has been appointed and qualified. Vacant seats on
the Commission shall be filled within 90 days. [Amended 7-11-2011 by Ord. No.
31A-2011]
   C.   The Commission shall elect one of its members as Chairman and may elect
such other officers as it may deem necessary. The Chairman may, with the
approval of the Commission, appoint such committees as may be necessary to
carry out the powers and duties of the Commission, and the Commission may
authorize such committees to take any necessary action for the Commission.
   D.   The Commission shall adopt such rules and regulations for its own
organization, operations and procedures as the Commission shall deem necessary
to administer, implement and enforce this Part.
   E.   The Commission shall hold at least eight meetings during each calendar
year. Four members of the Commission, or a majority of current Commission
members, shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of business, and a
majority vote of those present at any meeting shall be sufficient for any
official action taken by the Commission. [Amended 7-11-2011 by Ord. No. 31A-
2011]
   F.   The members of the Commission shall serve without compensation, but
upon resolution of Council, they may be reimbursed for all necessary expenses
incurred in the performance of their duties in accordance with appropriations
made by Council.
   G.   In the event no Commissioner shall be able and available to exercise
any of the powers or fulfill any of the duties of the Commission as set forth
in §
23-505, the Mayor may appoint one or more Commissioners temporarily to assume
the powers and/or fulfill the duties of the Commission. Such appointment may be
limited in duration of term and in scope of the power and duties of any
Commissioner so appointed.
   H.   Removal of members. Any member may be removed for misconduct or neglect
of duty or for other just cause by a majority vote of Council taken after the
member has received 15 days' advance notice of the intent to take such vote.
Failure of a member to attend three consecutive regular meetings of the
Commission will constitute grounds for immediate removal from the Commission by
City Council. Failure of a member to attend at least 50% of the regular
meetings of the Commission in a calendar year will constitute grounds for
immediate removal from the Commission by City Council. The Chairperson of the
Commission shall inform the City Clerk in writing when a member has failed to
comply with this attendance policy. Following such notification, City Council
may vote to remove the member and seek applicants to fill the vacant position.
[Amended 7-26-2010 by Ord. No. 38-20104]
4.   Editor's Note: Amended during codification (see
Ch. 1, General Provisions, Part 2).
§ 23-505. Powers and duties of Commission.
The Human Relations Commission shall have the power and it shall be its duty
to:
   A.   Initiate, receive, investigate and seek the satisfactory adjustment of
complaints charging unlawful practices, as set forth in this Part.
   B.   Issue subpoenas for persons and for documents which may be necessary to
properly investigate a complaint of discrimination filed pursuant to this Part.
Commissioners may not be subpoenaed to testify, nor may a Commissioner be
deposed or otherwise interrogated with respect to any action taken on behalf of
the Commission. In case of contumacy or refusal to obey a subpoena issued to
any person, any court of jurisdiction, upon application by the Commission, may
issue to such person an order requiring such person to appear before the
Commission there to produce documentary evidence, if so ordered, or there to
give evidence touching the matter in question, and any failure to obey such
order of the court may be punished by said court as a contempt thereof. Any
complaint filed under this subsection which the Commission believes may
constitute a violation of a law of the United States of America or the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania may be certified to the City Solicitor for such
actions as he may deem proper. [Amended 6-25-2012 by Ord. No. 68-2012]
   C.   Hold public hearings, subpoena witnesses and compel their attendance,
administer oaths, take the testimony of any person under oath, and in
connection therewith require the production of evidence relating to any matter
under investigation or any question before the Commission, make findings of
fact, issue orders and publish such findings of fact and orders and do all
other things necessary and proper for the enforcement of this Part.
   D.   In the performance of its duties, the Commission may cooperate with
and, if appropriate, contact interested citizens, private agencies and agencies
of the federal, state and local governments, and enter into such agreements as
may be necessary to formalize such relationships.
   E.   Request staff, provided by the City to the Human Relations Commission,
other departments, boards and commissions of the City government to assist in
the performance of its duties, and such other departments, boards and
commissions shall cooperate fully with the Commission; to appoint attorneys and
hearing examiners and other employees and agents as it may deem necessary, fix
their compensation within the limitations provided by law and prescribe their
duties. [Amended 7-11-2011 by Ord. No. 31A-2011]
   F.   Hold investigative hearings upon request by Council in cases of racial
tension and/or discrimination.
   G.   Assist in the enforcement of fair practices in City contracts.
   H.   Render, from time to time, a written report of its activities and
recommendations to the Mayor and Council.
   I.   Adopt such rules and regulations as may be necessary to carry out the
purposes and provisions of this Part. Such rules and regulations shall be in
writing and be made available to parties upon request.
§ 23-506. Unlawful employment practices.
[Amended 9-28-2009 by Ord. No. 53-2009]
It shall be an unlawful employment practice, except where based upon applicable
national security regulations established by the United States, by the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, or by any political subdivision of the
commonwealth having jurisdiction in the City, or where based upon a bona fide
occupational qualification:
   A.   For any employment to refuse to hire any person or otherwise, to
discriminate against any person with respect to hiring, tenure, compensation,
promotion, discharge or any other terms, conditions or privileges directly or
indirectly related to employment because of race, color, religion, ancestry,
sexual orientation, gender identity or expression, national origin, age, sex,
familial status, non-job-related handicap, or previous filing of a complaint of
discrimination.
   B.   For any employer, employment agency or labor organization to establish,
announce or follow a policy of denying or limiting through a quota system or
otherwise, the employment or membership opportunities of any person or group of
persons because of race, color, religion, ancestry, sexual orientation, gender
identity or expression, national origin, age, sex, familial status, non-job-
related handicap or previous filing of a complaint of discrimination.
   C.   For any employer, labor organization, employment agency or any joint
labor management committee controlling apprentice training programs to deny or
to withhold from any person the right to be admitted to or participate in a
guidance program, an apprenticeship training program, and on the job training
program or any other occupational training program because of race, color,
religion, ancestry, sexual orientation, gender identity or expression, national
origin, age, sex, familial status, non-job-related handicap or previous filing
of a complaint of discrimination.
   D.   For any employer, employment agency or labor organization to require of
any applicant for employment or membership any information concerning race,
color, religion, ancestry, sexual orientation, gender identity or expression,
national origin, age, sex, familial status, non-job-related handicap, or
previous filing of a complaint of discrimination, except when necessary to
affirmatively promote minority hiring or promotion.
   E.   For any employer, employment agency or labor organization to publish or
circulate, or to cause to be published or circulated any notice or
advertisement relating to employment or membership which indicates any
discrimination because of race, color, religion, ancestry, sexual orientation,
gender identity or expression, national origin, age, sex, familial status, non-
job-related handicap or previous filing of a complaint of discrimination.
   F.   For any employment agency to fall or refuse to classify properly or
refer to employment or otherwise to discriminate against any person because of
race, color, religion, ancestry, sexual orientation, gender identity or
expression, national origin, age, sex, familial status, non-job-related
handicap or previous filing of a complaint of discrimination.
   G.   For any employer to confine or limit recruitment or hiring of
employees, with intent to circumvent the spirit and purpose of this Part, to
any employment agency, employment service, labor organization, training school,
training center or any other employee referring source which serves persons who
are predominantly of the same race, color, religion, ancestry, sexual
orientation, gender identity or expression, national origin, age, sex, familial
status, non-job-related handicap or previous filing of a complaint of
discrimination.
   H.   For any labor organization to discriminate against any person in any
way which would deprive or limit his employment opportunities or otherwise
adversely affect this status as an applicant for employment or as an employee
with regard to tenure, compensation, promotion, discharge or any other terms,
conditions or privileges directly or indirectly related to employment because
of race, color, religion, ancestry, sexual orientation, gender identity or
expression, national origin, age, sex, familial status, non-job-related
handicap or previous filing of a complaint of discrimination.
   I.   For any employer, employment agency or labor organization to
discriminate against any person because he has opposed any practice forbidden
by this Part or because he had made a complaint or testified or assisted in any
manner in any investigation or proceeding under this Part or a substantially
similar state and/or federal law.
   J.   For any person, whether or not an employer, employment agency or labor
organization, to aid, incite, compel, coerce or participate in the doing of any
act declared to be unlawful employment practice by this Part or to obstruct or
prevent any person from enforcing or complying with the provisions of this Part
or any rule, regulation or order of the Commission, or to attempt, directly or
indirectly, to commit any act declared by this Part to be an unlawful
employment practice.
   K.   Notwithstanding any provision of this section, it shall not be an
unlawful employment practice for a religious corporation or association to hire
or employ any person on the basis of the sex or religion of that person in
those certain instances where sex or religion is a bona fide occupational
qualification because of the religious beliefs, practices or observances of the
corporation or association.
§ 23-507. Unlawful housing practices.
[Amended 9-28-2009 by Ord. No. 53-2009]
It shall be an unlawful housing practice except as otherwise provided in this
section:
   A.   For an owner, real estate broker or any other person to refuse to sell,
lease, sublease, rent, assign or otherwise transfer, or to refuse to negotiate
for the sale, lease, sublease, rental, assignment or other transfer of the
title, leasehold, or other interest in any housing accommodation to any person,
or to represent that any housing accommodation is not available for any
inspection, sale, lease, sublease, rental, assignment or other transfer when in
fact it is so available, or otherwise make unavailable any housing
accommodation from any person because of race, color, religion, ancestry,
sexual orientation, gender identity or expression, national origin, age, sex,
familial status, handicap (of the buyer, renter, a person residing in or
intending to reside in the dwelling after it is sold, rented or made available,
or any person associated with that person), or previous filing of a complaint
of discrimination, or to discriminate against, segregate or assign quotas to
any person or group of persons in connection with the sale, lease, sublease,
rental, assignment or other transfer of the title, leasehold, or other interest
in any housing accommodation or housing accommodations.
   B.   For any person, including any owner or real estate broker, to include
in the terms, conditions or privileges of any sale, lease, sublease, rental,
assignment or other transfer of any housing accommodation any clause, condition
or restriction discriminating against, or requiring any other person to
discriminate against, any person in the use or occupancy of such housing
accommodation because of race, color, religion, ancestry, sexual orientation,
gender identity or expression, national origin, age or sex, familial status,
handicap (of the buyer, renter, a person residing in or intending to reside in
the dwelling after it is sold, rented or made available, or any person
associated with that person) or previous filing of a complaint of
discrimination.
   C.   For any person, including any owner or real estate broker, to
discriminate in the furnishing of any facilities or services for any housing
accommodation because of race, color, religion, ancestry, sexual orientation,
gender identity or expression, national origin, age, sex, familial status,
handicap (of the buyer, renter, a person residing in or intending to reside in
the dwelling after it is sold, rented or made available, or any person
associated with that person) or previous filing of a complaint of
discrimination.
   D.   For any person to:
      (1)   Refuse to permit, at the expense of the handicapped person, the
making of reasonable modifications to the existing premises occupied or to be
occupied if such modifications may be necessary to afford the handicapped
person full enjoyment of the premises, except that, in the case of a rental,
the landlord may, when it is reasonable to do so, condition permission for the
requested modification on the renter's agreement to restore the interior of the
premises to the condition that existed prior to the modification, reasonable
wear and tear excepted.
      (2)   Refuse to make reasonable accommodations with respect to the rules,
policies, practices or services as necessary to afford a handicapped person
equal opportunity to use and enjoy a dwelling.
   E.   For any person to fail, in connection with the design and construction
of multifamily dwellings covered under the provisions of the Federal Fair
Housing Act, and after March 13, 1991, to design and construct dwellings in
such a manner that such dwellings are not accessible within the meaning of the
Federal Housing Act.
   F.   The dwellings have at least one building entrance on an accessible
reroute, unless it is impractical to do so because of the terrain or unusual
characteristics of the site:
      (1)   With respect to a dwelling with a building entrance on an
accessible route:
         (a)   The public use and common portions of the dwellings are readily
accessible and usable by handicapped persons.
         (b)   All the doors designed to allow passage into and within all
premises are sufficiently wide to allow passage by handicapped persons in
wheelchairs.
         (c)   All premises with covered multifamily dwelling units contain an
accessible route into and through the dwelling; light switches, electrical
outlets, thermostats and other environmental controls are in accessible
locations; there are reinforcements in the bathroom walls to allow later
installation of grab bars; and there are usable kitchens and bathrooms such
that an individual in a wheelchair can maneuver about the space. As used in
this section, the term "covered family dwellings" means buildings consisting of
four or more units if such buildings have one or more elevators and ground
floor units in other buildings consisting of four or more units.
   G.   For any person, including any owner or real estate broker, to publish,
circulate, issue or display, or cause to be published, circulated, issued or
displayed, any communication, notice, advertisement or sign of any kind
relating to the sale, rental, lease, sublease, assignment, transfer or listing
of a housing accommodation or accommodations which indicates any preference,
limitation, specification or discrimination based on race, color, religion,
ancestry, sexual orientation, gender identity or expression, national origin,
age, sex, familial status or handicap (of the buyer, renter, a person residing
in or intending to reside in the dwelling after it is sold, rented or made
available, or any person associated with that person).
   H.   For any person, including any bank, banking organization, mortgage
company, insurance company or other financial or lending institution, or any
agent or employee thereof, regardless of whether application is made for
financial assistance for the purchase, sale, lease, acquisition, brokering,
appraisal, construction, rehabilitation, repair, maintenance or the purchasing
of loans or providing other financial assistance for purchasing, constructing
improving, repairing or maintaining a dwelling or secured by residential real
estate of any housing accommodation or housing accommodations:
      (1)   To discriminate against any person or group of persons because of
race, color, religion, ancestry, sexual orientation, gender identity or
expression, national origin, age, sex, familial status, handicap (of the buyer,
renter, a person residing in or intending to reside in the dwelling after it is
sold, rented or made available, or any person associated with that person) or
previous filing of a complaint of discrimination of such person or group of
persons or of the prospective occupants or tenants of such housing
accommodation in the granting, withholding, extending, modifying or renewing,
or in the rates, terms, conditions or privileges of any such financial
assistance or in the extension of services in connection therewith.
      (2)   To use any form of application for such financial assistance or to
make any record of inquiry in connection with application for such financial
assistance which indicates, directly or indirectly, any limitation,
specification or discrimination.
   I.   For any real estate broker or real estate salesman or agent, or any
other person for business or economic purposes, to induce, directly or
indirectly, or to attempt to induce directly or indirectly, the sale or rental
or the listing for sale or rental, of a housing accommodation by representing
that a change has occurred or will or may occur with respect to racial,
religious or ethnic composition of the street, block, neighborhood or area in
which such housing accommodation is located, or to communicate to any
prospective purchaser or renter of a dwelling that he or she would not be
comfortable or compatible with existing residents of a community, neighborhood
or development because of race, color, religion, ancestry, sexual orientation,
gender identity or expression, national origin, sex, handicap, or familial
status.
   J.   For any person to deny another access to, or membership or
participation in a multiple listing service, real estate brokers organization,
or other service because of race, color, religion, ancestry, sexual
orientation, gender identity or expression, national origin, age, sex, familial
status, handicap or previous filing of a complaint of discrimination, or to
discriminate with respect to the terms or conditions of such access, membership
or participation therein because of race, color, religion, ancestry, sexual
orientation, gender identity or expression, national origin, age, sex, familial
status, handicap or previous filing of a complaint of discrimination, or to
discriminate with respect to the terms or conditions of such access, membership
or participation therein because of race, color, religion, ancestry, sexual
orientation, gender identity or expression, national origin, age, sex, familial
status, handicap or previous filing of a complaint of discrimination.
   K.   For any person, whether or not a real estate broker, real estate
salesman or agent, owner or lending institution to aid, incite, compel, coerce
or participate in the doing of any act declared to be an unlawful housing
practice under this Part, or to obstruct or prevent enforcement or compliance
with the provisions of this Part or any rule, regulation or order of the Human
Relations Commission, or to attempt, directly or indirectly, to commit any act
declared by this Part to be an unlawful housing practice.
   L.   For any person to coerce, intimidate, threaten or interfere with any
person in the exercise or enjoyment of, or on account of his having exercised
or enjoyed, or on account of his having aided or encouraged any other person in
the exercise or enjoyment of any right granted or protected by this Part.
   M.   For any person, based on the racial or ethnic composition of a
community, neighborhood or development, or based on the characteristics of an
individual or individuals which place such individual or individuals within a
class protected by this Part, to discriminate with respect to the provision of
municipal services or with respect to the provision of property, casualty,
fire, hazard or other similar insurance.
   N.   With respect to any property held for noncommercial purpose, nothing in
this section shall bar any religious or denomination, institution or
organization or charitable or educational organization which is operated,
supervised or controlled by or in connection with a religious organization or
any bona fide private or fraternal organization from limiting preference to
persons of the same religion or denomination or to members of such private or
fraternal organization or from making such selection as is reasonable for the
organization to promote the religious or fraternal principles, aims or purposes
for which such organization is established or maintained unless membership in
such religious or denominational institution or organization or charitable or
educational organization is restricted on account of race, color or national
origin.
§ 23-508. Unlawful lending practices.
[Amended 9-28-2009 by Ord. No. 53-2009]
It shall be an unlawful lending practice for a lending institution:
   A.   To deny, withhold, limit or otherwise discriminate against any person
or group of persons because of race, color, religion, ancestry, sexual
orientation, gender identity or expression, national origin, age, sex, familial
status, handicap (of the buyer, renter, a person residing in or intending to
reside in the dwelling after it is sold, rented or made available, or any
person associated with that person) or previous filing of a complaint of
discrimination, in lending money or extending credit.
   B.   To establish unequal terms or conditions in the contract for loans and
mortgages, or other extensions of credit because of race, color, religion,
ancestry, sexual orientation, gender identity or expression, national origin,
age, sex, familial status, handicap (of the buyer, renter, a person residing in
or intending to reside in the dwelling after it is sold, rented or made
available, or any person associated with that person) or previous filing of a
complaint of discrimination.
§ 23-509. Unlawful public accommodation practices.
[Amended 9-28-2009 by Ord. No. 53-2009]
It shall be an unlawful public accommodation practice:
   A.   For any owner, lessor, proprietor, manager, agent or employer of any
business or place of public accommodation, resort, recreation or amusement to:
      (1)   Refuse, withhold from or deny to any person because of his race,
color, religion, ancestry, sexual orientation, gender identity or expression,
national origin, age, sex, familial status handicap or previous filing of a
complaint of discrimination, either directly or indirectly, any of the
accommodations, advantages, facilities, services or privileges, products or
goods of such place of public accommodation, resort or amusement.
      (2)   Publish, circulate, issue, display, post or mail, either directly
or indirectly, any written or printed communication, notice or advertisement to
the effect that any of the accommodations advantages, facilities, goods,
products, services and privileges of any such place shall be refused, withheld
or denied to any person on account of race, color, religion, ancestry, sexual
orientation, gender identity or expression, national origin, age, sex, familial
status, handicap or previous filing of a complaint of discrimination, or that
the patronage of any person of any particular race, color, religion, ancestry,
national origin, age, sex, familial status, handicap or previous filing of a
complaint of discrimination is unwelcome, objectionable or not acceptable,
desired or solicited.
   B.   For any person, whether or not included in this section, to aid,
incite, compel, coerce or participate in the doing of any act declared to be an
unlawful public accommodations practice under this subsection.
§ 23-510. Obstruction of fair practices.
It shall be unlawful for any person, whether or not within the named
classifications set forth in this Part, to aid, incite, compel, coerce or
participate in the doing of any act declared to be an unlawful practice under
this Part, or to obstruct or prevent enforcement of compliance with the
provisions of this Part or any rule, regulation or order of the Human Relations
Commission or to attempt, directly or indirectly, to be an unlawful practice.
§ 23-511. City contracts.
   A.   All contracts of the City and its contracting agencies shall obligate
the contractor to comply with this Part and with any state or federal law or
laws or regulations relating to unlawful employment practices in connection
with any work to be performed thereunder, and shall require the contractor to
include a similar provision in all subcontracts.
   B.   The Human Relations Commission shall promulgate rules and regulations
for the processing of complaints of discrimination received under this section.
§ 23-512. Procedure.
   A.   A complaint charging that any person has engaged, is engaging or will
engage in any unlawful practice as set forth in this Part may be made by the
Human Relations Commission, or to the Commission by an aggrieved person or by
an organization which has one of its purposes the combating of discrimination
for the promotion of equal opportunities, and any complaint may be amended by
the complainant or the Commission at any time before final action has been
taken by the Commission, in accordance with such rules and regulations as the
Commission shall prescribe. No complaint shall be considered unless it is filed
with the Commission within 180 days after the occurrence of the alleged
unlawful practice.
   B.   The complaint shall be in writing, signed, verified and include the
name and address of the person or persons alleged to have committed the
unlawful practice and the particulars thereof, and such other information as
may be required by the Commission. [Amended 7-11-2011 by Ord. No. 31A-2011]
   C.   After the filing of any complaint, or whenever there is reason to
believe that an unlawful discriminatory practice has been committed, the
Commission shall make a prompt investigation in connection therewith. The
Commission shall commence proceedings on any formal complaint within 30 days of
the filing. Within 10 days of docketing the complaint, the parties shall each
receive a copy of the complaint along with a concise statement of the
procedural rights of such parties, unless otherwise impracticable to do so. The
respondent shall be afforded the right to file an answer to such complaint
within 10 days, but failure to file such answer shall not prevent the
Commission from commencing its investigation as provided herein. Upon filing of
the complaint, the Commission shall encourage voluntary and informed
predetermination settlements between parties. [Amended 7-11-2011 by Ord. No.
31A-2011]
   D.   The Commission shall institute and complete the investigation of any
formal complaint within 100 days of the filing of the formal complaint, unless
it is impracticable to do so. [Amended 7-11-2011 by Ord. No. 31A-2011]
   E.   If, pursuant to its investigation, the Commission shall determine that
there is no basis for the allegations in a complaint, the complaint shall be
dismissed and the complainant and respondent notified in writing of such
determination. Within 20 days from the receipt of such notice, the complainant
or his attorney, if any, may file with the Commission a request for review and
the Commission shall provide the parties and their attorneys an opportunity to
appear before the Commission or a member thereof for such purpose. After such a
review, the Commission may reverse its decision or, if the Commission or its
representative determines that there is no basis for the allegation, the
dismissal of the complaint shall be affirmed and there shall be no further
review of such decision.
   F.   If the Commission determines after investigation that probable cause
exists for the allegations made in the complaint, it shall promptly notify the
parties in writing and may attempt to eliminate the alleged unlawful practice
by means of private conferences, meetings or conciliation with all parties. Any
conciliation agreement arising from such efforts shall be in writing, signed by
the parties or their representative, and shall be subject to the approval of
the Commission. A conciliation agreement shall be made public unless the
parties otherwise agree and the Commission determines that disclosure of the
terms of the agreement is not required to further the purpose of this Part.
   G.   Prompt judicial action. If the Commission determines that a housing
accommodation or housing accommodations involved in a complaint of an unlawful
housing practice under §
23-507 may be sold, rented or otherwise disposed of before a determination of
the case has been made, and the Commission believes that judicial action is
necessary to effectuate the purpose of this Part, the Commission may request
the City Solicitor to seek an injunction restraining the sale, rental or other
disposition of the housing accommodation or housing accommodations in
accordance with the provisions of § 9.1 of the Pennsylvania Human Relations Act
of October 27, 1955, P.L. 744, added by Act No. 533, approved January 24, 1966,
5  as hereafter amended, supplemented or modified by the General Assembly of
Pennsylvania. [Amended 7-11-2011 by Ord. No. 31A-2011]
5.   Editor's Note: See 43 P.S. § 959.1.
   H.   In any case of failure to eliminate the unlawful practice charged in
the complaint by means of informal proceedings, or in advance thereof, if, in
the judgment of the Commission the facts so warrant, the Commission may hold a
public hearing to determine whether or not an unlawful practice has been
committed. Without holding such a hearing, the Commission may certify the case
to the City Solicitor in accordance with Subsection G, hereof.
   I.   Where a public hearing is ordered, the Executive Director of the City
of Reading Human Relations Commission shall designate one or more members or a
Hearing Examiner to conduct such a hearing. The Commission shall serve upon the
person charged with having engaged or engaging in the unlawful practice a
notice of the time and place of the hearing. In addition, the Commission shall
provide the Respondent with notice of procedural rights and obligations. The
hearing shall be held within 120 days following the issuance of the probable
cause determination unless it is impracticable to do so. [Amended 7-11-2011 by
Ord. No. 31A-2011]
   J.   The respondent shall have the right to file an answer to the statement
of charges, to appear at the hearing in person or to be represented by an
attorney or, subject to the approval of the hearing panel, by any other person,
and to examine and cross-examine witnesses. The complainant shall also have the
right to be represented by an attorney or, subject to the approval of the
hearing panel, by any other person. The Commission shall not be bound by the
strict rules of evidence prevailing in courts of law or equity. The testimony
taken at the hearing shall be under oath and shall be transcribed.
   K.   With respect to a complaint alleging an unlawful housing practice
arising under §
23-507, in lieu of proceeding before the Commission pursuant to this
subsection, any party may elect, within 20 days of receipt of the charge, to
have the claims contained in the charge decided in a civil action tried by a
court of competent jurisdiction. The party making such election shall notify
the Commission and all other interested parties within 10 days of making such
election. The complainant shall be represented by an attorney in a civil action
instituted pursuant to an election made under this subsection. Representation
of the complainant shall be at the Commission's expense and such representation
shall include presentation of the complainant's case at the public hearing.
   L.   One or more Commissioners of the Commission or a permanent hearing
examiner designated by the Commission shall constitute the Commission for any
hearing required to be held by the Commission. The recommended findings,
conclusions and order made by this (these) members or by the hearing examiner
will be reviewed and approved or reversed by the Commission. A vote by a
majority of the Commissioners shall be necessary to find that the respondent
has engaged in an unlawful practice. A decision shall be rendered within 45
days of the close of testimony or the final post-hearing submission of the
parties, if any, unless it is impracticable to do so. [Amended 7-11-2011 by
Ord. No. 31A-2011]
   M.   If upon all the evidence presented, the Commission finds that the
respondent has not engaged in any unlawful practice, it shall state its
findings of fact in writing and dismiss the complaint. If upon all the evidence
presented, the Commission finds that the respondent has engaged or is engaging
in an unlawful practice, it shall state its findings of fact in writing and
shall issue such order in writing as the facts warrant to effectuate the
purposes of this Part. Such order may require the respondent to cease and
desist from such unlawful practice and to take such affirmative action
including, but not limited to, the hiring, reinstatement or upgrading of
employees, with or without back pay, admission or restoration to membership in
any respondent labor organization, the selling, renting or leasing of a housing
accommodation or housing accommodations upon equal terms and conditions and
with such equal facilities, services and privileges, the tendering of money,
whether or not secured by mortgages or otherwise for the acquisition,
construction, rehabilitation, repair or maintenance of any housing
accommodation, the granting, permitting, selling or admission to any of the
accommodations, advantages, facilities, services or privileges, products or
goods of any respondent place of public accommodation, resort, recreation or
amusement, upon such equal terms and conditions to any person discriminated
against or to all persons as, in the judgment of the Commission, shall
effectuate the purposes of this Part and are warranted by the facts presented
at the hearing, including a requirement for a report or reports of the manner
of compliance. Compensatory damages may be awarded in appropriate circumstances
for a violation of any of the provisions of §
23-507. Copies of the order shall be served on all parties.
   N.   Any adjudication made by the Commission shall be in writing and dated,
and shall be deemed to be a final adjudication five days after the date of
issuance thereof. Parties shall have 30 days from the final adjudication to
appeal the decision of the Commission to the Berks County Court of Common
Pleas. An appeal from the Commission's order shall act as a supersedeas and
stay enforcement of such order until a final disposition of the appeal.
   O.   The Commission shall make a final administrative disposition of a
formal complaint within one year of the date of receipt of such complaint
unless it is impracticable to do so. If the Commission is unable to dispose of
the complaint within the time limitation set forth herein, it shall notify the
parties in writing of such fact and the reasons therefor. Should the Commission
fail to finally adjudicate or otherwise dispose of a formal complaint within
the time limit of the filing thereof, any party may commence a civil action for
the enforcement of this Part in an appropriate court of competent jurisdiction
no later than two years after the occurrence or termination of the alleged
discriminatory act or practice.
   P.   An aggrieved person may commence a civil action whether or not a
complaint has been filed under this section and without regard to the status of
any such complaint. There shall be no need for a complainant to exhaust
administrative remedies with respect to a complaint that could be brought under
§
23-507, so long as any action brought is commenced within one year of the
alleged discriminatory housing practice. The court in which any such action is
brought shall be empowered, in appropriate circumstances, to award compensatory
and punitive damages as well as equitable relief. However, if the Commission
has obtained a conciliation agreement with the consent of the aggrieved person,
no action may be filed by such aggrieved person with respect to the
discriminatory housing practice which forms the basis for such complaint except
for the purpose of enforcing the terms of such agreement.
§ 23-513. Enforcement.
In the event the respondent refuses or fails to comply with any order of the
Human Relations Commission or violates any of the provisions of this Part, the
Commission shall certify the case and the entire record of its proceedings to
the City Solicitor, who shall invoke the aid of an appropriate court to secure
enforcement or compliance with the order or to impose the penalties set forth
in §
23-514, or both.
§ 23-514. Violations and penalties.
   A.   In addition to any other remedies provided herein, upon a finding of a
violation of any provision of this Part relating to unlawful discriminatory
housing practices, or any rule or regulation pertaining thereto adopted by the
Human Relations Commission, or any order of the Commission, shall be subject to
a civil penalty of not more than: [Amended 7-11-2011 by Ord. No. 31A-2011]
      (1)   Sixteen thousand dollars if the respondent has not been adjudged to
have committed any prior discriminatory housing practice in any administrative
hearing or civil action permitted under the Fair Housing Act or any state or
local fair housing law, or in any licensing or regulatory proceeding conducted
by a federal, state or local governmental agency.
      (2)   Thirty-seven thousand five hundred dollars if the respondent has
been adjudged to have committed one other discriminatory housing practice in
any forum set forth in Subsection A(1), hereof and the adjudication was made
during the five-year period preceding the date of filing of the charge.
      (3)   Sixty-five thousand dollars if the respondent has been adjudged to
have committed two or more discriminatory housing practices in any forum set
forth in Subsection A(1) hereof, and the adjudications were made during the
seven-year period preceding the date of filing of the charge.
   B.   Respondent shall also be responsible for costs and shall be subject to
imprisonment for not more than one year. The Commission, in its discretion, may
allow the prevailing party other than the Commission a reasonable attorney's
fee and costs. Monetary awards may be given under appropriate circumstances the
amount of which shall be based on the record made before the Commission and may
include damages caused by humiliation and embarrassment.
Part 6
Charter Board
[Adopted 7-25-2005 by Ord. No. 46-2005 (
Ch. 1, Part 5L, of the 2001 Code of Ordinances); amended 1-23-2023 by Ord. No.
7-2023]
§ 23-601. Title; purpose.
   A.   Title. The title of this Part shall be the City of Reading Charter
Board Ordinance.
   B.   Purpose of ordinance. The purpose of the City of Reading Charter Board
Ordinance is to provide, through the institution of the City of Reading Charter
Board ("Board"), for the implementation of Amendment I of the Reading City
Charter, which is entitled "Enforcement of Charter." 6
6.   Editor's Note: Amendment I, Enforcement of Charter, of the Reading City
Charter is located at the end of the Home Rule Charter.
§ 23-602. Organization of Charter Board.
   A.   Composition and structure of Board.
      (1)   Composition. The Board established under Amendment I of the City of
Reading Home Rule Charter ("Charter") shall be composed of five residents of
the City of Reading. Board members shall be appointed by the Mayor with the
consent of City Council.
      (2)   Terms of service. Members of the Board shall serve for terms of
five years, except that the members shall continue to serve until their
successors are appointed and qualified. The terms of the initial members shall
be staggered, with members serving terms of one, two, three, four, and five
years, respectively.
      (3)   Vacancy. An individual appointed to fill a vacancy occurring other
than by the expiration of a term of office shall be appointed for the unexpired
term of the member he/she succeeds and is eligible for appointment thereafter
according to the terms herein. 7
7.   Editor's Note: Former § 1-599.22D, Removal of members, added 8-23-2010 by
Ord. No. 59-2010, which immediately followed this subsection, was repealed 3-
26-2012 by Ord. No. 39-2012.
      (4)   Election of Chairperson and Vice Chairperson. The Board shall elect
a Chairperson and Vice Chairperson upon seating of the members and thereafter
annually at a meeting held in July of each year. The Vice Chairperson shall act
as the Chairperson in the absence of the Chairperson or in the event of a
vacancy in that position.
      (5)   Quorum. A majority of the members of the Board shall constitute a
quorum and the votes of a majority of the members present are required for any
action or recommendation of the Board.
      (6)   Staff. The Board shall appoint a Solicitor, an investigative
officer, a hearing officer, a secretary, and such other staff as may be deemed
necessary. The Solicitor, investigative officer, a hearing officer, secretary,
and such other staff as may be necessarily appointed shall not be members of
the Board.
      (7)   Meetings. The Board shall meet at the call of the Chairperson or at
the call of a majority of its members.
      (8)   Investigative Officer.
         (a)   The Board shall appoint an investigative officer ("Investigative
Officer") who shall serve at the pleasure of the Board. The Investigative
Officer is charged with determining jurisdiction, conducting preliminary and
full investigations, issuing written findings reports, prosecuting complaints
before evidentiary hearings, and performing such other duties as set forth
herein. The Investigative Officer shall conduct his/her work independently and
without comment or inquiry from the Board, except as provided in Subsection A
(8)(d) below.
         (b)   The Investigative Officer shall be a member in good standing of
the Pennsylvania Bar Association and shall have so been for at least five
years. The Investigative Officer need not be a resident of the City of Reading
and shall not be a Board member. The Investigative Officer is authorized to
retain the services of an investigator and other professional staff and/or
consultants, and shall only delegate nondiscretionary functions.
         (c)   The Investigative Officer shall not be the current or former
Solicitor to the Board and the Investigative Officer shall not serve in the
future as Solicitor to the Board on any matter investigated or prosecuted by
the Investigative Officer. Furthermore, the Investigative Officer shall not
seek the advice of the Solicitor to the Board, and the Solicitor to the Board
shall not seek the advice of the Investigative Officer, on substantive aspects
of any complaint or referral before the Board.
         (d)   In addition to all other responsibilities of the Investigative
Officer, he/she shall provide to the Board every six months a summary of any
complaint dismissed or otherwise resolved during the investigatory stage.
   B.   Prohibitions. Due to the nature of their appointment, Board members
have a duty to avoid any known conflicts of interest, especially actions or
behaviors in violation of the City Charter or its full and impartial
enforcement. The prohibitions in this section are in addition to all other
duties, responsibilities, and obligations imposed upon Board members.
      (1)   No member may hold or campaign for any other public office.
      (2)   No member may hold office in any political party or political
organization or political committee.
      (3)   No member may hold a position of employment with City government or
appointment to any other board, authority, or commission formed by the City of
Reading.
      (4)   No member may actively participate in or contribute to any
political campaign in the City of Reading for a candidate running for the
office of Mayor, President of Council, Council member, or Auditor. This does
not abridge the right of a member to vote or attend a debate, speech or similar
event that is held primarily for the purpose of communicating a candidate's
platform or position on issues of public concern.
      (5)   No member shall receive compensation but shall be reimbursed by the
City for documented expenses actually incurred.
   C.   Mandate to fund. City Council shall appropriate sufficient funds for
the Board to perform its enforcement and educational duties, including expenses
for independent counsel, investigative personnel, investigations, hearings,
appeals, staff, any other necessary personnel, and professional educational
programming. City Council may place reasonable restrictions to limit the
funding to an amount that is necessary to meet the Charter requirement to
provide funding that is sufficient. These limits may include, but are not
limited to the following:
      1.   Limiting travel time to either one-way or limit the billable rate to
50% for the overall trip to and from City Hall or anywhere else Charter Board
business (meetings, hearings, etc.) occurs.
      2.   Limits on fees to an amount that is consistent with general
municipal work, City Council may require the Charter Board to follow the City's
purchasing procedures to determine whether funding for the Charter Board is
sufficient.
   D.   Right to a defense. City officials and employees who are the subject of
a complaint are entitled to a defense. Defense counsel fees may be limited to
an amount that is consistent with general municipal work. Defense counsel shall
be selected from a panel of attorneys/firms who have been procured in
accordance with the City's Purchasing Policy.
§ 23-603. Powers and duties of Charter Board.
   A.   Charter enforcement powers. The Board shall have the following powers
and duties with respect to Charter enforcement. It shall:
      (1)   Serve as an administrative body to hear and decide all complaints
alleging violations of the Charter and Administrative Code, except that its
jurisdiction shall not extend to cases arising under the Ethics Code or the
Personnel Code of the City of Reading.
      (2)   Impose penalties and administrative fines for failure to comply
with an order of the Charter Board. The Board may also refer matters to law
enforcement, regulatory, or other authorities with jurisdiction over these
matters.
      (3)   Initiate preliminary investigations on its own motion. In the event
that the Board approves an investigation it shall direct the Investigative
Officer to conduct a preliminary investigation and the Investigative Officer
shall have standing to initiate proceedings in the Court of Common Pleas to
enforce the Charter if the Investigative Officer reasonably believes a Charter
Board violation exists. Board-initiated investigations shall not be heard by
the Board itself.
      (4)   Appoint an Investigative Officer to conduct investigations and to
issue findings reports where appropriate.
      (5)   Hold hearings, issue subpoenas and compel the attendance of
witnesses, administer oaths, take testimony, require evidence on any matter
under investigation before the Board, and issue orders rendering a final
determination on the Charter violations alleged in the complaint and issue
penalties for failure to comply with any order or final determination of the
Charter Board.
      (6)   Adopt rules and regulations to administer, implement, enforce and
interpret the Board ordinance.
      (7)   Have all other powers necessary and appropriate to effectuate the
purposes set forth herein and in Amendment I of the Charter.
   B.   Charter advisory powers. Upon written request of any board or
commission that does not have its own independent legal counsel or a City
Employee or City Official who has a reasonable and good faith belief that the
Solicitor or Council Solicitor has a conflict of interest, the Board may
authorize the Board Solicitor to render advisory opinions concerning
interpretation of the Charter or Administrative Code related to a potential or
proposed course of action or pending decision involving the requester. All
advisory opinions shall be issued in writing. The costs related to an advisory
opinion shall not exceed $1,000 per opinion unless a higher amount is
reasonably necessary to adequately answer the question and the additional
expenditure is approved by a unanimous vote of the Board.
   C.   Charter educational powers. The Board shall have the following powers
and duties with respect to Charter education. It shall:
      (1)   Direct and administer, with professional assistance, the required
orientation of all newly elected City officials at the commencement of their
initial full term of office.
      (2)   Be responsible, proactively and on an ongoing basis, for educating
the public and members of City government as to their rights, duties, and
obligations under the Charter and Administrative Code.
§ 23-604. Standards for interpretation of Reading City Charter and
Administrative Code.
   Interpretation of the Charter shall follow the provisions of the Statutory
Construction Act, 1 Pa.C.S.A. § 1501 et seq., which is binding for the
interpretation of all home rule charters through Cottone v. Kulis, 460 A.2d 880
(Pa. Commonwealth, 1983), and for the interpretation of all municipal
ordinances through Ciavarella et ux. Appeal, 484 A.2d 420 (Pa. Commonwealth,
1984).
§ 23-605. Enforcement.
   A.   Procedure.
      (1)   Standing.
         (a)   Any taxpayer, or aggrieved person, may file a complaint about
alleged violations of the Charter or Administrative Code. The person signing a
complaint shall:
            [1]   Reasonably believe in the existence of facts upon which the
claim is based.
            [2]   Reasonably believe that the complaint may be valid under the
Charter or Administrative Code.
         (b)   In addition, the Board may initiate preliminary investigations
on its own motion, through the Investigative Officer in accordance with § 23-
603(A)(3).
      (2)   Filing of complaint.
         (a)   Complaints must be submitted on forms provided by the Board. The
Board shall make available this form upon request. The complaint shall state
the name, job or office held by the alleged violator and a description of the
facts that are alleged to constitute a violation. It must contain a notarized
signature subject to the penalties of 18 Pa.C.S.A. § 4904 relating to unsworn
falsification to authorities. The Board shall establish a separate post office
box through which to receive complaints. This post office box shall be
generally accessible by the Investigative Officer and/or the secretary,
provided that the secretary is not a Board member.
         (b)   No member of the Board shall review any complaint until after an
evidentiary hearing has been requested by the subject of the investigation, or
if no evidentiary hearing is requested, then until the submission to the Board
of the Investigative Officer's Findings Report.
         (c)   The complainant may withdraw his or her complaint at any time
after its submission, and no further action will be taken with regard to the
complaint. Such withdrawal shall be in writing and contain a notarized
signature. If a preliminary investigation has already been initiated, the
subject of the investigation shall immediately be notified of the withdrawal.
The individual’s withdrawal of a complaint does not preclude further action by
the Board on its own motion in accordance with §
23-603(A)(3).
      (3)   Determination of jurisdiction.
         (a)   Each complaint filed with the Board shall immediately be
directed to and preliminarily reviewed by the Investigative Officer appointed
by the Board to determine whether the complaint falls within the jurisdiction
of the Board. The aforesaid determination shall be made within seven days of
the filing of the complaint. If the Investigative Officer determines that the
Board does not have jurisdiction over the matter underlying the complaint, the
complainant will be notified and no further action will be taken with regard to
the complaint. If, however, the Investigative Officer determines that the
complaint falls within the jurisdiction of the Board, the Investigative Officer
shall authorize a preliminary investigation. The Investigative Officer shall
provide the subject with a copy of the complaint within five days of
authorizing a preliminary investigation.
         (b)   Upon determination that the complaint falls within the
jurisdiction of the Board, the Officer shall attempt an informal resolution of
the issue (as provided by the Rules of Administration and Procedure implemented
by the Board. This subsection shall apply to all complaints filed after 60 days
from the effective date of the ordinance adopting this amendment to the Charter
Board Ordinance, Bill No. 46-2005.) [Amended 6-22-2015 by Ord. No. 30-2015]
         (c)   Concurrent with the attempt at informal resolution, the
Investigative Officer shall inform both the complainant and the subject of the
complaint of their rights and responsibilities under the formal adjudicative
process.
         (d)   At any time during the proceedings, the Investigative Officer
and the subject may jointly request an evidentiary hearing or request to have
the matter decided on briefs and/or oral argument in lieu of a full evidentiary
hearing.
      (4)   Preliminary investigation.
         (a)   The preliminary investigation shall be initiated and conducted
at the sole discretion of the Officer. If the Officer, in his/her discretion,
finds that the alleged violation, would, if proved, constitute a "de minimis"
infraction, he/she may decline to initiate a preliminary investigation and
dismiss the complaint. A de minimis infraction is one that is so insignificant
or trifling that enforcement serves merely to exhaust the Board's time and
resources. See Bailey v. Zoning Board of Adjustments, 801 A. 2d 492 (Pa.,
2002). Furthermore, if the Officer, in his/her discretion, finds that the Board
in the instant case cannot provide an adequate or timely remedy, he/she may
decline to initiate a preliminary investigation, dismiss the complaint, and
advise the complainant of alternative remedies.
         (b)   At the onset of the preliminary investigation, the Officer shall
notify both the complainant and the subject of the investigation of the filing
of the complaint, the nature of the same and the initiation of a preliminary
investigation.
         (c)   The preliminary investigation shall be completed within 30 days
of the Officer's finding of jurisdiction.
         (d)   If, at any time during the preliminary investigation, an
extension is necessary and justified, the Officer may request of the Board one
fifteen-day extension, which shall be granted as of course. The Officer shall
notify both the complainant and the subject of the investigation of such
extension.
         (e)   At the conclusion of the preliminary investigation, the Officer
shall determine whether there may exist facts to support the complaint. If the
inquiry fails to establish such facts, the Officer shall dismiss the complaint
and notify both the complainant and the subject of the complaint of the
dismissal. If, however, at the conclusion of the preliminary investigation the
Officer determines that there may exist facts to support the complaint, the
Officer shall authorize a full investigation.
      (5)   Full investigation. If preliminary investigation uncovers facts to
support the complaint, the Officer shall authorize a full investigation. The
complainant and the subject of the investigation shall be notified within three
days of the initiation of a full investigation and the subject shall be
notified of the identity of the complainant. Until the investigation is
concluded or terminated, the Officer will notify both the complainant and the
subject of the investigation of the status of the investigation at least every
45 days. Within 90 days of the initiation of the full investigation, the
Officer must either terminate the investigation or issue a findings report
("findings report").
      (6)   Findings report.
         (a)   The findings report shall set forth the pertinent findings of
fact as determined by the Officer. The Officer shall deliver the findings of
fact to the complainant and the subject of the investigation.
         (b)   Within 20 days of the issuance of the report, the subject of the
investigation may make a request in writing to the Officer for an evidentiary
hearing, and such request shall be granted as of right. When the Officer
receives such a request, the Officer shall immediately notify the Board of the
request for a hearing, and the names of the parties involved. The Investigative
Officer shall then prepare facts in support of the complaint and present them
at the evidentiary hearing.
         (c)   If the subject of the investigation does not request an
evidentiary hearing within 20 days of the issuance of the findings report, the
Officer shall immediately notify the Board of the names of the parties involved
and shall deliver to the Board the findings report.
      (7)   Evidentiary hearing.
         (a)   Timing. An evidentiary hearing must be held within 45 days of
the filing of a request for same unless the Investigative Officer and subject
agree to a date beyond the 45-day period. provided that the extension does not
interfere with the requirement for the Charter Board to issue a final decision
within eight months of the receipt of the complaint.
         (b)   Procedure.
            [1]   The subject of the investigation shall have reasonable access
to any evidence intended to be used at the hearing. The subject of the
investigation shall have the opportunity to be represented by counsel and to
subpoena witnesses, present evidence, cross-examine witnesses against him/her,
submit argument, and shall be entitled to exercise all rights afforded him/her
by the United States Constitution and the Pennsylvania Constitution which apply
to this type of hearing.
            [2]   The formal rules of evidence will not apply to hearings;
however, they may be used as a guide for determining the evidence admitted at
the hearing.
            [3]   Testimony shall be given under oath or affirmation, and
witnesses shall be subject to cross-examination.
            [4]   A stenographic record shall be taken of all evidentiary
hearings.
            [5]   The Investigative Officer will present his/her case followed
by the case of the subject of the complaint. Each party may make an opening and
closing statement, unless otherwise directed by the Board.
            [6]   Subpoenas may be issued at the request of the parties to the
hearing on the approval of the Board. Information subpoenaed shall be relevant
and not privileged.
            [7]   The Board shall possess and be afforded all other powers,
rights, privileges, and immunities, afforded to quasi-judicial bodies in the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
         (c)   Closed hearing. The hearing shall be closed to the public unless
the subject requests an open hearing, in writing, to the Board at least five
days before the hearing.
         (d)   Hearing Officer. The Board shall appoint a hearing officer who
shall assist the Board in carrying out its functions during the evidentiary
hearing, may examine witnesses, documents and things to the same extent as the
Board, may make evidentiary rulings and advise the Board concerning same,
assist in the preparation and review of the final order, and otherwise advise
and counsel the Board as necessary. The Hearing Officer shall maintain complete
independence from the Board Solicitor and the Investigative Officer.
      (8)   Decision by the Board: final order.
         (a)   Following evidentiary hearing. At the conclusion of the
evidentiary hearing, and in a timely manner, the Board shall deliberate on the
evidence to determine whether the subject of the complaint violated the Charter
or the Administrative Code. The Board's decision shall be by a majority vote of
those members present.
         (b)   Where no evidentiary hearing is requested. If the subject of the
complaint does not request an evidentiary hearing, the Board shall decide by a
majority vote of those members present whether the findings report supports a
determination that the subject of the complaint violated the Charter or
Administrative Code.
         (c)   Final order and opinion. The final order and opinion of the
Board shall contain findings of fact and conclusions of law in accordance with
the Local Agency Law, 2 Pa.C.S.A. §§ 551 through 555. A copy of said order and
opinion shall be delivered immediately to both the complainant and the subject
of the complaint by certified United States mail, return receipt requested. The
Board, through its Hearing Officer, shall render its decision and issue a final
order and opinion which shall be binding:
            [1]   Within 30 days of the conclusion of the evidentiary hearing.
            [2]   In the instance where no evidentiary hearing is requested,
within 60 days of the issuance of the findings report.
      (9)   Right to appeal.
         (a)   Any person aggrieved by an adjudication of the Board who has a
direct interest in such adjudication shall have the right to appeal therefrom
to the court vested with jurisdiction of such appeals pursuant to Title 42
(relating to judiciary and judicial procedure). All such appeals shall be
conducted in accordance with the Local Agency Law, 2 Pa.C.S.A. §§ 751 through
754.
         (b)   In the instance of an appeal from an adjudication of the Board,
representation of the Board shall be by its Solicitor.
      (10)   Protection of complainant. No person may be penalized, nor any
employee of the City be discharged, suffer change in his/her official rank,
grade, or compensation, denied a promotion, or threatened, for a good faith
filing of a complaint with the Board, or for providing information or
testifying in any Board proceeding.
      (11)   Costs of Charter enforcement. Any person who prevails in any legal
action against the City, its officers or agents to enforce this Charter or the
Administrative Code pursuant to it, shall be entitled to recover all reasonable
attorney's fees and costs incurred in such action.
   B.   Violations.
      (1)   Violations. The violation of any section of the Charter or
Administrative Code, in whole or in part, shall constitute a violation under
the jurisdiction of the Board, except that the Board's jurisdiction shall not
extend to cases arising under either the Ethics Code or the Personnel Code.
      (2)   Relief. Upon the finding of any violation, the following relief may
be ordered by the Board:
         (a)   Issue an order requiring the subject to cease and desist from
engaging in a particular activity or non-activity that is in violation of the
Administrative Code or Charter.
         (b)   Order the subject to take specified action to bring him/her into
compliance with Board directives.
      (3)   Penalties.
         (a)   Penalties.
            [1]   If a subject who has been found to have violated the Charter
continues or repeats the conduct found to have been a violation of the Charter
or fails to correct an ongoing violation of the Charter within 30 days of the
order. the board may institute penalties to enforce its order. If the order is
appealed the subject may request that the Court issue a stay of enforcement
pending appeal.
            [2]   Factors to be considered. Before the imposition of any
penalty the Board shall consider the following factors and address the relevant
factors in its final order:
               [a]   The seriousness of the offense.
               [b]   The substantive effect the offense has on the application
of the Charter and its purposes.
               [c]   Whether the subject of the complaint has had previous
decisions entered against him/her by the Board.
               [d]   The number of violations involved.
               [e]   Whether the violations were the result of willful or
intentional conduct, recklessness, negligence, oversight or mistake.
               [f]   The consequences of the violation.
               [g]   Any other factors relevant in determining the type and
severity of the penalty to be imposed.
            [3]   Penalties. Upon the finding of any violation, the following
penalties shall be available to the Board for imposition, in addition to and
not withstanding restitution and other remedies listed in Subsection B(3)(b)
below:
               [a]   Admonition, in compliance with existing personnel
practices, collective bargaining agreements and/or statutes, a letter to the
respondent, the Mayor, the Managing Director, and Director of the Department in
which the respondent is employed, if any, and the complainant, if any,
indicating that the respondent has been found to have violated the Charter or
Administrative Code.
               [b]   Public censure, in compliance with existing personnel
practices, collective bargaining agreements and/or statutes, notification to
the respondent, the Mayor, the Managing Director, the Director of the
Department in which the respondent is employed, if any, and the complainant, if
any, and the news media indicating that a violation of the Charter or
Administrative Code took place and that the Board strongly disapproves of the
public official's or public employee's actions.
               [c]   Referral to the appropriate authorities for criminal
prosecution in cases where a violation of the Charter or Administrative Code is
also a violation of federal or state law.
               [d]   Imposition of a fine, not to exceed $1,000 per violation.
               [e]   Imposition of an administrative fine of not more than
$1,000 to defray the actual cost and expense of investigating any violation.
         (b)   Other remedies. Upon the finding of any violation, the Board may
take one or more of the following actions, in addition to and notwithstanding
the penalties listed in Subsection B(3)(a)[3] above:
            [1]   Order the subject to cease and desist from engaging in a
particular activity that is in violation of the Administrative Code or Charter.
            [2]   Order the subject to take specified action to bring him/her
into compliance with Board directives.
            [3]   Refer the matter for review or with specific recommendation
for action to law enforcement, regulatory or other authorities with
jurisdiction over these matters.
   C.   Wrongful use of Charter Board.
      (1)   Complaints directed to the Board must be based on fact and a
reasonable belief of a Charter violation. Wrongful use of the Board is
prohibited and any person engaged in such conduct may be subject to penalties
as set forth in Subsection B.
      (2)   Wrongful use of the Board is defined as:
         (a)   Filing an unfounded, frivolous or false complaint. A complaint
is unfounded, frivolous or false if it is filed in a grossly negligent manner
without basis in law or fact and was made for a purpose other than reporting a
violation of the Charter or Administrative Code. A person has not filed a
frivolous complaint if he/she reasonably believes that facts exist to support
the claim, and either reasonably believes that under those facts the complaint
is valid or acts upon the advice of counsel sought in good faith and given
after full disclosure of all relevant facts within his/her knowledge and
information.
§ 23-606. Educational duties of Charter Board.
   A.   Overview. The educational duties of the Board are two-fold:
      (1)   It shall direct and administer, with professional assistance, the
required orientation of all elected City officials at the commencement of their
terms.
      (2)   It shall, proactively and on an ongoing basis, educate the public
and members of City government as to their rights, duties and obligations under
the City Charter and Administrative Code.
   B.   Orientation of elected City officials.
      (1)   A basic orientation course shall provide comprehensive information
on Home Rule Law, the City Charter, the City Administrative Code, and the City
Ethics Code. Other topics to be included in the course are: the impact of the
Pennsylvania Constitution and other pertinent legal statutes on City
government; a review of the City budget, including all City employees' labor
agreements; and Roberts Rules of Order. This course shall be directed and
administered by the Board, with assistance from the Pennsylvania Department of
Community and Economic Development, the State and County Bar Associations, the
Ethics Board, and any other resources the Board deems appropriate.
      (2)   Any elected official who, in the determination of the Board,
completes this course within four months of their initial full term will
receive a bonus of $250.
      (3)   City Council shall provide sufficient funds to ensure a thorough
and professional orientation.
   C.   Educating the public and members of City government.
      (1)   Educating the public and members of City government about their
rights, duties and obligations promotes involvement and participation for more
effective and efficient government. The Board, with the assistance of resources
deemed appropriate by the Board, shall conduct these educational programs in
various formats. Educational information can be disseminated in a variety of
formats: public meetings, printed materials such as inserts in tax and water
bills; handbooks; web site; community newsletter; interactive local television
programming.
      (2)   Funds shall be made available to the Board for the ongoing
educational program of the public and members of City government.
Part 7
Equal Business Opportunity Advisory Board
[Adopted 9-12-2005 by Ord. No. 56-2005 (Ch. 1, Part 5M, of the 2001 Code of
Ordinances); Repealed and replaced in its entirety 10-11-2021 by Ord. No. 76-
2021]
§ 23-701. Policy.
It is the policy of the City, state and federal governments to foster an
environment of inclusion in which all businesses are free to participate in
business opportunities and to flourish without the impediments of
discrimination. Businesses participating in these contracts shall do so on a
fair and equitable basis. Vendors on these contracts shall not discriminate
against any business because of race, color, religion, national origin, sex,
sexual orientation or disability.
There is hereby established an Equal Business Opportunity Advisory Board to
advise the City on policies, procedures and practices to enhances participation
of MBEs, DBEs. WBEs, SBEs and the lower-to-moderate income residents in
procurement of City contracts.
§ 23-702. Definitions.
For the purpose of this Part, the following terms shall have the following
respective definitions:
   AGE — Includes any person 40 and above and shall also include any other
person so protected by further amendment to the Federal Age Discrimination in
Employment Act.
   AGENCY — Any City office, department, board or commission, including but not
limited to the Council of the City of Reading. It shall also mean all legal
entities which either:
   A.   Receive funds, directly or indirectly, from the City, state or federal
governments.
   B.   Have entered into continuing contractual or cooperative relationships
with the City, including quasi-public agencies, hospitals, schools, etc.
   C.   Operate under legal authority granted to them by City ordinance.
   CERTIFYING AGENCY - A private or public entity designated by the City
procurement officers as an agency eligible to certify businesses as
Certification Eligible Business.
   CERTIFICATION ELIGIBLE BUSINESS OR CEB - Any one or more businesses in the
group consisting of DBEs, MBEs. SBEs. WBEs and such other categories of
business enterprises established by the City procurement officers, or his/her
designee, from time to time as eligible for participation in a certification
program, when in his/her judgment the best available evidence supports such
establishment.
   CITY CONTRACTS - Any City contract, purchase order or agreement, not
including lease of real property or collective bargaining agreement, awarded by
any officer or agency of the City whether competitively bid or negotiated,
including but not limited to, any construction contract with a total value in
excess of $10,000 which:
   A.   Is paid for in whole or in part with City, state or federal funds.
   B.   Is financed either wholly or partially by state or federal funds which
are administered by the City.
   C.   Is funded in whole or in part by Financial Assistance (See § 23-706
below).
   CONTRACTOR - Any person or business entity that enters into a City contract,
including all partners and all joint ventures of such person.
   DISABLED PERSON - A person who has a physical or mental impairment which
substantially limits one or more of his or her major life activities or has a
record of such impairment. “Major life activities” shall mean functions, such
as caring for one’s self, performing manual tasks, walking, seeing, hearing,
speaking, breathing, learning and working.
   DISADVANTAGED BUSINESS ENTERPRISE or DBE - When connected to a contract that
is funded in whole or in part from state or federal governmental sources, means
a business entity designated pursuant to the rules and regulations of such
governmental source, and includes a City designated certifying agency.
   DISCRIMINATE and DISCRIMINATION - Conduct used to deny someone equal
protection of the laws and which includes any difference in treatment based on
race, color, religion, ancestry, national origin, age, sex, familial status,
handicap or previous filing of a complaint of discrimination.
   FINANCIAL ASSISTANCE - Any grant, loan, incentive or abatement provided by,
or with the authority or approval of, the City or a City-related agency,
including but not limited to bond financing subsidies, tax increment financing
aid, industrial development bonds, use of the power of eminent domain, land or
property acquisition, Community Development Block Grant loans or grant, revenue
bonds, Enterprise Zone designations, and aid from any federal, state or City or
other similar agencies.
   INDIVIDUAL - A natural person.
   HANDICAP - With respect to a person, a physical or mental impairment which
substantially limits one or more major life activities; a record of having such
an impairment; or being regarded as having such an impairment.
   MCA - The Minority Contractors Association.
   MINORITY BUSINESS PROCUREMENT ADVISORY BOARD (MBPAB) - The entity within the
Finance Department responsible for the development, implementation, monitoring
and enforcing the procedures and goals set forth in this chapter.
   MINORITY-OWNED BUSINESS or MBE - Minority business enterprise including any
local owned business which is at least 51 percent owned by one or more members
of one or more minority groups, or. in the case of a publicly held corporation,
at least 51 percent of the stock of which is owned by one or more members of
one or more minority groups whose management and daily business operations are
controlled by one or more members of one or more minority groups, and which is
not an established business.
   MINORITY PERSON - A person who is a citizen or lawful permanent resident of
the United States and who is:
   A.   African American (a person having origins in any of the black racial
groups in Africa).
   B.   Hispanic American (a person of Spanish or Portuguese culture with
origins in Mexico, South or Central America, or the Caribbean Islands,
regardless of race).
   C.   Asian American (a person having origins in any of the original peoples
of the Far East, Southeast Asia, the Indian Subcontinent or the Pacific
Islands).
   D.   Native American (a person having origins in any of the original peoples
of North America).
   E.   For purposes of contracts funded by state or federal governmental
sources, groups found to be eligible for the purposes of DBEs by such
governmental sources.
   NON-JOB-RELATED HANDICAP OR DISABILITY - Any handicap or disability which
does not substantially interfere with the ability to perform the essential
functions of the employment which a handicapped person applies for, is engaged
in, or has been engaged in. Uninsurability or increased cost of insurance under
a group or employee insurance plan does not render a handicap or disability
job-related.
   PERSON - A corporation, partnership or association, or any combination
thereof, as well as a natural person.
   PROCUREMENT - Includes buying, purchasing, renting, licensing, or
acquisition of any supply, service, or product. Procurement also includes all
functions that pertain to obtaining any supply, service, or product. including
drafting the requirements, the selection and solicitation of sources, the
preparation, review, and award of contract, and all phases of the contract
administration.
   SMALL BUSINESS ENTERPRISE or SBE - A business which is independently owned
and operated and which is not dominant in its field of operation as further
defined in the Small Business Size Regulations, adopted by the U.S. Small
Business Administration and published in the U.S. Code of Federal Regulations,
including the industry size standards set forth in the table contained therein,
which regulations are incorporated herein, and made a part hereof by reference.
   SOCIALLY AND ECONOMICALLY DISADVANTAGED INDIVIDUALS - Those who have either
been subjected to racial, sexual or ethnic prejudice because of their identity
as a member of a group or to differential treatment because of their disability
without regard to their individual qualities, and whose ability to compete in
the free enterprise system has been impaired due to diminished capital and
credit opportunities as compared to others in the same business who are not
socially disadvantaged.
   A.   In determining who are socially and economically disadvantaged
individuals, Equal Business Opportunity Advisory Board may make a reputable
presumption that all minority persons, all women and all disabled persons shall
be so classified.
   B.   The Minority Business Procurement Advisory Board, in determining
whether an individual shall be classified as a socially and economically
disadvantaged individual, shall also consider, among other things, the extent
of the liquid assets and net worth of such socially disadvantaged individuals.
   WOMEN BUSINESS ENTERPRISE or WBE - Any Women Business Enterprise:
   A.   Which is at least 51% owned and controlled by one or more socially and
economically disadvantaged women.
   B.   In the case of any publicly owned business, one in which at least 51%
of the stock is owned by one or more socially and economically disadvantaged
women, associations or groups; provided, however, that a reputable presumption
shall exist that any person that has received more than $5,000,000 in three
consecutive years of contract work from the City is not a WBE, and; provided
further, that any previous certification of any such person as a WBE shall be
reevaluated pursuant to regulations.
§ 23-703. Purpose.
The Board’s purpose is to advise administration on issues and policies
concerning enhance participation, to the maximum extent feasible, of third-
party contractors at all levels, included but not limited to apprenticeship
programs, training programs, etc., for MBEs, DBEs, WBEs, and the lower-to-
moderate income residents, etc. within the distressed areas as mandated by
City, state and federal governments regulations.
§ 23-704. Membership and Officers.
A.   The Board will consist of five members, each to be appointed by the Mayor,
with City Council approval. for a three year term. The terms shall be staggered
so that no more than two member's terms expire in the same calendar year.
B.   Membership will include a member who is a minority business owner, a
member of the Building/Trades Council, a member of the Chamber of Commerce, a
procurement professional, and a resident at large.
C.   The members of the Board may be reappointed to successive terms of office.
Each member of the Board shall continue to serve after their term until their
successor has been qualified and appointed.
D.   The members of the Board shall serve without compensation, but upon
resolution of Council, they may be reimbursed for all necessary expenses
incurred in the performance of their duties in accordance with appropriations
made by Council.
E.   The Board shall elect one of its members as Chairman and may elect such
other officers as it may deem necessary. The Chairman may, with approval of the
Board, appoint such committees as may be necessary to carry out the powers and
duties of the Board.
F.   In the event that a member wishes to resign, they must do so in writing to
the Chairman of the Board. A copy of this letter should be provided to all
members for information purposes only.
G.   The Board shall adopt such rules and regulations for its own organization,
operation and procedures as the Board shall deem necessary to administer and
implement this Part 7.
H.   The Finance Director, or a designee, shall make reasonable effort to
accommodate the monitoring of MBEs, DBEs, WBEs, SBEs, and lower-to-moderate
income businesses and subcontractors participating in City contracts and its
procurement process.
I.   Removal of members. Any member may be removed for misconduct or neglect of
duty or for other just cause by a majority vote of Council taken after the
member has received 15 days’ advance notice of the intent to take such vote.
Failure of a member to attend three consecutive regular meetings of the Board
will constitute grounds for immediate removal from the Board by City Council.
Failure of a member to attend at least 50% of the regular meetings of the Board
in a calendar year will constitute grounds for immediate removal from the Board
by City Council. The Chairperson of the Board shall inform the City Clerk in
writing when a member has failed to comply with this attendance policy.
Following such notification, City Council may vote to remove the member and
seek applicants to fill the vacant position. [Amended 9-13-2010 by Ord. No. 66-
2010]
§ 23-705. Meetings.
The Board shall hold at least four quarterly public meetings during each
calendar year. Three members of the Board shall constitute a quorum for the
transaction of business, and a majority vote of those present at any meeting
shall be sufficient for any official action taken by the Board.
§ 23-706. Powers and duties of Board.
The Equal Business Opportunity Advisory Board shall advise the City in accord
with the policy set forth herein and in doing so may also:
A.   Develop a procedure to advise the City in outreaching and encouraging
MBES, DBES, WBES, SBES and lower-to-moderate income businesses to participate
in procurement.
B.   Develop a procedure to advise the City in outreaching and encouraging
MBES, DBEs, WBEs, SBEs and lower-to-moderate income businesses to participate
in City contracts as subcontractors.
C.   Advise the City on the total number of MBEs, DBEs, WBEs, SBEs and lower-
to-moderate income businesses in the Berks County Standard Statistical Area.
D.   Maintain a listing of all eligible vendors and make it available to all
agencies.
E.   Develop a process to ensure all majority contractors are aware of the
existence and identity of MBES, DBES, WBES, SBES and lower-to-moderate income
businesses in Reading and Berks County.
F.   Provide an annual written report to the City Administration and Council on
the MBES, DBES, WBES, SBEs and lower to-moderate income businesses
participating in City contracts, including subcontractors, and its procurement
process.
G.   Develop appropriate policies and procedures for monitoring the Board's
mission and policy.
§ 23-707. City contracts.
All contracts of the City and its contracting agencies shall encourage the
contractor to comply with the policy of this article to enhance the
participation of MBEs, DBEs, WBEs, SBEs and the lower-to-moderate income
residents, etc., therewith and to comply with any state or federal law or laws
or regulations relating to unlawful employment practices in connection with any
work to be performed thereunder and shall require the contractor to include a
similar provision in all subcontracts.
Part 8
Board of Health
[Adopted 5-22-2006 by Ord. No. 39-2006 (
Ch. 1, Part 5B, of the 2001 Code of Ordinances)]
§ 23-801. Establishment; members.
   A.   Creation. A Board of Health is hereby created in the City of Reading,
Pennsylvania, to consist of five members and two alternates.
   B.   Appointment. The members of the said Board shall serve without
compensation and shall be appointed by the Mayor with the approval of the
Council. No member of City Council shall be appointed as a member of the Board
of Health.
   C.   Residency. All members of the Board of Health shall be residents of the
City. If a qualified Board of Health cannot be established as set forth herein
with residents of the City, alternatively, members may be selected from persons
with a significant business interest in the City.
   D.   Membership. The Board of Health shall be comprised of at least one
representative of each of the following:
      (1)   A person certified by the state or appropriately licensed in the
area of environmental health.
      (2)   A person state certified or appropriately licensed in the study of
infectious diseases.
      (3)   A person state certified or appropriately licensed as a public
health practitioner.
      (4)   A person certified and licensed to practice by the State Board of
Medicine, the State Board of Veterinary Medicine, the State Board of Pharmacy,
or the State Board of Nursing to be engaged in a medical, medically related or
health care profession or business.
      (5)   A representative of the citizens of the City of Reading.
   E.   One alternate shall be selected from any of the aforementioned
professional fields with preference given to an individual representing a
licensed profession not already represented on the Board.
   F.   The second alternate shall be a resident of the City who does not need
to possess any of the qualifications stated above.
   G.   The inclusion of a state certified physician, veterinary, pharmacist
and nurse specifically enumerated in Subsection D above does not preclude such
from qualified under Subsection D(1) through (3) above if they are certified
and/or licensed in the areas specified therein. If a licensed or certified
professional from one of the above-named areas cannot be identified to serve on
the Board, the Mayor, with the approval of City Council, may appoint any
individual who has experience or is knowledgeable of public health issues
relating to the field for which they are being selected to represent.
Alternatively, if all fields are unable to be represented and more than one
individual is qualified in one of the aforementioned fields, a second such
person may qualify to fill the unfilled position of an unrepresented field.
   H.   Term. At the first appointment, Council shall designate one of the
members to serve for one year, one for two years, one for three years, one for
four years and one for five years, from January 1, 2006, and thereafter, one
member of said Board shall be appointed annually to serve for the term of five
years from January 1 succeeding his appointment.
   I.   Removal. Any member may be removed for misconduct or neglect of duty or
for other just cause by a majority vote of Council taken after the member has
received 15 days' advance notice of the intent to take such vote. Failure of a
member to attend three consecutive regular meetings of the Board will
constitute grounds for immediate removal from the Board by City Council.
Failure of a member to attend at least 50% of the regular meetings of the Board
in a calendar year will constitute grounds for immediate removal from the Board
by City Council. The Chairperson of the Board shall inform the City Clerk in
writing when a member has failed to comply with this attendance policy.
Following such notification, City Council may vote to remove the member and
seek applicants to fill the vacant position. [Amended 8-23-2010 by Ord. No. 58-
2010]
   J.   Oath. Each member of the Board of Health shall take an oath of office.
§ 23-802. Purpose.
   A.   To prevent or diminish the introduction or further spread of infectious
or contagious diseases.
   B.   To prevent, abate or remove conditions found to be detrimental to the
public health.
§ 23-803. Organization.
   A.   President. The Board shall elect a President annually from among the
members. Duties of the President shall include:
      (1)   Preside at all meetings of the Board.
      (2)   See that all orders of the Board are carried out.
      (3)   Report to City Council.
   B.   Vice President. The Board shall elect a Vice President. The Vice
President of the Board shall fulfill all duties of the President in his/her
absence.
   C.   Secretary. The Board shall appoint a secretary who is not a Board
member and who is qualified in the secretarial arts. Duties of the secretary
shall include:
      (1)   Keep the minutes of the proceedings of the Board.
      (2)   Prepare, under the direction of the Board, the annual report to
Council.
      (3)   Assist the City Health Officer in the preparation of reports to the
State Department of Health as are required by law or by rule or regulation of
the Department. Any annual report of the local Board of Health must be
submitted to the local state office.
      (4)   At the direction of the Board of Health, issue and respond to all
correspondence from and to the Board of Health.
      (5)   Issue all notices to the newspaper for publication.
      (6)   Prepare any other reports and perform such other duties as are
required of him/her by law of the Board of Health.
§ 23-804. Powers and duties.
   A.   It shall be the duty of the Board of Health to enforce the laws of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania and the article of the City of Reading enacted for
the protection of the public health.
   B.   To undertake the aforesaid duty, the Board of Health shall:
      (1)   Monitor the health status of the City of Reading to identify
community problems.
      (2)   Diagnose and investigate health problems and health hazards in the
City of Reading.
      (3)   Inform, educate and empower the citizens and residents of Reading
about health issues.
      (4)   Mobilize community partnerships and take action to solve problems.
      (5)   Analyze and develop policies and plans that support individual and
community health efforts.
   C.   To exercise all the rights and perform all the duties and obligations
conferred and imposed upon like Boards of Health in cities of the third class
of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania by all acts of assembly which may not be in
force or hereafter passed in reference to the same that are not performed by
other boards, commissions or authorities or departments of the City of Reading.
   D.   The Board of Health shall have power to make and enforce such orders
and regulations as may be necessary to carry out its aforesaid duties and
obligations so long as the Council shall approve such regulations.
§ 23-805. Meetings.
   A.   Scheduled. The Board of Health shall meet on the first Wednesday of
each month. A list of the regularly scheduled monthly meetings for the upcoming
year will be published in the newspaper in December.
   B.   Emergency. If the President of the Board of Health declares an
emergency, he may call an emergency meeting. Twenty-four-hour notice of an
emergency meeting must be given to the public. An emergency would include, but
not be limited to, the existence of a condition which would immediately
endanger public health, or the development of any other serious situation in
which the President believes that action by the Board of Health is necessary
for public safety.
   C.   Quorum. For the purpose of holding any meeting, the Board shall be at
least 50% or more of the membership.
   D.   Open to the public. The Board of Health meetings shall be open to the
public and shall be held at such places where the general public has unhampered
access to such meetings.
   E.   Minutes. The said Board shall keep regular minutes of its meetings.
   F.   Rules and regulations. The Board shall have the power to adopt rules
and bylaws to govern its meetings and organization.
§ 23-806. Advisors.
Advisors to the Board of Health shall be as follows:
   A.   Health Officer. Under §
5-701, Duties of City Health Officer, of
Chapter 5, Administrative Code, the City of Reading shall have a City Health
Officer appointed by the Mayor. The Health Officer shall advise the Director of
Community Development, and the Health Officer or his designee shall attend all
Board of Health meetings in an advisory capacity.
   B.   Property Maintenance Manager. The Property Maintenance Manager or his
designee shall attend all Board of Health meetings in an advisory capacity on
issues under his/her purview and department. 11
   C.   Legal. The City of Reading Legal Specialist shall attend all Board of
Health meetings in advisory capacity and advise on all legal/law issues.
   D.   Others. The Board of Health may request the attendance of other City
officials as may be necessary from time to time to address or advise on an
issue before it. For example, the Board may request the attendance of the Codes
or Health Inspector for a premises in question.
11. Editor's Note: Amended during codification (see
Ch. 1, General Provisions, Part 2).
Part 9
Blighted Property Review Committee
[Adopted 10-23-2006 by Ord. No. 65-2006 (
Ch. 1, Part 5D, of the 2001 Code of Ordinances)]
§ 23-901. Short title.
This Part 9 shall be known as and may be cited as the "Blighted Property Review
Committee Ordinance."
§ 23-902. Purpose.
The purpose of these provisions are to establish a Blighted Property Review
Committee of the City of Reading to implement provisions of the Urban
Redevelopment Law of 1945, 12  as amended by Act 94 of 1978, further amended by
Act 113 of 2002, promoting reuse and reinvestment in properties in the City of
Reading.
12. Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 1701 et seq.
§ 23-903. Creation, members, duties, term and expenditures.
[Amended 8-9-2010 by Ord. No. 49-2010; 8-23-2010 by Ord. No. 62-2010; 10-9-2023
by Ord. No. 89-2023]
There is hereby established a "Blighted Property Review Committee" (hereinafter
"Committee").
   A.   Duties. The Committee will be responsible for the certification to the
Redevelopment Authority of all properties deemed to be vacant or abandoned.
   B.   Membership. The Committee shall be composed of not less than five
members and two alternates who shall served without compensation. The Committee
shall include at least one member of the governing body, a representative of
the Redevelopment Authority, a representative of the Planning Commission, two
citizen representatives of the City of Reading, one appointed by the Mayor and
one appointed by Council, and two alternates appointed by Council. The citizen
representative shall be nominated by the Mayor. In the event mayoral nomination
does not occur, Council may appoint unfilled positions. All citizen members
shall be approved by Council.
   C.   Terms. The term of each member shall be for a period of four years and
until his or her successor is appointed. A member may be reappointed upon
expiration of his or her term. The position of any member of the Committee
appointed in his or her capacity as a member of the governing body,
representative of the Redevelopment Authority, representative of the Planning
Commission, representative designated by the Mayor, who ceases to be so engaged
shall be automatically considered vacant. An appointment to fill a vacancy
shall be only for the unexpired portion of the term. [Amended 10-22-2012 by
Ord. No. 106-2010]
   D.   Organization of the Committee. The Committee shall establish its own
bylaws, establish offices, and elect officers from its own membership. For the
conduct of any meeting and the taking of any action, a quorum shall be not less
than a majority of the Committee as a whole. For the purpose of this Part, the
Committee will be able to begin holding meetings as soon as a majority of the
members have been appointed and approved by Council. Any action taken at any
meeting shall require the affirmative vote of a majority of the Committee as a
whole. No member of the Committee shall be permitted to take part in the
discussion or vote on any property in which said member has any financial
interest, direct or indirect. The Committee shall keep full public records of
its business and shall submit a report of its activities to City Council at
least once a year.
   E.   Removal of members. Any member may be removed for misconduct or neglect
of duty or for other just cause by a majority vote of Council taken after the
member has received 15 days' advance notice of the intent to take such vote.
Failure of a member to attend three consecutive regular meetings of the
Committee will constitute grounds for immediate removal from the Committee by
City Council. Failure of a member to attend at least 50% of the regular
meetings of the Committee in a calendar year will constitute grounds for
immediate removal from the Committee by City Council. The Chairperson of the
Committee shall inform the City Clerk in writing when a member has failed to
comply with this attendance policy. Following such notification, City Council
may vote to remove the member and seek applicants to fill the vacant position.
13
   F.   Expenditure for services. City Council may appropriate funds for legal,
secretarial, clerk, consultant, and other technical assistance, and for the
acquisition and maintenance of blighted properties, and any other such expenses
incurred in the pursuit of achieving the aims of this Part.
13. Editor's Note: Amended during codification (see
Ch. 1, General Provisions, Part 2).
§ 23-904. Definitions.
For the purpose of this Part, all words used in present tense include the
future tense. All words in the plural number include the singular number and
all words in the singular number include the plural number, unless the natural
construction of the word clearly indicates otherwise. The word "shall" is
mandatory and not discretionary. The word "used" includes "designated,
intended, built, or arranged to be used."
   BLIGHTED PROPERTY —
   A.   Includes:  [Added 2-26-2024 by Ord. No. 12-2024; amended 5-12-2025 by
Ord. No. 34-2025] 
      (1)   A premises:
         (a)   Ascertained to be a public nuisance due to physical condition or
use and regarded as such at common law and deemed to be a danger to public
health, safety and welfare or public nuisance as regulated by a locally adopted
property maintenance code or, if no such code exists, any compatible code
enacted by the act of November 10, 1999 (P.L.491, No.45), known as the
Pennsylvania Construction Code Act; or
         (b)   The condition of which contains an attractive nuisance created
by physical condition, use or occupancy, including abandoned water wells,
shafts, basements, excavations and unsafe fences or other structures, or which
contains an unauthorized entry, unsafe equipment, or other safety risk.
      (2)   A dwelling that has been condemned or otherwise deemed unfit for
occupancy or use by the local authority having jurisdiction due to dilapidated,
unsanitary, unsafe, or vermin-infested condition or that is lacking in the
facilities and equipment as required by the Pennsylvania Construction Code Act.
      (3)   A structure determined by the local authority having jurisdiction
to be a fire hazard or otherwise that could easily catch fire or cause a fire
and endanger public health, safety and welfare.
      (4)   A vacant or unimproved lot or parcel of ground located in a
predominantly developed neighborhood that has become a place for the
accumulation of trash and debris or a haven for rodents and other vermin by
reason of neglect or lack of maintenance.
      (5)   Any structure from which utilities, plumbing, heating, sewage or
other facilities have been disconnected, destroyed, removed, or rendered
ineffective so that the property is unfit for its intended use.
      (6)   A property that is vacant and has not been rehabilitated within one
year from receipt of notice for corrective action as issued by the local
authority having jurisdiction, except a property where a valid construction
permit is in place.
      (7)   A property that has been declared abandoned in writing by the
owner, including an estate that is in possession of the property.
      (8)   A vacant or unimproved lot or parcel of ground that is subject to a
municipal lien for the cost of demolition of a structure previously located on
the property and for which no payments on the lien have been made for a period
of 12 months.
      (9)   A vacant or unimproved lot or parcel of ground on which the total
municipal liens for delinquent real estate and property tax or any other type
of municipal claim are greater than 150% of the fair market value of the
property as established by the board of assessment appeals or other body with
legal authority to determine the taxable value of the property.
      (10)   Any unoccupied property which has been tax delinquent for a period
of two years prior to the effective date of this Part, and those in the future
having a two-year tax delinquency.
      (11)   Any property which is vacant, but not tax delinquent, which has
not been rehabilitated within one year of the receipt of notice to rehabilitate
from the appropriate code enforcement agency. A property which has defective or
unusual conditions of title or no known owners, rendering title unmarketable.
      (12)   A property which has environmentally hazardous conditions, solid
waste pollution or contamination in a building or on the land which poses a
direct and immediate threat to the health, safety and welfare of the community.
      (13)   A property having three or more of the following characteristics:
         (a)   Has unsafe or hazardous conditions that do not meet current use,
occupancy or fire codes;
         (b)   Has unsafe external and internal accessways;
         (c)   Is being served by an unsafe public street or right-of-way;
         (d)   Violates the applicable property maintenance code adopted by a
municipality and is an immediate threat to public health and safety;
         (e)   Is vacant;
         (f)   Is located in a redevelopment area with a density of at least
1,000 people per square mile or a redevelopment area with more than 90% of the
units of property being nonresidential or a municipality with a density of at
least 2,500 people per square mile.
   B.   Multiple properties. Blighted property shall include: [Added 10-22-2012
by Ord. No. 106-2010; amended 2-26-2024 by Ord. No. 12-2024; 5-12-2025 by Ord.
No. 34-2025] 
      (1)   A majority of the units of property meet any of the requirements
under Subsection A and represent a majority of the geographical area; or
      (2)   Properties representing a majority of the geographical area meet
one or more of the conditions set forth in Subsection A(1) through (13) or at
least 1/3 of the units of property meet two or more of the requirements under
Subsection A(1) through (13).
   C.   In the event of conflict or ambiguity regarding this definition, the
defined term and its scope or intent as set forth in PA Act 79 of 2019 shall
control. [Added 5-12-2025 by Ord. No. 34-2025]
   CITY — The City of Reading.
   CITY COUNCIL — The legislative body of the City of Reading, composed of
Council President and six district representatives.
   CODE — The health, housing, building, fire, electrical, plumbing or other
related code of the City of Reading.
   COMMISSION — The Reading Planning Commission.
   COMMITTEE — The Blighted Property Review Committee.
   GOVERNING BODY — The City Council of the City of Reading.
   PUBLIC NUISANCE or NUISANCE — Any condition or usage whatsoever in or about
buildings, structures or land or the streets or private ways and places, or
elsewhere, within the City, whether public or private, which is found to be
detrimental to the public health as determined by the Committee or other
appropriate City office or agency.
   REDEVELOPMENT AREA — Any area, whether improved or unimproved, which the
Planning Commission may find to be blighted so as to require development.
   REDEVELOPMENT AREA PLAN — A plan for the redevelopment of all or part of a
redevelopment area made by a Planning Commission.
   REDEVELOPMENT AUTHORITY — Redevelopment Authority of the City of Reading.
   REDEVELOPMENT PROPOSAL — A proposal, including a copy of the redevelopment
area plan and supporting data, submitted for approval to the governing body by
an authority for the redevelopment of all or part of a redevelopment area.
   RESIDENTIAL AND RELATED USE — Includes residential property for sale or
rental and related uses, including but not limited to, park and recreation
areas, neighborhood community services, and neighborhood parking lots.
   VACANT — Any unoccupied or unimproved lot or parcel of ground, which by
reason or neglect or lack of maintenance shows to be unlikely habitable,
implying abandonment on the part of the previous tenants or owner.
§ 23-905. Blighted property removal.
Notwithstanding any other provision of law, the Redevelopment Authority shall
have the power to acquire by purchase, gift, bequest, eminent domain or
otherwise, any blighted property as defined herein, either within or outside of
a redevelopment area and, further, shall have the power to hold, clear, manage,
lease and/or dispose of said property for residential and related uses. This
power shall be exercised in accord with the procedures set for hereinafter.
§ 23-906. Restrictions.
[Amended 8-10-2009 by Ord. No. 42-2009; 3-22-2010 by Ord. No. 10-2010; 12-27-
2010 by Ord. No. 108-2010; 11-10-2025 by Ord. No. 73-2025]
The Blighted Property Review Committee and the Planning Commission, upon making
a determination that any property is blighted as defined in §
23-904, above, must certify said blighted property to the Redevelopment
Authority except that:
   A.   No property shall be certified to the Redevelopment Authority unless it
is vacant or abandoned.
   B.   No property shall be certified to the Redevelopment Authority unless
the owner of the property or an agent designated by him for the receipt of
service of notices has been served with notice of the determination that the
property is blighted, together with an appropriate order to eliminate the
conditions causing blight and notification that failure to do so may render the
property subject to condemnation. The notice shall be served upon the owner or
his agent. In addition, a Declaration of Blight shall be recorded with the
Berks County Recorder of Deeds and attaching the notice to the deed of the
certified property which shall be constructive notice to all purchasers and
other persons who are responsible for the property.
      (1)   Procedure. Whenever the Committee shall determine, after such
examination, investigation or hearing as shall suffice to inform its judgment,
that a public nuisance exists or is about to exist, it may order the nuisance
to be removed, abated, suspended, altered, or otherwise prevented or avoided.
Notice of such order, bearing the official title of the Committee and the
number of days for compliance therewith and the alternative remedy of the
Committee in case of noncompliance, shall be served upon the person, if any,
whom the Committee deems responsible therefor or concerned therein, and upon
the owner or abutting owner of the land, premises or other places whereon such
a nuisance is or is about to be, if any. In case no such party or parties can
be discovered by the Committee, the order shall be served by posting a copy or
copies thereof conspicuously upon the premises for a period of at least 10
days.
      (2)   Contents of notice. The notice of the Committee's order shall
clearly specify:
         (a)   The place and manner of the nuisance or anticipated nuisance as
determined by the Committee.
         (b)   The nature or condition thereof.
         (c)   The Committee's order with respect to the nuisance or
anticipated nuisance.
         (d)   The name of the persons found by the Committee to be responsible
therefor or concerned therewith and the name of the owner, if any, of the land
or premises involved; in the event the owner or contact cannot be determined,
said notice shall reflect this.
         (e)   The date of the Committee's order and the number of days there
from allowed for compliance with it.
         (f)   The alternative remedy of the Committee in case of
noncompliance.
         (g)   The signature of the Chair of the Committee, attested by the
Secretary.
      (3)   Hearing and disposition.
         (a)   If any person affected thereby shall apply for a hearing within
the time provided, the Committee shall promptly notify all interested parties
of the time and place of the hearing.
         (b)   The Committee shall enter upon its minutes such facts and proofs
as it may receive, and its proceedings on such hearing and thereafter may
rescind, modify or reaffirm its order and require execution of the original or
of a new or modified order, as it shall determine and direct.
   C.   No blighted property shall be certified to the Redevelopment Authority
on which more than 10 dwelling units can be constructed under existing zoning
regulations.
§ 23-907. Reuse of acquired property.
   A.   Acquisition and disposition of blighted property shall not require
preparation, adoption or approval of a redevelopment area plan or redevelopment
proposal, but at least 30 days prior to acquisition of any property, the
Redevelopment Authority shall transmit identification of the property to the
Planning Commission and shall request a recommendation as to the appropriate
reuse of the property. The Redevelopment Authority shall not acquire the
property where the Planning Commission certifies that disposition for
residential or related use would not be in accord with the Comprehensive Plan
of the City of Reading.
   B.   Property disposed of within a redevelopment area shall be disposed of
under a redevelopment contract in accordance with the provisions of the Urban
Redevelopment Law. 14
   C.   Property disposed of outside a redevelopment area shall be disposed of
by deed in accordance with the provisions set forth in applicable law.
   D.   Power of eminent domain shall be exercised pursuant to a resolution of
the Redevelopment Authority and the procedures set forth in applicable law.
14. Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 1701 et seq.
§ 23-908. Conflict with other laws.
Should any provisions set forth in this Part be found to conflict with any law
of the United States or the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, such federal and/or
state laws shall govern and this Part shall be construed accordingly. Such a
conflict shall not affect the validity of this Part.
Part 10
Diversity Board
[Adopted 7-9-2007 by Ord. No. 54-2007 (
Ch. 1, Part 5O, of the 2001 Code of Ordinances)]
§ 23-1001. Purpose.
The City of Reading City Council hereby creates a City of Reading Diversity
Board to serve in an advisory capacity to the Mayor and City Council by
providing input on policy and processes that promote and facilitate active
involvement and participation by diverse cultures such as of race, color,
religion, ancestry, national origin, age, sex, familial status, and handicap
within the Reading Community.
§ 23-1002. Responsibilities.
The City of Reading Diversity Board shall have the following responsibilities:
   A.   To promote understanding that accepts, celebrates and appreciates
diversity within the Reading community.
   B.   To serve as a resource and provide recommendations for the City
regarding opportunities to address or promote diversity issues or programs
within the City and community.
   C.   To promote and encourage active involvement and participation by
diverse cultures within the Reading community and City government.
   D.   To enlist the cooperation of various groups in the community to
participate in educational, cultural and other campaigns demonstrating an
awareness of cultural and human diversity in the community.
§ 23-1003. Membership; removal.
[Amended 3-8-2010 by Ord. No. 6-2010; 9-13-2010 by Ord. No. 68-2010; 8-22-2011
by Ord. No. 41A-2011; 2-11-2013 by Ord. No. 7-2013; 8-26-2013 by Ord. No. 35-
2013; 9-28-2015 by Ord. No. 52-2015]
   A.   The Diversity Board shall be composed of nine voting members, chosen to
serve three-year staggered terms and appointed by the City Council. The
Diversity Board shall include one representative of Council, Managing Director,
or designee, the Human Resources Director or designee, one member representing
AFSCME, one representative of the NAACP, one representative of a reputable,
majority Latino or Hispanic organization located within the City of Reading,
the Human Relations Commission Executive Director or designee, and two members
reflecting the geographic, demographic, technical, and nontechnical backgrounds
of the citizens of Reading.
   B.   Removal of members. Any member may be removed for misconduct or neglect
of duty or for other just cause by a majority vote of Council taken after the
member has received 15 days' advance notice of the intent to take such vote.
Diversity Board members having two or more unexcused absences in a calendar
year may be replaced by City Council. Notification of potential dismissal from
the Diversity Board will be mailed by the Chair to the Board member following a
second absence within a calendar year. The Chairperson of the Board shall
inform the City Clerk in writing when a member has failed to comply with this
attendance policy. Following such notification, City Council may vote to remove
the member and seek applicants to fill the vacant position.
§ 23-1004. Organization of Board.
[Amended 2-11-2013 by Ord. No. 7-2013 ]
The Diversity Board shall establish its own bylaws, establish offices and elect
officers from its membership. To conduct any meeting, a majority of the Board
shall be present. A majority of the Board must vote affirmatively to approve
any motion or action. The Diversity Board shall receive legal counsel from the
City's Law Department and assistance from the Human Resources Division.
§ 23-1005. Powers and duties.
It shall be the duty of the City of Reading Diversity Board to:
   A.   Annually review the City's progress in implementing a Citywide
Diversity Plan and report the results of the review to the Mayor and City
Council.
   B.   Issue reports and actively participate in ongoing dialog with the
community consistent with the purpose of the Board.
   C.   To promote and encourage active involvement and participation by
diverse cultures within the Reading community and City government.
   D.   Develop and propose municipal policies and procedures that increase
diverse representation in the City's work force and assure fair and equitable
treatment of all applicants.
   E.   Create a mission statement that reflects the purpose and
responsibilities defined herein.
§ 23-1006. Meetings.
[Amended 2-11-2013 by Ord. No. 7-2013 ]
The Diversity Board shall meet quarterly on a day and time approved by majority
vote of the Board. The meetings of the Board shall be publicized and open to
the public in accordance with the Sunshine Act. 15  Copies of meeting minutes
will be provided to the City Clerk's Office.
15. Editor's Note: See 65 Pa.C.S.A. § 701 et seq.
§ 23-1007. Expenditures for services.
City Council may, upon written request of the Diversity Board, appropriate
funds for expenses incurred in the pursuit of achieving the purpose of this
Part 10.
Part 11
Environmental Advisory Council
[Adopted 3-24-2008 by Ord. No. 27-2008 (
Ch. 1, Part 5N, of the 2001 Code of Ordinances)]
§ 23-1101. Purpose.
The Environmental Advisory Council (EAC) duly organized under these bylaws
shall have the power to study environmental and sustainability issues at the
request of City Council and make recommendations to Council on those issues.
The EAC will work with City Council in an advisory capacity in an effort to
help Council analyze environmental and sustainability issues and, when
appropriate, issue recommendations on courses of action necessary to protect
the health, safety and welfare of the residents of Berks County.
§ 23-1102. Membership.
   A.   The EAC is composed of seven voting members, chosen to serve three-year
staggered terms and appointed by City Council. These members shall reflect the
geographic, demographic, technical, and nontechnical backgrounds of the
citizens of Reading.
   B.   Removal of members. Any member may be removed for misconduct or neglect
of duty or for other just cause by a majority vote of Council taken after the
member has received 15 days' advance notice of the intent to take such vote.
Failure of a member to attend three consecutive regular meetings of the EAC
will constitute grounds for immediate removal from the EAC by City Council.
Failure of a member to attend at least 50% of the regular meetings of the EAC
in a calendar year will constitute grounds for immediate removal from the EAC
by City Council. The Chairperson of the EAC shall inform the City Clerk in
writing when a member has failed to comply with this attendance policy.
Following such notification, City Council may vote to remove the member and
seek applicants to fill the vacant position. [Amended 9-13-2010 by Ord. No. 67-
2010; 8-26-2013 by Ord. No. 35-2013]
§ 23-1103. Meetings and voting.
   A.   Monthly meetings. Regular meetings of the EAC will be determined by the
membership of the EAC. Notices of an EAC meetings will be posted on the City of
Reading website, the municipal access channel and, if necessary, a newspaper of
general record.
   B.   Special meetings. Special meetings may be requested by the Chair, or by
a majority of the EAC members. Such special meetings shall be held at such
place, date and hour as may be designated by the person or persons authorized
herein to call such a meeting.
   C.   Written or phone notice of such a special meeting shall be given by the
Chair to the Advisory Council members at least five days and not more than 21
days prior to the meeting. City Council and the public shall be notified for
such meetings in appropriate manner; i.e., posting the date, time and location
on the City website, posting on the municipal access channel, sending a letter
to City Council, etc.
   D.   Quorum. In the event a quorum is not present at any meeting, the
members may reschedule the meeting for a later date with the required notice. A
quorum shall consist of more than 2/3 of the current voting members. The act of
the majority of the members present at a meeting at which a quorum is present
shall be the act of the Council.
   E.   Voting. Each member is entitled to one vote, with the voting governed
by parliamentary procedure according to Robert's Rules of Order.
   F.   Notes. Notes from meetings will be kept and copies of the meeting's
notes will be sent to the City Clerk's Office and each member of the EAC.
   G.   All meetings or portions of meetings at which action is taken shall be
open to the public.
However, the EAC may meet in closed session for discussion purposes, pursuant
to the "Sunshine Act of 1987."16
16. Editor's Note: See 65 Pa.C.S.A. § 701 et seq.
§ 23-1104. Officers and compensation.
   A.   Officers. The EAC shall elect from among their members a Chair and a
Vice Chair at the first meeting of each calendar year. Officers shall serve for
one year or until their successors are elected.
   B.   Chair. The Chair shall preside at all meetings of the Council and shall
have the duties and powers normally invested in the Office of Chair. He/she
shall enforce the bylaws and regulations of the EAC. He/she shall be the
official spokesperson for the EAC.
   C.   Vice Chair. The Vice Chair shall carry out the Chair's duties in case
of absence, incapacity, or resignation.
   D.   Secretary. The Secretary will be responsible for keeping the official
minutes of the EAC and preparing all correspondence on behalf of the EAC.
   E.   Compensation. No EAC member shall receive any salary or payment for
his/her services.
Financial support of the EAC can be provided by City Council through the
authorization of an appropriation to the General Fund budget. 17
17. Editor's Note: Amended during codification (see
Ch. 1, General Provisions, Part 2).
§ 23-1105. Duties.
   A.   To coordinate at the request of Council ongoing, and to propose and
promote new environmental protection and sustainability initiatives among
residents, businesses, governmental and nongovernmental agencies, and
educational organizations through education and outreach programs.
   B.   To advise and make recommendations to City Council, City
Administration, and City boards, authorities and commissions on policies and
programs that infuse the work of City government with an operating philosophy
based on environmental protection and sustainability.
   C.   To recommend plans and programs to the appropriate agencies for
promotion and conservation of natural resources and for the protection and
improvement of the quality of the environment within the City of Reading and
surrounding areas.
   D.   Make recommendations as to the possible use of open land areas within
the City of Reading.
   E.   To promote community environmental awareness programs.
   F.   Keep an index of all open areas, publicly or privately owned, including
but not limited to, flood-prone areas, wetlands and other unique natural areas.
   G.   To prepare an annual report to City Council on its activities, goals
and accomplishments.
   H.   For each issue that the EAC reviews, it will generate a report to City
Council that sets forth its findings and dissenting opinions, if any.
   I.   To consult and cooperate with other agencies, departments, boards,
authorities and commissions of the City of Reading on environmental matters.
§ 23-1106. Bylaws.
   A.   The Environmental Advisory Council Bylaws will be drafted and adopted
by City Council.
   B.   If at any time the established bylaws are determined to be at conflict
with EAC activities or impose too great a set of constraints, the EAC may
request City Council amend the bylaws. The request, along with specific
recommendations, must be submitted to City Council in writing. Upon receiving a
request for amendment, City Council will meet with representatives of the EAC
to discuss the request. Amendments to the EAC bylaws must be approved by City
Council through resolution.
   C.   City Council reserves the right to amend the bylaws of the EAC through
the adoption of subsequent resolutions.
§ 23-1107. Hearings.
   A.   In addition to those required by law, the EAC may hold public hearings
when the EAC and City Council decide that such hearings will be in the public
interest.
   B.   Except as required by law, notice of the time and place of such
hearings, when on matters of widespread interest, shall be published in at
least one newspaper of general circulation in the territorial jurisdiction of
the hearing, not earlier than two weeks prior to the hearing. For matters of
limited territorial interest, notice shall be given in such manner as is deemed
appropriate by the EAC.
   C.   The matter before the EAC shall be presented in summary by some person
designated by the Chair, and parties in interest shall have privilege of the
floor.
   D.   No record or statement shall be recorded or sworn to by the EAC as
evidence for any court of law without notice to the parties mentioned in the
record or statement.
   E.   A record shall be kept of those speaking before the EAC at such
hearings.
   F.   Copies of all testimony and other evidence provided at a public hearing
must be forwarded to the City Clerk's Office at the conclusion of the hearing.
§ 23-1108. Intermunicipal cooperation.
   A.   No part of this Part 11 shall prohibit the Reading Environmental
Advisory Council from cooperating with similar organizations in other
jurisdictions.
   B.   In the interest of efficiency, the Reading Environmental Advisory
Council may wish to form a joint board with other jurisdictions. Any merger
shall be treated as an amendment of this Part 11 requiring the approval of City
Council.
Part 12
Downtown Revitalization Public Private Partnership 18
[Adopted 7-23-2018 by Ord. No. 41-2018]
18.   Former Chapter 23, Part 12, Main Street Program Board, repealed by Ord.
No. 40-2018, adopted 7-23-2018.
§ 23-1201. Authorization.
[Amended 10-8-2018 by Ord. No. 66-2018; 8-9-2021 by Ord. 60-2021]
The City Council recognizes the need to increase the economic momentum in the
Central Business District of the City of Reading, Berks County, Pennsylvania
(the "City") in and around Penn Street. The City desires to partner with the
Greater Reading Chamber Alliance (GRCA) and use the resources and ability of
the GRCA to administer an economic development strategy and initiatives
including but not limited to the Main Street Program that will 1) promote a
sense of community and unified purpose, 2) assure the historic continuity of
the City's architectural heritage, 3) improve the image and perception of the
City to residents and visitors and 4) strengthen economic rejuvenation of
property and commerce for the benefit of all.
The Downtown Revitalization Public Private Partnership is hereby authorized and
shall consist of nine voting members, serving voluntarily, to serve four year
staggered terms, as follows:
   •   A member of City Council, initially serving a two year term, selected
and appointed by City Council
   •   A representative of the Mayor's administration, initially serving a two
year term, selected and appointed by the Mayor
   •   A representative of a large business, initially serving a four year
term, selected and appointed by City Council
   •   A representative of a small business, initially serving a four year
term, selected and appointed by the Mayor
   •   Two representatives from private entities, initially serving three and
four year terms respectively, selected and appointed by the GRCA
   •   One citizen, who must be a City resident who is not employed, appointed
or elected to any government position, initially serving a three year term,
selected and appointed by the Mayor
   •    The City of Reading Designated Downtown Coordinator
   •   The Executive Director of Downtown Revitalization, who shall be employed
by the GRCA
Each appointing entity shall have the ability to select and appoint an
alternate member who shall have the same term as the full member to attend
meetings and participate in the member's absence.
Any appointment made after the effective date of the October 8, 2018 amendment
that does not comply with any of the requirements and conditions as stated
herein shall be considered null and void.
§ 23-1202. Officers.
The membership shall elect the positions of Chair, Vice-Chair and Secretary
annually at their January meeting.
   A.   Chair. The Chair shall preside at all meetings and shall have the
duties and powers normally vested in the Office of Chair. He/she shall enforce
the bylaws and regulations of and be the official spokesperson of the public-
private partnership, along with the Executive Director.
   B.   Vice-Chair. The Vice-Chair shall carry out the Chair's duties in case
of absence, incapacity, or resignation.
   C.   Secretary. The Secretary will be responsible for keeping the official
minutes of the public-private partnership. The monthly minutes, agenda and
reports shall be provided to the City of Reading City Clerk, after they are
approved by the Board.
   D.   Program Manager. The Executive Director of Downtown Revitalization,
will be employed by the GRCA, shall be the Program Manager, responsible to the
Public Private Partnership for carrying out its Revitalization Program.
§ 23-1203. Committees.
Through its committee structure, the Public Private Partnership shall promote
and foster as full a participation of all Downtown stakeholders as possible.
This structure shall be composed of such committees as the Partnership shall
create and deem necessary.
§ 23-1204. Quorum.
Five members shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of business.
§ 23-1205. Purpose.
A comprehensive approach to downtown revitalization involves aesthetics,
business creation, business retention, and housing possibilities – all creating
a healthy and economically vibrant downtown. The public private partnership
shall focus on building a stronger downtown community through a five-year
strategic plan including the Main Street program's four point approach of
Organization, Promotion, Design and Economic Restructuring.
The Downtown Revitalization Public Private Partnership shall involve government
officials, business organizations, and property owners to:
   •   Implement an effective business strategy to recruit appropriate small
and large businesses;
   •   Encourage the development of new housing in the upper levels of
commercial properties to strengthen the social and economic vitality of the
downtown;
   •   Undertake community renewal programs at the local level;
   •   Facilitate an effective planning process that ensures that capital
investments of public funds will enhance the aesthetics and economics of the
commercial district through appropriate design that respects the historic
architecture of the target area;
   •   Develop strategies, to update zoning requirements and building code
requirements that may discourage economic reinvestment;
   •   Promote economic activity through a coordinated outreach and
communication strategy to publicize activities;
   •   Measure and evaluate progress in meeting established goals.
   •   Preserve significant or historic buildings and provide an environment
that attracts new investment to enable the adaptive reuse of these buildings
for new Main Street enterprises;
   •   Develop effective communication with existing downtown merchants and
residents:
   •   Develop a coordinated marketing effort to attract investments,
prospective businesses, and new residents.
§ 23-1206. Duties.
   A.   Exercise administrative and general fiduciary review of the State Main
Street program and the operations and programs of the Downtown Revitalization
Public Partnership Program, including but not limited to preparation of a
budget, management of expenditures, operation of programs, and activities.
   B.   Authorize the Executive Director of Downtown Revitalization, employed
by the GRCA, as the Downtown Revitalization Public Private Partnership Program
Manager.
   C.   Apply for grants and other funding to successfully implement the
Program.
Part 13
Audit Committee
[Adopted 5-14-2012 by Ord. No. 49-2012]
§ 23-1301. Purpose.
The Act 47 Recovery Plan Initiative CA02 requires the City of Reading to
establish a process for coordinating and responding to external audits. The
City of Reading Audit Committee should facilitate City Council's performance of
its oversight role. It should provide independent review of a municipality's
financial reporting processes, internal and external audits, formal responses
to audits and oversight of City management's actions to achieve compliance. The
Committee should ensure that City management properly develop and adhere to
standard operating procedures for its fiscal affairs, uphold the integrity of
independent external audits, and the objectivity and comprehensiveness of
internal audits.
§ 23-1302. Membership.
The City of Reading Audit Committee shall be composed of five members comprised
of City Clerk, City Auditor, Chair of the Council Finance Committee, or his
representative, the Finance Director, and a qualified citizen who is a resident
of the City for at least three years, has at least five years of experience in
public accounting, finance or budgeting, and is willing to serve a three-year
term. The citizen can be selected by Council but will operate as an independent
voice on the Committee.
§ 23-1303. Functions.
The City of Reading Audit Committee shall be chaired by the City Auditor. Each
Committee member will have one equal vote. The Committee shall meet within five
business days from the end of each quarter. The City of Reading Audit Committee
will:
   A.   Select the external auditor, in accordance with the City's procurement
code. The external auditor shall report its findings to the Audit Committee,
and work with the Audit Committee to achieve compliance.
   B.   Review the City’s financial statements, including all quarterly
financial statements produced by the Finance Department for accuracy and
completeness, including any adjustments required by the external auditor.
   C.   Approve the annual work plan of the City Auditor to ensure the audits
are timely and constructive.
   D.   Make a report to Council at the start and end of each fiscal year that
details its areas of focus and at the close of each year to describe the
Committee's success and challenges.
   E.   Review all internal audits prepared by the City Elected Auditor.
   F.   Examine all aspects of the financial reporting process.
   G.   Provide a statement on whether the City's year-end financials are
accurately presented.
§ 23-1304. Authority.
The City of Reading City Council hereby empowers the City of Reading Audit
Committee to execute its mission by:
   A.   Providing funding for the engagement and the services of an external
auditor and other government financial experts as determined by a majority vote
of the Committee;
   B.   Providing access to the schedule of audits and reports produced by the
internal elected auditor;
   C.   Providing authority to ensure appropriate corrective action is taken by
City management in response to the internal and external audits;
   D.   Providing authority to establish procedures for the confidential
receipt, retention and treatment of complaints regarding accounting, internal
accounting controls, or auditing matters from City municipal employees;
   E.   Providing authority to review the financial documents and procedures of
all related boards and commissions to ensure accurate financial reporting and
make recommendations for improvements to the various financial procedures.
Part 14
Code and License Appeals Board
Publisher's Note: This Part has been AMENDED by new legislation (Ord. 35-2022,
enacted 4-25-2022). The text of the amendment will be incorporated below when
the ordinance is codified.
[Adopted 12-22-2014 by Ord. No. 102-2014]
§ 23-1401. Organization.
[Amended 6-26-2017 by Ord. No. 53-2017; 5-19-2020 by Referendum]
   A.   Membership. The Code and License Appeals Board shall be a body of five
members consisting of: the Finance Director or his/her designee who shall serve
as Chairperson; a Councilperson from the district the business or property is
located in or the designee of the President of Council if the District
Councilor is unavailable, a member of the business community; a resident at
large; and member of a recognized City of Reading community group.
   B.   Alternates. There shall be three alternate members one each from the
following groups: a member of the business community, a resident at large and a
member of a community group recognized by the City of Reading.
   C.   Appointment. The member of the business community and the alternate
from the business community shall be appointed by the Mayor without
confirmation of Council and the remaining members and alternates shall be
appointed by Council.
   D.   Term.
      (1)   A member or alternate member shall serve a term of three years from
the time of appointment or reappointment or until his/her successor shall take
office. Members and alternates of the initial Board shall be appointed to
staggered terms of one, two and three years. Members may be appointed to serve
successive terms.
      (2)   Removal of members. Any member may be removed for misconduct or
neglect of duty or for other just cause by a majority vote of Council taken
after the member has received 15 days’ advance notice of the intent to take
such vote. Failure of a member to attend three consecutive regular meetings of
the Board will constitute grounds for immediate removal from the Board by City
Council. Failure of a member to attend at least 50% of the regular meetings of
the Board in a calendar year will constitute grounds for immediate removal from
the Board by City Council. The Chairperson of the Board shall inform the City
Clerk in writing when a member has failed to comply with this attendance
policy. Following such notification, City Council may vote to remove the member
and seek applicants to fill the vacant position.
      (3)   Designees and alternate members may be requested to attend meetings
in absence of a regular member and shall have all the powers of a regular
member at such meetings.
   E.   Quorum and majority vote. Three members shall constitute a quorum of
the Board. A majority vote of the members of the quorum of the Board shall
prevail. A tie vote shall be deemed as a denial of the appeal.
§ 23-1402. Powers.
[Amended 9-11-2017 by Ord. No. 86-2017; 6-14-2021 by Ord. 45-2021; 4-25- 2022
by Ord. No. 35-2022]
The Code and License Appeals Board shall have the following powers:
   A.   Promulgate rules and regulations. To adopt and administer the rules of
procedure regarding its organization, officers (except the Chairperson), times
and places of meetings, conduct of meetings and other legal procedures relating
to the hearing and determination of appeals and other matters within the
Board's jurisdiction.
   B.   Oaths and subpoenas. The Board shall have power to administer oaths and
issue subpoenas to compel the attendance of witnesses and the production of
relevant documents and papers, including witnesses and documents requested by
the parties.
   C.   Hear and decide matters.
      (1)   To hear and decide matters regarding the revocation of a business
privilege license where it is alleged that one of the criteria set forth herein
has been violated. The Board is also authorized to hear appeals of refusals of
business privilege license or cease operations order.
      (2)   To hear and decide matters regarding appeals to the Property
Maintenance Code.
      (3)   To hear and decide matters relating to appeals of the Solid Waste
Code, which includes solid waste, dumpsters and recycling.
      (4)   To hear and decide matters relating to appeals of the Housing
Ordinance, including appeals to issued disruptive conduct reports.
      (5)   To hear and decide matters relating to appeals of the Vending
Machine Ordinance.
      (6)   To hear and decide matters relating to appeals of the Mobile
Vendors Ordinance.
      (7)   To modify any notice of violation or order and to authorize a
variance from the terms of this code when, because of special circumstances,
undue hardship would result from literal enforcement, and where such variance
substantially complies with the spirit and intent of the Code.
      (8)   To grant a reasonable extension of time for the compliance, as
described in the City’s Property Maintenance Code (
Chapter 180, Part 13) and other applicable sections of the Code of the City of
Reading of any order where there is a demonstrated case of hardship and
evidence of bona fide intent to comply within a reasonable time period.
      (9)   To hear and decide appeals relating to
Chapter 576, Part 13 Motorized Devices and All-Terrain Vehicles.
   D.   Timeliness.
      (1)   In exercising the above-mentioned powers, the Board shall act with
reasonable promptness and seek to prevent unwarranted delays prejudicial to the
party involved and to the public interest; provided, however, that the Board
shall hold a hearing on any founded appeal at stated periodic meeting but in no
event later than 30 days after receipt of the application and shall file its
decision within 10 days after the appeal hearing.
      (2)   The decision of the Board shall be filed with the Managing
Director, the Solicitor and the City Clerk. Copies of the decision shall be
sent by first class mail to the appellant within 10 days of the Board's
decision.
   E.   Authority.
      (1)   The Board is empowered to find no cause for the revocation of a
business privilege license or cause to revoke a business privilege license by a
majority vote of the appointed members. The Board shall be bound by this Part
and shall not ignore the clear provisions and intent of this Part.
   (2)   The Board shall modify or reverse the decision of the Solid Waste,
Housing, Vending Machine, or the Property Maintenance Code official or City of
Reading Police Officer only by a majority vote of the appointed members.
      (3)   The Administration shall take immediate action in accordance with
the decision of the Board.
   F.   Court review.
      (1)   Any party to the appeal to the Board shall have to the appeal the
decision of the Board to the appropriate court of jurisdiction in the manner
and time required by law following the filing of the Board's decision, as per
Subsection D(2) herein.
      (2)   Stays of enforcement. Appeals of decisions of the Board shall stay
the enforcement and collection of the bill for costs of abatement of violation
of this Part.
Part 15
YOUTH COMMISSION
[Adopted 5-22-2017 by Ord. No. 47-2017]
§ 23-1501. Purpose.
[Amended 6-26-2023 by Ord. No. 57-2023]
It is the purpose and intent of the City Council to establish a City of Reading
Youth Commission [Commission]. The Commission will serve as an advisory body to
the Mayor, City Council, and Managing Director on issues of interest to youth
and pertaining to youth in the City of Reading. The Commission will also have
an active role in City events. Youth and young adults are impacted by the
decisions of City officials, but seldom have the opportunity to directly
participate in the process. Establishment of a Commission will facilitate the
participation of youth and young adults in local government, as well as provide
City officials an opportunity to hear and address their ideas and concerns.
City Council members are encouraged to provide guidance and mentorship to their
District Commission representative.
§ 23-1502. Youth Commission Members.
[Amended 6-26-2023 by Ord. No. 57-2023]
   A.   The Commission shall consist of 15 members between the ages of 16 - 24
who shall serve without compensation. Each Council District shall have two
representatives, which may include students from Albright College, Alvernia
University and Reading Area Community College, who shall be nominated by the
District Councilmember and approved by City Council. The remaining members
shall be nominated by the Mayor and confirmed by City Council. Vacancies shall
be filled in the same manner. If any member of the Commission reaches the age
of 25 while serving on the Commission, the appointment of that member shall
expire the following July 1.
   B.   Members shall serve three-year staggered terms, and each member shall
serve until a successor is duly appointed and confirmed. No member shall serve
more than two consecutive terms. The expiration date of all terms shall be July
1.
   C.   The Commission shall elect a Chair, Vice Chair and a Secretary annually
from the members of the Commission. The Commission shall provide an agenda and
a meeting report from all meetings to the City Clerk.
§ 23-1503. City Council Liaison.
City Council shall appoint two liaisons to facilitate the activities and
meetings of the Commission, one of whom shall be a representative of City
Council. Both shall serve without compensation.
§ 23-1504. Meetings.
   A.   A quorum shall consist of the majority of the members present at the
meeting, but no less than five members.
   B.   All Commission meetings shall adhere to State regulations as defined in
the Act of June 3,1986, P.L. 388, No. 84, known as the “Sunshine Act,” 53 P.S.
§ 271 et seq.
   C.   Regular meetings of the Commission shall be determined by the
membership but the Commission shall meet no less than four times per year.
Notices of meetings will be posted on the City of Reading website.
   D.   Minutes from meetings will be kept and copies of the meeting minutes
will be sent to the City Clerk’s Office after each meeting.
§ 23-1505. Duties and functions.
[Amended 6-26-2023 by Ord. No. 57-2023]
The Commission shall:
   A.   Identify critical issues affecting youth in the City of Reading.
   B.   Provide advice and recommendations to the Mayor, City Council, Managing
Director, and other City officials on issues affecting youth in the City of
Reading.
   C.   Create educational campaigns to raise awareness about youth issues.
   D.   Create its own initiatives.
   E.   Help to plan and participate in City-sponsored events.
   F.   Current Commission members are encouraged to actively recruit new
members.
   G.   Form subcommittees of less than a majority of its members as deemed
necessary to allow for in-depth review of issues of interest to the Commission.
   H.   Make available to the Managing Director its findings and
recommendations and present periodic reports to City Council.
   I.   Provide a written report annually on the status of the Commission and
its activities to the Mayor and City Council.
   J.   Perform such further duties as may hereafter be delegated to the
Commission by resolution of the City Council.
§ 23-1506. Removal of members.
[Added 6-24-2024 by Ord. 35-2024]
   Any member may be removed for misconduct or neglect of duty or for other
just cause by a majority vote of Council taken after the member has received 15
days' advance notice of the intent to take such vote. Failure of a member to
attend three consecutive regular meetings of the Commission will constitute
grounds for immediate removal from the Commission by City Council. Failure of a
member to attend at least 50% of the regular meetings of the Commission in a
calendar year will constitute grounds for immediate removal from the Commission
by City Council. The Chairperson of the Commission shall inform the City Clerk
in writing when a member has failed to comply with this attendance policy.
Following such notification, City Council may vote to remove the member and
seek applicants to fill the vacant position.
Chapter 36
FIRE AND RESCUE SERVICES
§
36-101.   Recognizing Volunteer Fire Department.
§
36-102.   Organization of new fire companies.
§
36-103.   Classifying members of volunteer fire companies into certified
volunteer firefighters and volunteer non- firefighters.
§
36-104.   Appropriations.
§
36-105.   Officers.
§
36-106.   Salaries.
§
36-107.   Duties at fires.
§
36-108.   Service outside City.
§
36-109.   Fire Chief as ex officio Fire Marshal.
§
36-110.   Adoption of standard screw coupling.
§
36-111.   Rules and regulations.
§
36-112.   Fire Marshal creation, appointment and reports.
§
36-113.   Fees for emergency medical services; delinquent bill accounts.
§
36-114.   Collection procedures and collection agency fees for delinquent
RFDEMS accounts.
§
36-115.   Fees for standby medical services; right of first refusal.
[HISTORY: Adopted by the City Council of the City of Reading 12-22-1937 by Ord.
No. 74-1937 (
Ch. 1, Part 9, of the 2001 Code of Ordinances). Amendments noted where
applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES Police Department — See
Ch. 77.
STATE LAW REFERENCES
Third Class City Code fire bureau provisions - See 11 Pa.C.S. §§ 10101 et seq.
§ 36-101. Recognizing Volunteer Fire Department.
[Amended 6-8-1938 by Ord. No. 20-1938; 5-29-2001 by Ord. No. 14-2001]
   A.   The following named fire companies, to wit:
      (1)   Rainbow Steam Fire Engine Company No. 1, of the City of Reading,
Pa., instituted March 17, 1773.
      (2)   The Junior Steam Fire Engine Company No. 2, instituted December, 2,
1813.
      (3)   Reading Hose Company No. 1, instituted July 4, 1819.
      (4)   Neversink Fire Company No. 3, of the City of Reading, instituted
April 14, 1829.
      (5)   Friendship Steam Fire Engine Company No. 4 of Reading, Pa.,
instituted March 4, 1848.
      (6)   The Liberty Fire Company of Reading, Pa., instituted January 21,
1854.
      (7)   Washington Fire Company No. 2 of Reading, Pa., instituted September
17, 1855.
      (8)   Keystone Hook & Ladder Company No. 1, of Reading, Pa., instituted
January 19, 1856.
      (9)   The Hampden Steam Fire Engine Company No. 6. of Reading, Pa.,
organized September 8, 1867.
      (10)   Marion Hose and Steam Fire Engine Company No. 10, of Reading, Pa.,
instituted October 1, 1881.
      (11)   Riverside Steam Fire Engine Company, instituted January 9, 1890.
      (12)   The Schuylkill Fire Company of the City of Reading, instituted
February 20, 1892.
      (13)   The Union Fire Company of Reading, Pa., instituted March 18, 1898.
      (14)   Oakbrook Fire Company, organized November, 1902.
   B.   Together with such other fire companies as may be hereafter organized,
in accordance with the provisions of §
36-102 hereof, shall constitute the Firemen's Union of the City of Reading.
Such companies are hereby recognized as the duly organized Volunteer Fire
Department of the City, subject to such necessary rules and regulations as
Council shall approve by ordinance.
§ 36-102. Organization of new fire companies.
No new fire company shall be organized in the City except by ordinance of
Council upon petition of the Firemen's Union, setting forth the name, location
and membership of the proposed company, together with the consent of at least
2/3 of the companies at that time composing the Firemen's Union.
§ 36-103. Classifying members of volunteer fire companies into certified
volunteer firefighters and volunteer non-firefighters.
[Added 2-27-1989 by Ord. No. 18-1989; 5-29-2001 by Ord. No. 14-2001]
In the month of February of each year, the Department of Fire and Rescue
Services shall certify as firefighter those members of the City volunteer fire
engine companies who have maintained sufficient and adequate ongoing fire
training and who have received any other fire suppression instruction as
required by the Department. It is the intent of this provision that only those
members of volunteer fire companies who have been certified as a firefighter by
the Department shall be permitted to ride in or on Department of Fire and
Rescue Services apparati, utilize or employ firefighting devices, tools and
equipment and/or engage in firefighting, fire- suppression activities and/or
participate directly or indirectly in firefighting activities at a fire scene,
in order to lessen the element of danger to life and property because of
improvident actions of insufficiently trained volunteer and noncertified
firefighters. Members of volunteer fire companies certified in any one phase of
Department of Fire and Rescue Services operations such as SCUBA rescue/
hazardous materials, etc., shall not, without the required credentials, be
teams of the Department, certified to participate in their own respective
emergency and rescue units, shall, nevertheless, be required to be a certified
volunteer firefighter in order to participate in fire-suppression emergency
operations.
§ 36-104. Appropriations.
[Amended 6-8-1938 by Ord. No. 20-1938; 12-3-1975 by Ord. No. 51-1975; 5-29-2001
by Ord. No. 14-2001]
There shall be included each year in the annual appropriation ordinance an
appropriation for each duly organized fire company belonging to the Reading
Department of Fire and Rescue Services, provided that no part of any such
appropriation shall be expended unless the company for which it is made has
complied with all the rules and regulations of the Department, has been
previously inspected by the Fire Chief and has furnished such Chief with a
statement of its equipment and membership, together with the number of fires at
which it was in service during the preceding year, with the average attendance
of members thereat. Such appropriations shall be expended only for the payment
of wages of, and compensation insurance premiums for, fire and ambulance
drivers and tillermen; salaries and bond premiums of fire company officers;
group accident insurance premiums for members; purchase of materials, supplies,
and equipment used for firefighting and ambulance purposes; and for the
maintenance of firehouses and equipment thereof in a suitable and comfortable
condition for the purpose for which such firehouses may be used, in accordance
with this section.
§ 36-105. Officers.
[Amended 12-3-1975 by Ord. No. 51-1975; 6-15-1983 by Ord. No. 24-1983; 5-29-
2001 by Ord. No. 14-2001]
The former title, designation, position, post or rank of Chief Engineer, shall
hereafter be known as "Fire Chief." The former title, designation, position,
post or rank of Assistant Engineers shall hereafter be known as "First Deputy
Fire Chiefs." The new title, designation, position, post or rank representing a
third level of command formerly known as Assistant Chiefs shall hereafter be
known as "Second Deputy Fire Chiefs." All vacancies to the position, post or
rank of Second Deputy Fire Chief (the third level of command, whatever the same
shall be called) shall be filled from the ranks of the bargaining unit using
Firemen's Civil Service procedure under the Third Class City Code 1  and merit
selection as set forth in the 1974-1975 labor contract pursuant to the Amended
Order of Court dated April 4, 1975, Returnable to No. 3709 Equity Docket 1972.
In the event of a vacancy in the post of Fire Chief, such position shall be
filled by the Mayor with approval of a majority of Council.
1.   Editor's Note: See 11 Pa. C.S. §§ 10101 et seq.
§ 36-106. Salaries.
[Amended 12-3-1975 by Ord. No. 51-1975]
The salaries of the Fire Chief and Deputy Chiefs shall be in the amounts fixed
by Council by ordinance.
§ 36-107. Duties at fires.
[Amended 12-3-1975 by Ord. No. 51-1975; 5-29-2001 by Ord. No. 14-2001]
The Fire Chief or, in his absence, the next First Deputy Fire Chief, shall have
control over all fire apparatus and members of the Department of Fire and
Rescue Services while in service at fires, and may, for insubordination
thereat, suspend any company from service for such period as he exclude from
interference with the function of the regularly organized Department of Fire
and Rescue Services, while on duty at all fires, all persons not members
thereof, except owners of properties in the immediate neighborhood of such
fires, and persons having a pecuniary interest therein, or their agents, and to
take into custody any person or persons who may persist in such unauthorized
interference.
§ 36-108. Service outside City.
[Amended 12-3-1975 by Ord. No. 51-1975; 5-29-2001 by Ord. No. 14-2001]
The Fire Chief or, in his absence, the next First Deputy Fire Chief, is hereby
authorized and empowered, upon the request of the proper authorities of any
adjacent city or town, to forward thereto, at his discretion, not more than two
of the fire engines belonging to the Department of Fire and Rescue Services,
for services in case of serious conflagration. However, in every such instance,
the apparatus shall be in charge of, and accompanied by, experienced firemen
belonging to the respective companies whose engines are so employed.
§ 36-109. Fire Chief as ex officio Fire Marshal.
[Amended 12-3-1975 by Ord. No. 51-1975]
The Fire Chief is hereby made ex officio Fire Marshal, with all the powers
conferred by the Third Class City Code.
§ 36-110. Adoption of standard screw coupling.
[Amended 5-29-2001 by Ord. No. 14-2001]
The standard screw coupling approved by the Firemen's Union is hereby adopted
as the coupling for the use of the entire Reading Department of Fire and Rescue
Services.
§ 36-111. Rules and regulations.
[Amended 12-3-1975 by Ord. No. 51-1975; 5-29-2001 by Ord. No. 14-2001]
   A.   The following rules and regulations shall cover the conduct of the
Reading Department of Fire and Rescue Services:
      (1)   Rule 1. The Fire Chief shall have control over all fire apparatus
and firemen at the time of fires, and shall have power to suspend any member or
members of any company or companies for violating any of the City ordinances,
or any of the rules and regulations of the Firemen's Union. All members so
suspended shall stand suspended until final action. The Chief shall report his
action in the matter to the Firemen's Union, who shall thereupon notify the
company or companies whereof such parties are members, so that the proper
action can be taken and penalty imposed. In the absence of the Fire Chief, the
First Deputy Fire Chief of the District in which the fire occurs shall have
charge of the Department. In case of the absence of the Fire Chief and the
First Deputy Fire Chief of the District, the First Deputy Fire Chief at the
fire shall have charge of the Department until the arrival of the Chief or
First Deputy Fire Chief of the District. The foreman of the company arriving
first at the fire shall assume charge of the Department, and have full control
until charge is assumed by the Fire Chief or Deputy Fire Chiefs, respectively,
as above stated.
      (2)   Rule 2. The Fire Chief, or other officer in charge, shall see that
the premises where fires occur are left in such a condition that there will be
no further danger from fire likely to cause damage to life or property. He
shall also have the power to detail a sufficient number of firemen, with
apparatus, to remain at the fire as long as he deems it necessary.
      (3)   Rule 3. The First Deputy Fire Chiefs and all companies shall
promptly report their arrival at fires to the Fire Chief or other officer in
charge.
      (4)   Rule 4. The Fire Chief, or Deputy Fire Chiefs, or other officer in
charge at fires, shall see that no more water is used than is necessary, and
when chemical engines are present, no water shall be used should the Chief or
Deputy Chief, or other officer in charge, consider the chemical streams
sufficient. In all cases only booster streams shall be used, unless the fire
has gained too much headway. All chemical lines shall be followed up by the
large water lines with a shutoff nozzle attached thereto, when same are
attached to a fire hydrant.
      (5)   Rule 5. The Fire Chief or officer in charge shall cause companies
not needed at fires to promptly return to quarters.
      (6)   Rule 6. The dangerous condition of any building, wall or other
obstruction at any fire shall be promptly reported to the Fire Chief, or other
officer in charge at such fire, and immediately after the fire such officer in
charge shall report same to the Building Inspector of the City for proper
action in regard thereto, unless it is deemed necessary for purposes of safety
and subduing the fire, to cause its immediate removal by any means at hand.
      (7)   Rule 7. During the existence of fires requiring the presence of the
Fire Chief, the Deputy Fire Chiefs, at the discretion of the Chief, shall
respond to other alarms within their respective districts.
      (8)   Rule 8. The Fire Chief shall visit each company monthly, and
thoroughly and carefully inspect all apparatus, and report the condition of the
same to the Firemen's Union at the regular meeting succeeding such inspection.
      (9)   Rule 9. The Fire Chief or other officer in charge at a fire shall
cause all firemen found to be under the influence of liquor to be removed
beyond the fire lines, and shall report the facts of such removal, with the
names of the guilty parties, to the Firemen's Union, who shall thereupon notify
the company or companies whereof such parties are members, so that the proper
action can be taken and penalty imposed.
      (10)   Rule 10. All engines shall carry a gate valve for use on two- or
three-way fire hydrants, and immediately upon arriving at the fire ground shall
attach same to the fire hydrant intended to be used by their respective
companies, and shut off the same. Such company shall then attach its suction,
or leading hose, to the other outlet, if a two-way fire hydrant, and if a
three-way hydrant, attach its suction, or leading hose, to one of the other two
outlets, so that a second company arriving at the same fire hydrant can attach
its suction, or leading hose, to such gate valve attachment, at the two- or
three-way fire hydrant, as it may be. All attachments of gate valves or hose,
as aforesaid, shall be subject to change, at any fire, by order of the Fire
Chief.
      (11)   Rule 11. Engine and chemical companies will, on arrival on fire
ground, cause their respective apparatus to be stationed within such reasonable
distance from building so as to allow an aerial truck to station themselves
directly in front of building.
      (12)   Rule 12. Engine and hose companies shall be required to carry
reducers and other connections necessary to attach hose to engines and fire
hydrants, and for any other connections.
      (13)   Rule 13. Companies shall report to the Fire Chief all fire
hydrants found to be obstructed, or in need of repairs, and he shall
immediately notify the Department of Water thereof.
      (14)   Rule 14. All engines of the Fire Department of Fire and Rescue
Services shall be tested at least once a month.
      (15)   Rule 15. All hose of the Fire Department of Fire and Rescue
Services shall be tested semimonthly under the direction of the Fire Chief.
      (16)   Rule 16. When a still alarm is sent to a company house, the Fire
Chief shall be immediately notified by telephone. The company shall respond
promptly, first using the booster stream, and the water stream only as a last
resort, as is specifically set out in Rule 4; the chemical line to be followed
up by the large water line, with a shutoff nozzle attached thereto, and
connected with the fire hydrant nearest the fire.
      (17)   Rule 17. Hoses shall be run in as close to a fire as is
practicable, keeping on the side of the street the engine is located. Hose
shall be kept off tracks wherever possible and not run over hose and couplings
already laid. Engines and trucks shall also avoid running over hose and
couplings laid in seeking positions for service at fires and in removing
therefrom.
      (18)   Rule 18. Engine, hose and hook-and-ladder companies, immediately
after the removal of their hose or ladders from their apparatus, shall remove
apparatus to a reasonable distance from the immediate fire grounds.
      (19)   Rule 19. All proper dispatch consistent with safety shall be used
in proceeding to a fire. Companies shall be held responsible for reckless
driving.
      (20)   Rule 20. Companies shall keep their apparatus and tools in perfect
order and carefully examine same after use for any defects therein.
      (21)   Rule 21. The number of persons who shall be permitted on the
various size ladders at any one time shall not exceed, viz.: To each ten- or
fifteen-foot ladder: one. To each twenty-foot, twenty-five-foot or thirty-foot
ladder: two. To each ladder more than 30 feet: three.
      (22)   Rule 22. When a company or companies, in responding to fire
alarms, with its, or their, apparatus, are driving to the fire ground on a
street leading directly thereto, the right-of-way shall be given it, or them,
by any other company, or companies driving with its, or their, apparatus to the
same fire along a cross street, or arriving at the place of its intersection
with such direct street. Such latter company, or companies, when about to turn
with its, or their, apparatus from such cross street into such direct street
and drive to the left thereon, shall take the right side of such street in
making such turn, and when about to turn as aforesaid, from such cross street
into such direct street and drive to the right thereon, shall take the left
side of such cross street in making such turn.
      (23)   Rule 23. When two or more companies, with their apparatus, are
driving to a fire along the same street, side by side, or within a short
distance from one another, neither company shall hinder or delay the other by
driving from side to side of the street, or in any manner. The penalties
imposed by law in such cases will be strictly enforced against guilty parties.
      (24)   Rule 24. No company, or companies, nor any of its, or their,
members, when responding to an alarm of fire, or while engaged in the line of
duty at any fire, or in returning from a fire alarm or fire, shall become
involved in any altercation, dispute, disturbance or breach of the peace, or
violate any City ordinance or state law. If any dispute or misunderstanding
arises between any companies or the members thereof at or during the above
stated times or places, the Fire Chief or Deputy Fire Chiefs, or other officer
in charge of the Department at the time, shall forthwith be called upon, and
his decision shall be final settlement of the same, and his orders in the
premises shall be peaceably and implicitly obeyed by the parties concerned.
      (25)   Rule 25. The Fire Chief shall prepare a fire alarm chart showing
the number and location of each fire alarm box, the number of boxes to which
each company shall respond on first and second alarms, and whether all
apparatus or only one is to be used, and each company shall respond in
accordance therewith.
      (26)   Rule 26. Companies responding to first alarms shall remain until
dismissed by the Fire Chief. Companies assigned to second alarms shall respond
to all subsequent alarms.
      (27)   Rule 27. When two ladder companies respond to an alarm, and
another alarm comes in for the same district, the ladder company in reserve
shall respond. When ladder companies respond to general alarm boxes only,
ladders shall respond and the engines stand in reserve.
      (28)   Rule 28. When an alarm is sounded within the district south of
Buttonwood Street, north of Penn Street and east of Seventh Street, and an
additional alarm is sounded covering the district north of Buttonwood Street
and east of Seventh Street, one piece from Neversink Fire Company and one piece
from Schuylkill Fire Company shall respond.
      (29)   Rule 29. No apparatus shall leave the station on a box alarm until
one round has been registered on the indicator.
      (30)   Rule 30. In the event of the indicator or gong not working
properly, the alarm room shall be called for the location of alarm.
      (31)   Rule 31. Friendship Fire Company shall be a reserve company with
one piece of apparatus for all stations north of Green Street and west of
Seventh Street; Marion Fire Company shall be a reserve company for all stations
south of Penn Street, except Stations 4, 41, 253 and 254; Riverside Fire
Company shall be a reserve company for all stations south of Penn Street,
except Stations 31, 37 and 132; Union Fire Company shall be a reserve company
for all stations north of Penn Street, including Stations 31, 37 and 132;
Oakbrook Fire Company shall be a reserve company for all stations north of Penn
Street, including Stations 4, 41, 253 and 254. The reserve companies will
respond to all alarms except the one in which the Department of Fire and Rescue
Services is working by a previous alarm.
      (32)   Rule 32. After a first alarm has been sounded, should the Fire
Chief require the assistance of companies assigned to the boxes on second
alarms, he shall give two taps and, after a brief interval, strike the box
number in the usual manner. A second alarm shall, in all cases, be designated
by two taps followed by the box number from which the first alarm was sounded,
the box number being repeated four times.
      (33)   Rule 33. The signal 3-3-3 will be used exclusively for general
alarms, to which the entire Department shall respond, with the exception of the
reserve companies, who shall remain at their respective stations and respond to
all subsequent alarms.
      (34)   Rule 34. Companies not responding to first alarms assigned to
second alarms shall stand on the alert. Should no additional company be
required, a signal of one tap shall be given by the Fire Chief indicating that
the fire is under control and that the companies have left the place of alarm.
Upon the return of the companies to their stations following an alarm, they
will report to the alarm room when in service again.
      (35)   Rule 35. Companies not assigned to first or second alarms become
first alarm companies, and shall respond to all subsequent alarms.
      (36)   Rule 36. The rules and regulations of the Water Authority, with
regard to the opening and closing of, and making connections to, fire plugs,
shall be strictly observed.
      (37)   Rule 37. The foregoing rules and regulations shall be strictly
enforced, and any act of insubordination, or disobedience of these rules and
regulations, or of any order of the Fire Chief or other officer in charge at
any fire, by any company or companies of the Fire Department of Fire and Rescue
Services, or any respective members thereof, shall be promptly reported to the
Firemen's Union by the Fire Chief or such officer in charge for immediate
action at its next meeting.
§ 36-112. Fire Marshal creation, appointment and reports.
[Added 9-3-1986 by Ord. No. 70-86; 5-29-2001 by Ord. No. 14-2001]
   A.   There is hereby created the office of Fire Marshal in the Department of
Fire and Rescue Services.2
   B.   The Fire Marshal shall report to the Fire Chief in such manner as
required by the provisions of the Charter.
   C.   The Mayor shall appoint the Fire Marshal, with the approval and consent
of Council, biennially, as provided by the Code.
2.   Editor's Note: Amended during codification (see
Ch. 1, General Provisions, Part 2).
§ 36-113. Fees for emergency medical services; delinquent bill accounts.
[Added 12-27-2000 by Ord. No. 38-2000]
   A.   The Chief of the Department of Fire and Rescue Services (hereinafter
"Chief") is hereby authorized to and shall establish a schedule of fees for
providing emergency medical services to individuals or other entities. Said
fees may be adjusted from time to time by the Chief to reflect changing costs
and needs.
   B.   Any recipient, individual or other entity of emergency medical services
assistance shall be responsible for payment of his bill before the expiration
of 90 days from the date of billing. Any bill paid after 90 days from the date
of billing will be assessed an additional 25% of the unpaid balance as a
collection fee. Any collection fee incurred in conjunction with the collection
of any such delinquent account shall be the responsibility of, and paid by the
recipient, individual or other entity, of said services.
§ 36-114. Collection procedures and collection agency fees for delinquent
RFDEMS accounts.
[Added 3-28-2005 by Ord. No. 13-2005]
   A.   Statement of policies. The Reading Fire Department Emergency Medical
Services (RFDEMS) hereby determines to charge to delinquent account parties all
costs of collection, including agency fees incurred in collection of unpaid
fees, user charges and other items covered by the Act.
   B.   Schedule of fees.
      (1)   The RFDEMS hereby approves the following schedule of Agency fees
for services in connection with the collection of accounts, which is hereby
determined to be fair and reasonable compensation for the services of such an
agency:
         (a)   For the collection of accounts under one year from date of
service or last payment made by debtor: 25%.
         (b)   For the collection of accounts one year or over from date of
service or last payment made by debtor: 25%.
         (c)   For the collection of accounts second placement: 25%
      (2)   The amount of fees determined as set forth above shall be added to
the RFDEMS's claim in each account.
   C.   Collection procedures. The following collection procedures are hereby
established to the policy of the RFDEMS. 3
      (1)   At least 30 days prior to assessing or imposing agency fees in
connection with the collection of an account, the RFDEMS shall mail or cause to
be mailed, by first class mail, postage prepaid, a notice of such intention to
the rate payor or other entity liable for the account (the "account debtor").
      (2)   All notices required by this chapter shall be mailed to the account
debtor's last known post office address as recorded in the records or other
information of the RFDEMS, or such other address as it may be able to obtain
from the County Office of Assessment and Revision of Taxes or elsewhere.
      (3)   Each notice ad described above shall include the following:
         (a)   The type of charge, the date it became due and the amount owed,
including penalty and interest.
         (b)   A statement of the RFDEMS's intent to impose or assess agency
fees within 30 days after the mailing of the notice.
         (c)   The manner in which the assessment of imposition of agency fees
may be avoided by payment of the account.
         (d)   The place of payment for accounts and the name and telephone
number of the RFDEMS official designated as responsible for collection matters.
   D.   Related action. The proper officials of the RFDEMS are hereby
authorized and empowered to take such additional action as they may deem
necessary or appropriate to implement this chapter.
3.   Editor's Note: The Collection Services Agreement between ARB and RFDEMS is
on file in the City offices.
§ 36-115. Fees for standby medical services; right of first refusal.
[Added 9-12-2022 by Ord. No. 79-2022; amended 2-24-2025 by Ord. No. 16-2025]
   As a condition of any lease, license or permit for the use of City property
or for a gathering of a large crowd defined by PA State EMS protocols within
City limits that may require emergency medical standby services, as dictated by
Pennsylvania EMS rules and regulations, City of Reading Department of Fire and
Rescue Services shall have the right of first refusal to provide such services.
The City may charge an hourly fee consistent with the amount set forth in
Section
212-113. Failure to follow this section may result in a penalty of $350 per
occurrence.
Chapter 51
INITIATIVE AND REFERENDUM
§
51-101.   Declaration of purpose.
§
51-102.   Definitions.
§
51-103.   Initiative and referendum; commencement of proceedings; petitioners
committee; affidavit.
§
51-104.   Form and content.
§
51-105.   Affidavit of circulator.
§
51-106.   Initiative petitions.
§
51-107.   Referendum petitions.
§
51-108.   Signatures.
§
51-109.   Circulation of petitions.
§
51-110.   Time for circulating and filing referendum petitions.
§
51-111.   Time for circulation and filing initiative petitions.
§
51-112.   Submission of petitions.
§
51-113.   Initiative and referendum; procedure after filing.
[HISTORY: Adopted by the City Council of the City of Reading 5-14-2007 by Ord.
No. 24-2007 (
Ch. 1, Part 11, of the 2001 Code of Ordinances). Amendments noted where
applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES Charter provisions for initiative and referendum — See Home
Rule Charter, Art. XI, Citizen's Rights and Participation.
§ 51-101. Declaration of purpose.
The City of Reading City Council recognizes the importance of protecting and
promoting the ability of our citizens to participate in government through
initiative and referendum. Since the change to Home Rule government, there have
been approximately 10 citizen petition efforts. The lack of clear instruction
on the circulation and signature verification of initiative and referendum
petitions in the Charter has caused many procedural problems, resulting in
court challenges and legal fees to both the City and citizen groups. Therefore,
through the enactment of this chapter, City Council sets out regulations
pertaining to the circulation and signing of initiative and referendum
petitions to assist Reading voters with their rights to participation provided
by the Home Rule Charter.
§ 51-102. Definitions.
   AFFIDAVIT — A written declaration or statement of facts, made voluntarily,
taken and signed before a notary public.
   PETITION — An initiative or referendum petition for ordering a measure to be
submitted to City Council and/or the voters.
   PETITION BLANKS — Forms prepared by the City Clerk's Office containing a
petition with a serial number, a circulator's affidavit, and the full copy of
the ordinance proposed for enactment or repeal.
   PETITIONERS' COMMITTEE — A group of five registered voters responsible for
circulating and filing the petition with the City Clerk's Office in proper
form.
   REGULAR ELECTION — A primary or general election conducted by the Berks
County Department of Elections. 1
1.   Editor's Note: Original § 1-1103, Initiative and referendum, which
immediately followed this section, was repealed during codification (see
Ch. 1, General Provisions, Part 2).
§ 51-103. Initiative and referendum; commencement of proceedings; petitioners
committee; affidavit.
   A.   Any five qualified voters of the City may commence initiative or
referendum. A qualified voter is a legal resident of the City of Reading who is
registered and constitutionally entitled to vote in Pennsylvania.
   B.   A qualified voter shall obtain a Petitioners' Committee affidavit and
petition forms from the City Clerk in the Council Office during regular
business hours.
   C.   The Petitioners' Committee affidavit shall state the names and
addresses of five qualified voters who will constitute the Petitioners'
Committee and be responsible for circulating the petition and filing it in
proper form, and specifying the address to which all notices to the committee
are to be sent, and setting out in full the proposed initiative ordinance or
the ordinance sought to be reconsidered.
   D.   In case of referendum, such an Petitioners' Committee affidavit must be
filed within 10 days of the adoption of the ordinance.
   E.   Within five days after the Petitioners' Committee affidavit is filed
and validated, the City Clerk shall issue the appropriate petition blanks to
the petitioners.
§ 51-104. Form and content.
   A.   The form and content of each petition pack shall be prepared as
follows:
      (1)   Each petition shall be uniform in size and style on eight-and-one-
half-inch-by-eleven- inch paper, marked sequentially and/or containing a serial
number.
      (2)   Each petition pack shall contain one petition.
      (3)   Have an affidavit of circulator, as defined in §
51-105 below.
      (4)   Contain complete text of the initiative ordinance being considered
or the ordinance to be considered for repeal by referendum, as stated in §
51-106 or 51-107 below.
      (5)   Contain no more than 20 signature lines for the printed name,
address, signature of each person signing the petition, and the date signed.
[Amended 3-28-2011 by Ord. No. 15-2011]
      (6)   Contain a warning statement advising that it is unlawful for anyone
to sign any initiative or referendum petition with any name other than his/her
own, or to knowingly sign his/her name more than once for the same proposal, or
to sign such petition when he/she is not a legal voter in the City of Reading.
      (7)   No corrections, additions or alterations shall be made to the form
of all petitions issued by the City Clerk to the Petitioners' Committee.
   B.   Any petition not following the form and content set out above shall be
declared invalid.
§ 51-105. Affidavit of circulator.
Each paper of a petition shall have attached to it upon filing a notarized
affidavit executed by the circulator thereof stating that he or she personally
circulated the paper, the number of signatures thereon, that all the signatures
were affixed in the circulator's presence, and that he or she believes them to
be valid and that each signer had an opportunity before signing to read the
full text of the ordinance proposed or sought to be reconsidered.
§ 51-106. Initiative petitions.
All initiative petitions shall contain an initiative statement describing the
intent of the ordinance not exceeding 100 words, phrased in the form of a
question that can be answered only with an affirmative or negative response.
The initiative statement may be distinct from the petitioner's title of the
measure, and shall express and give a true and impartial statement of the
purpose of the measure. It shall not intentionally be an argument, nor likely
to create prejudice, either for or against the measure. This statement shall be
delivered to the City Clerk at the time the request for the Petitioners'
Committee petition form is requested. Each petition shall also have attached to
it the full body of the initiative ordinance.
§ 51-107. Referendum petitions.
All referendum petitions shall contain the title of the bill enacted by City
Council as well as the bill number and date of enactment of the bill sought to
be repealed. Each petition shall also have attached to it the full body of the
bill sought to be repealed.
§ 51-108. Signatures.
Initiative and referendum petitions must be signed in ink or indelible pencil
by 2,000 qualified voters of the City of Reading.
§ 51-109. Circulation of petitions.
The Petitioners' Committee shall be responsible for instructing circulators on
the regulations and guidelines for circulating petitions, as contained herein.
   A.   All circulators must reside in the City of Reading and be registered to
vote as defined in §
51-103A above.
   B.   Each person collecting signatures must allow any person to review the
text of the initiative ordinance or ordinance to be reconsidered.
   C.   Each signature collected must be personally witnessed by the
circulator.
   D.   The circulator must complete the affidavit of circulator before a
notary public after all the signatures on the sheet have been collected.
   E.   Circulators must not attempt to obtain signatures of persons knowing
that the person signing the petition is not qualified to sign it.
   F.   Circulators must not offer money or any thing of value to another
person or threaten a person to sign or not to sign a petition, nor shall they
sell or offer to sell signature sheets.
   G.   Circulators must not accept compensation to circulate a petition that
is based on the number of signatures obtained.
   H.   Any person violating the circulator regulations shall be charged in
accordance with the applicable offense sections of the Elections Code 25 P.S. §
2601 et seq.
§ 51-110. Time for circulating and filing referendum petitions.
Referendum petitions must be circulated and filed within 35 days after the
filing of the Petitioners' Committee affidavit. The City Clerk shall only
accept petitions filed by the Petitioners' Committee. The City Clerk shall not
accept any petitions submitted by any other circulators, representatives or
agents thereof.
§ 51-111. Time for circulation and filing initiative petitions.
Initiative petitions must be circulated and signed within a period of 65 days
from the date of the filing of the Petitioners' Committee affidavit with the
City Clerk. The City Clerk shall only accept petitions filed by the
Petitioners' Committee. The City Clerk shall not accept any petitions submitted
by any other circulators, representatives or agents thereof. 2
2.   Editor's Note: Original § 1-1113, Referendum petitions; suspension of
effect of ordinance, which immediately followed this section, was repealed
during codification (see
Ch. 1, General Provisions, Part 2).
§ 51-112. Submission of petitions.
Before submitting the signature sheets for verification, the Petitioners'
Committee must stack petition packs beginning with the number 1 and continue
sequentially until all sheets petitions issued are accounted for. The petitions
submitted must contain at least 2,000 original signatures. The Petitioners'
Committee must also include a letter stating how many signatures they purport
to have. The City Clerk shall advise the Petitioners' Committee of their
ability to obtain the necessary number of signatures or make other corrections
in accordance with §
51-113 of this chapter.
§ 51-113. Initiative and referendum; procedure after filing.
   A.   Sufficiency of petitions; determination. No petition for referendum
shall be filed with the City Clerk unless it contains the required number of
signatures. Upon filing of a petition for initiative or referendum with the
City Clerk, the City Clerk shall make an initial face value determination of
sufficiency and report the results thereof to the City Council within two days
of the date of such filing. The City Clerk may make its determination of
sufficiency of the petitions and the signatures contained thereon as stated
hereafter.3,4,5
3.   Editor's Note: Amended during codification (see
Ch. 1, General Provisions, Part 2). Editor's Note: Original Subsection B,
regarding a verification process, and Subsection C, stating a petition may not
be removed or altered after filed, which immediately followed this subsection,
were repealed during codification (see
Ch. 1, General Provisions, Part 2). Editor's Note: Original §§ 1-1116,
Certificate of Clerk; amendment, 1-1117, Council review, 1-1118, Court review;
new petition, 1-1119, Initiative and referendum; action on petitions, 1-1120,
Initiative and referendum; results of election, and 1-1121, Initiative and
referendum; limitations, which immediately followed this section, were repealed
during codification (see
Ch. 1, General Provisions, Part 2).
4.   Editor's Note: Original Subsection B, regarding a verification process,
and Subsection C, stating a petition may not be removed or altered after filed,
which immediately followed this subsection, were repealed during codification
(see
Ch. 1, General Provisions, Part 2). Editor's Note: Original §§ 1-1116,
Certificate of Clerk; amendment, 1-1117, Council review, 1-1118, Court review;
new petition, 1-1119, Initiative and referendum; action on petitions, 1-1120,
Initiative and referendum; results of election, and 1-1121, Initiative and
referendum; limitations, which immediately followed this section, were repealed
during codification (see
Ch. 1, General Provisions, Part 2).
5.   Editor's Note: Original §§ 1-1116, Certificate of Clerk; amendment, 1-
1117, Council review, 1-1118, Court review; new petition, 1-1119, Initiative
and referendum; action on petitions, 1-1120, Initiative and referendum; results
of election, and 1-1121, Initiative and referendum; limitations, which
immediately followed this section, were repealed during codification (see
Ch. 1, General Provisions, Part 2).
Chapter 62
PENSIONS
Part 1
New Officers and Employees Pension Fund
§
62-101.   Purpose.
§
62-102.   Definitions.
§
62-103.   Trust provisions.
§
62-104.   Normal retirement.
§
62-105.   Basic benefit.
§
62-106.   Service increment.
§
62-107.   Early retirement.
§
62-108.   Accrued pension.
§
62-109.   Disability benefits.
§
62-110.   Survivor benefits.
§
62-111.   Vesting.
§
62-112.   Member contributions.
§
62-113.   Refund of contribution or rollover.
§
62-114.   Maximum permissible benefits and contributions – Code Section 415.
§
62-115.   Required minimum distributions – Code Section 401(a)(9).
§
62-116.   Direct rollovers.
§
62-117.   Miscellaneous.
Part 2
Officers and Employees Retirement System
§
62-201.   Definitions.
§
62-202.   System created.
§
62-203.   Officers and Employees Retirement Board.
§
62-204.   Fund created; receipt of contributions; payment from and investment
of fund.
§
62-205.   Employment statement.
§
62-206.   Right to and amount of pension benefits.
§
62-207.   Disability benefits.
§
62-208.   Member contributions.
§
62-209.   Additional payments to extend benefits.
§
62-210.   Termination prior to benefit entitlement.
§
62-211.   Refunds.
§
62-212.   Council contributions.
§
62-213.   Benefits.
§
62-214.   Time of service.
§
62-215.   Military service.
§
62-216.   Payment only to beneficiary.
§
62-217.   Method of payment.
§
62-218.   Service increment.
§
62-219.   Federal income tax exemption of employee contribution to fund.
§
62-220.   Direct rollovers.
§
62-221.   Maximum permissible benefits and contributions – Code Section 415.
§
62-222.   Required minimum distributions – Code Section 401(a)(9).
§
62-223.   Miscellaneous.
Part 3
Firemen's Pension Fund
§
62-301.   Definitions.
§
62-302.   Board of Managers created.
§
62-303.   Board of Managers; members, term and vacancy.
§
62-304.   Board officers.
§
62-305.   Surety bond of Treasurer.
§
62-306.   Board expenses.
§
62-307.   Board compensation.
§
62-308.   Fund created; receipt of contributions; payment from and investment
of fund.
§
62-309.   Fund sources.
§
62-310.   Gifts and grants.
§
62-311.   Reward proceeds.
§
62-312.   DiLauro interest arbitration.
§
62-313.   Member contributions; increase.
§
62-314.   City contributions.
§
62-315.   Board rewards, rules and meetings.
§
62-316.   Board to request budget funds from Council.
§
62-317.   Board voting and decisions.
§
62-318.   Board to issue payment certificates.
§
62-319.   Employment termination prior to pension entitlement.
§
62-320.   Entitlement to benefits.
§
62-321.   Member right to and amount of benefits; service increment
contributions.
§
62-322.   Benefits to be uniform; widows and children of members.
§
62-323.   Disability benefits.
§
62-324.   Deferred Retirement Option Program (DROP).
§
62-325.   Application.
§
62-326.   Contribution payment to estate.
§
62-327.   Pension investment account.
§
62-328.   Exemption from attachment or execution; nonassignability.
§
62-329.   Effective date.
§
62-330.   Direct rollovers.
§
62-331.   Maximum permissible benefits and contributions – Code Section 415.
§
62-332.   Required minimum distributions – Code Section 401(a)(9).
§
62-333.   Miscellaneous.
Part 4
Police Pension Fund
§
62-401.   Definitions.
§
62-402.   Police Pension Fund Association.
§
62-403.   Duties of Finance Director.
§
62-404.   Contributions to fund.
§
62-405.   Right of members to pension benefits and amount of pension benefits.
§
62-406.   Right to refund of contribution in lieu of receipt of pension
benefit.
§
62-407.   Termination of employment of members prior to being entitled to
pension benefits.
§
62-408.   Permanent disability pension.
§
62-409.   Widow or widowers and children of members.
§
62-410.   Computation of time of service.
§
62-411.   Receipt of contributions; payment from and investment of fund.
§
62-412.   Exemption from attachment or execution; nonassignability.
§
62-413.   Payment to estate.
§
62-414.   Military service.
§
62-415.   Police service.
§
62-416.   Increases in allowances following retirement.
§
62-417.   Deferred Retirement Option Program (DROP).
§
62-418.   Direct rollovers.
§
62-419.   Maximum permissible benefits and contributions – Code Section 415.
§
62-420.   Required minimum distributions – Code Section 401(a)(9).
§
62-421.   Miscellaneous.
Part 5
Aggregated Pension Trust Fund
§
62-501.   Establishment; funds transferred.
§
62-502.   Board of Trustees.
§
62-503.   Composition of Board of Trustees.
§
62-504.   Officers of the Board.
§
62-505.   Board members from active membership of existing pension plans.
§
62-506.   Legal title to assets.
§
62-507.   Investment of assets.
§
62-508.   Actuarial valuation, auditing and basis of accounting of pension
funds assets.
§
62-509.   Transfer of responsibility for investment, accounting, auditing and
administration to the Board of Trustees.
Part 6
Officers and Employees Defined Contribution Plan
§
62-601.   Officers and Employees Defined Contribution Plan.
Appendix A
Appendix B
[HISTORY: Adopted by the City Council of the City of Reading as indicated in
part histories. Amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fire and rescue services — See
Ch. 36. Police Department — See
Ch. 77.
Personnel — See
Ch. 70.
Salaries and compensation — See
Ch. 91.
STATE LAW REFERENCES
Pensions for employees other than police officers and city-paid firefighters -
See 11 Pa.C.S. §§ 14339 et seq.
Coverage of persons under Social Security - See 65 P.S. § 201 et seq.
Firemen's Pension Fund - See 11 Pa.C.S. §§ 14319 et seq.
Police Pension Fund - See 11 Pa. C.S. §§ 14300 et seq.
Part 1
New Officers and Employees Pension Fund
[Adopted 9-30-1987 by Ord. No. 79-1987 (
Ch. 1, Part 6D, of the 2001 Code of Ordinances); amended in its entirety 4-22-
2013 by Ord. No. 26-20131]
1.   Editor's Note: This ordinance provided an effective date of 1-1-2012.
§ 62-101. Purpose.
The purpose of this part is to establish benefits payable to officers and
employees, other than policemen or firemen, or beneficiaries of such officers
or employees who are elected or appointed to the staff of the City, for the
first time, on or after January 1, 1988.
§ 62-102. Definitions.
[Amended 10-11-2021 by Ord. No. 79-2021]
For purposes of this part the following terms shall have the meanings herein
defined unless the context clearly indicates a contrary intention:
   ANNUAL COMPENSATION — In a calendar year means the total of the monthly
compensation of each of the 12 months in such year.
   AVERAGE MONTHLY COMPENSATION — A member's average monthly compensation for
the highest consecutive five years out of the last 10 years.
   BOARD — The Officers and Employees Pension Fund Board.
   BOARD ADMINISTRATOR — The position designated by the Board to act on behalf
of the Board in matters of day-to-day administration of the plan. CITY — The
City of Reading, Pennsylvania.
   CODE — The United States Internal Revenue Code, as amended, including
reference, where applicable, to regulations and other guidance issued by the
United States Department of Treasury and the Commissioner of the Internal
Revenue Service.
   COMPENSATION — Pickup contributions plus remuneration received as a City
employee excluding refunds for expenses, contingency and accountable expense
allowances and excluding severance payments or payments for unused vacation or
unused sick leave or comp time that is paid upon termination. Compensation
includes amounts excluded from income pursuant to a member's election under a
cash or deferred compensation arrangement described in Section 401(k) of the
Code, an eligible deferred compensation plan described in Section 457(b) of the
Code, a cafeteria plan described in Section 125 of the Code, and, effective
January 1, 1998, a qualified transportation fringe benefit plan under Section
132(f) of the Code. Notwithstanding the preceding, the annual compensation of a
member shall be limited as set forth in Section 401(a)(17) of the Code [as
adjusted annually pursuant to Section 401(a)(17)(B) of the Code and
announcement by the Internal Revenue Service; for 2011, $245,000]. Compensation
for any prior year shall be subject to the limitations set forth in Appendix A,
A-1. 2  If compensation for any prior determination period is taken into
account in determining a member's benefits for the current year, the
compensation for such prior determination period is subject to the applicable
annual compensation limit in effect for that prior period.
   FUND — The City of Reading Officers and Employees Pension Fund.
   MONTHLY COMPENSATION — Consists of basic monthly compensation plus longevity
payments but excludes overtime pay, educational incentive payments, bonuses,
payments in lieu of dependent's health insurance costs, and other special forms
of compensation.
   MEMBER - An officer or employee who is elected or appointed to an office of,
or employed by, the City and becomes a member of the pension fund, for the
first time, on or after January 1, 1988 but before January 1, 2022. It does not
include policemen or firemen. Membership of eligible officers and employees is
a required condition of employment. An officer or employee who becomes a member
of the Officers and Employees Retirement System before January 1, 1988, shall
remain subject to Chapter 62, Part 2, of this chapter, entitled “Officers and
Employees Retirement System.” Any officer or employee who is reappointed on or
after January 1, 1988, having had previous employment prior to January 1, 1988,
shall be subject to the pension provisions applying to persons employed prior
to January 1, 1988, i.e., Ord. 13-1998, 4-27-1998 (Part 2 of this chapter). Any
officer or employee who became a member of the pension fund, for the first
time, on or after January 1, 1988, but before October 1, 2021, terminates
employment, and is reappointed on or after January 1, 2022, shall become a
member upon such reappointment for the sole purpose of being credited with
vesting service; his/her basic benefit shall be determined based upon his/her
average monthly compensation as determined as of his/her prior termination of
employment multiplied by the number of years of service completed as of his/her
prior termination of employment.
   PLAN (or SYSTEM) — The New Officers and Employees Pension Plan.
   QUALIFIED MILITARY SERVICE — Any service in the uniformed services (as
defined in Chapter 3 of Title 38, United States Code), by any individual if
such individual is entitled to reemployment rights under such chapter with
respect to such service.
   SPOUSE — The spouse of a member, as determined under law of the Commonwealth
of Pennsylvania. Effective for designations made after December 31, 2006, a
member may designate his/her spouse to be the beneficiary of the member's
pension, regardless of the date of the marriage.
2.   Editor's Note: Appendix A is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 62-103. Trust provisions.
The Officers and Employees Retirement Board, as constituted under §
62-203, shall serve as the Board of the plan and shall administer the plan
consistent with its duties under §
62-203 and the terms of this plan. The Board shall serve as the fund trustees
and the assets of the fund shall be held in trust for the exclusive benefit of
the members of the Officers and Employees Plan and this plan and their
beneficiaries, and a reversion of fund assets or a return of City contributions
is prohibited, except as otherwise provided by applicable law or IRS Revenue
Ruling 91-4. The Board may use fund assets to pay the reasonable costs of
administering the plan, consistent with the requirements of §
62-204.
§ 62-104. Normal retirement.
A member shall be eligible for normal retirement after attainment of age 65 and
completion of 10 years of service.
§ 62-105. Basic benefit.
The basic benefit for a member who has met the eligibility requirements for
normal retirement is a monthly pension equal to 2% of the member's average
monthly compensation, multiplied by the number of years of service completed by
the member, up to a maximum of 25 years of service. Such monthly pension shall
be payable for the life of the member with payments continuing after the
member's death to the member's spouse equal to 50% of the amount payable to the
member on the day of his death. Such member must have been married to the
spouse for at least one year prior to the date of the member's death in order
for the payments to continue to the spouse.
§ 62-106. Service increment.
A member who has completed in excess of 25 years of service shall receive an
additional incremental monthly pension equal to 1.25% of average monthly
compensation for the highest consecutive five years out of the last 10 years
preceding his/her date of retirement, multiplied by the number of years of
service completed by the member in excess of 25 years of service.
§ 62-107. Early retirement.
A member is eligible for early retirement after attainment of age 50 and
completion of 10 years of service. The early retirement benefit shall be equal
to the member's accrued pension, as hereinafter defined in §
62-108, accrued to the date of early retirement, reduced by 1/3 of 1% for each
month that the member's early retirement date precedes his/her normal
retirement date.
§ 62-108. Accrued pension.
   A.   The accrued pension of a member at any determination date shall be
equal to 2% of the member's average monthly compensation multiplied by the
number of years of service completed by the member at such date, up to a
maximum of 25 years of service. In addition, the accrued pension shall also
include an incremental pension of 1.25% of average monthly compensation,
multiplied by the number of years of service completed by the member at such
date in excess of 25 years of service.
   B.   USERRA and HEART requirements. Effective December 12, 1994, any member
who is absent on account of qualified military service and returns to City
service within the period of time during which his reemployment rights are
protected by federal law shall receive service credit, contributions, benefits
and other rights provided under this subsection in lieu of the service credit,
contributions, benefits or other rights to which the member would otherwise be
entitled under this section, except to the extent the member would be entitled
to more advantageous service credit, contributions, or benefits or more
valuable rights under other provisions of this section. A member described in
this subsection shall be credited with years of service for the full period of
qualified military service, provided such member pays into the fund an amount
equal to the contributions such member would have been required to make but for
his absence on account of qualified military service, within the five-year
period of time beginning on his reemployment date (or the lesser period of time
beginning on such reemployment date that is three times the length of his
qualified military service), and the City shall make all contributions that
would have been due on account of such member contributions, and the member
shall be entitled to all other rights and benefits accruing on account of such
contributions and service. For purposes of this subsection, a member shall be
treated as having received compensation during his qualified military service
based on the rate of compensation the member would have received but for his
qualified military service compensation, or if such amount is not reasonably
certain, his average compensation during the twelve-month period immediately
preceding his qualified military service (or, if shorter, the period of time
immediately preceding his qualified military service). This subsection shall be
applied in a manner consistent with Section 414(u) of the Code.
      (1)   Effective January 1, 2007, in the case of a member who dies while
performing qualified military service, the member's surviving beneficiary shall
be entitled to any additional benefits (other than benefit accruals relating to
the period of qualified military service) provided herein as though the member
had resumed employment with the City on the day before death and then
terminated employment on account of death in accordance with Section 401(a)(37)
of the Code.
      (2)   Effective with respect to years beginning after December 31, 2008,
for purposes of applying the limits on annual benefits and contributions and
for purposes of applying other applicable provisions of the Code, but not for
purposes of determining benefits and contributions, "compensation" shall also
include differential wage payments, as defined in Section 3401(h) of the Code,
paid by the City to an employee on account of qualified military service.
§ 62-109. Disability benefits.
[Amended 7-11-2022 by Ord. No. 68-2022]
If a member becomes disabled, he/she shall be entitled to a monthly disability
benefit. The monthly disability benefit shall be equal to the benefit accrued
as of the date of disability. The minimum disability benefit shall be equal to
20% of such member’s average monthly compensation. In the event a member
becomes disabled prior to being employed by the City for a period of 10 years,
the benefits shall be calculated as follows: average monthly compensation for
the highest consecutive five years out of a total period of employment will be
used. If a member has completed less than five years of service as of the date
of disability, average monthly compensation for the entire period of employment
will be used. In the event the member works less than a month prior to his
disability, the average monthly compensation shall be determined by annualizing
the compensation that the employee received on a daily basis so as to establish
an average “monthly compensation.” In determining whether a member is eligible
to receive a disability pension benefit, the Board shall apply the criteria set
forth in §
62-207.
§ 62-110. Survivor benefits.
If a member is eligible for early retirement and dies while employed by the
City, a monthly pension shall be payable to the member's spouse for the
spouse's lifetime equal to 50% of the monthly pension the member was eligible
to receive had he/she been retired as of the day of his/ her death. Such member
must have been married to the spouse for at least one year prior to the date of
the member's death in order for the spouse to qualify for this benefit.
§ 62-111. Vesting.
If a member terminates City employment prior to meeting the eligibility
requirements for retirement under the plan but after having completed 10 years
of service, he shall be entitled to vest in his/her accrued pension and receive
his/her pension benefit when such member attains normal retirement age by
filing with the City a written notice of his/her intention to vest, within 90
days of the date of his/her termination. Upon reaching the date which he/she
would have been eligible for normal retirement if he/she had continued to be
employed by the City, such member shall be paid a monthly pension benefit equal
to the benefit accrued as of the date of termination. However, the member may
elect to receive his/her monthly pension benefit after he/she has met the
eligibility requirements for early retirement and prior to attaining normal
retirement, in which case, the monthly pension benefit payable to the member
shall be equal to the benefit accrued as of the date of termination, reduced by
1/3 of 1% for each month by which the member's early retirement date precedes
his normal retirement date.
§ 62-112. Member contributions.
All members shall pay into the fund monthly, 3% of gross monthly compensation,
beginning with the member's date of hire in an eligible position.
§ 62-113. Refund of contribution or rollover.
Provided a member has not filed an election to vest under §
62-111, and 90 days has passed since member's employment was terminated, on
termination of full-time employment, before a member has met the eligibility
requirements for early retirement, a refund or a direct rollover, if elected,
shall be made of all contributions paid into the fund by such member with
interest compounded at the rate of 5% per annum. The member shall have 90 days
from the date of termination of full-time employment to elect a direct rollover
or a distribution by providing to the Board Administrator the appropriate form
evidencing such election. The form shall be prepared by the Board Administrator
and approved by the Board. Direct rollovers shall be administered in accordance
with §
62-116. In the case of the member's death after his/her election and prior to
the fund's distribution, such refund shall be paid to the member's designated
beneficiary, or, in the absence of such designation, to the member's estate.
Any member who leaves employment subject to the provisions of this part and is
reappointed shall receive credit for prior years of service only by repaying to
the fund the amount refunded by the fund with interest compounded at the rate
of 5% per annum from the date of refund by the fund to the date of payment
which shall be made within one year from the date of reappointment. In the
event the payment is not made within the specified time limit, the right to
obtain credit for prior years of service shall be lost for the applicable prior
years' period and any repayments shall be refunded without interest.
§ 62-114. Maximum permissible benefits and contributions – Code Section 415.
   A.   In general. Notwithstanding anything herein to the contrary, effective
for limitation years beginning on or after January 1, 1995, the annual benefit
(attributable to City contributions and pickup contributions treated as City
contributions) with respect to a member payable under the plan and all other
defined benefit plans of the City, when expressed in the form of a straight
life annuity, shall not exceed the "maximum permissible benefit." Effective for
limitation years beginning on or after January 1, 2008, in no case shall any
amount accrue in a limitation year, with respect to a member under the plan or
all other deferred benefits plans of the City, that would exceed the maximum
permissible benefit. For purposes of this section, the member's maximum
permissible benefit shall equal the dollar limit prescribed in Section 415(b)
(1)(A) of the Code ($195,000 in 2011) or such other amount as may be prescribed
under regulations issued by the U.S. Secretary of the Treasury under Section
415(d) of the Code, adjusted in accordance with Subsections B, C and D, below.
In addition, the "annual additions," as defined in Section 415(c)(2) of the
Code, made by or on behalf of any member attributable to member contributions
to the plan other than pickup contributions treated as City contributions,
together with any annual additions, to any Code Section 401(a) qualified
defined contribution plan maintained by the City, shall not exceed the maximum
amount determined under Section 415(c)(1) of the Code for any limitation year.
Solely for purposes of determining the maximum annual addition prescribed in
Section 415(c) of the Code, "compensation" means a member's wages as defined in
Section 3401(a) of the Code and all other payments of compensation to the
member from the City for which the City is required to furnish the member a
written statement under Sections 6041(d) and 6051(a)(3) of the Code.
Compensation shall be determined without regard to any rules that limit the
compensation included in wages based on the nature or location of the
employment or the services performed. Compensation shall include any amount
which would otherwise be deemed compensation under this definition but for the
fact that it is subject to a salary reduction agreement under any plan
described in Section 457(b), 132(f), or 125 of the Code. Solely for this
purpose, compensation also includes regular compensation received after such
member's severance from employment [as defined in Treas. Reg. § 1.415(a)-1(f)
(5) (but not severance payments)]; provided that payment of such compensation
is made by the later of 2 1/2 months after the member's severance from
employment or the end of the calendar year that includes the member's severance
from employment; and provided, further, that in order for these postseverance
payments to be considered compensation for this purpose, these amounts may only
consist of the following (which would otherwise constitute compensation): i)
regular compensation for services during the member's regular working hours, or
compensation for service outside the member's regular work hours (such as
overtime or shift differential), commission, bonuses, or similar payments, if
such payment would have been paid to the member prior to severance from
employment if the member had continued in employment with the City; ii) payment
for unused, accrued, bona fide sick, vacation or other leave (but only if the
member would have been able to use the leave if employment had continued); and
iii) for plan years beginning on or after January 1, 2009, payments to members
who do not currently perform services for the City by reason of qualified
military service [as that term is defined in Section 414(u)(1) of the Code] to
the extent those payments do not exceed the amounts the individual would have
received if the individual had continued to perform services for the City
rather than entering qualified military service. Other types of payments paid
to the member after severance from employment shall not be considered
compensation for this purpose, even if paid within the time frame described
above. In no event, however, shall compensation for this purpose include any
amounts not permitted to be included under Section 415 of the Code.
   B.   Adjustment to the maximum permissible benefit. Adjustments shall be
made to the maximum permissible benefit in accordance with Subsection B(1), (2)
or (3) below:
      (1)   If a member's benefit is payable in any form other than a straight
life annuity, the determination as to whether the limitation of this section
has been satisfied shall be made by adjusting such benefit to the form of a
straight life annuity beginning when the payment of benefits begins. The
adjustment described in the preceding sentence shall be made in the manner
prescribed by the U.S. Secretary of the Treasury, such that the equivalent
annual benefit would be the greater of: 1) the equivalent annual benefit
computed using 7% interest rate and GAM83 mortality table; and 2) the
equivalent annual benefit computed using an interest assumption of 5% (for
distributions made during plan years beginning in 2004 or 2005, 5.5%) and the
mortality table prescribed by the U.S. Secretary of the Treasury under Section
415(b)(2)(E)(v) of the Code. Notwithstanding the preceding sentence, effective
for plan years beginning after 2005, for purposes of determining whether any
benefit payable as a lump sum satisfies the limitation of this section, the
adjustment described in the preceding sentence shall be made in the manner
prescribed by the U.S. Secretary of the Treasury, such that the equivalent
annual benefit would be the greatest of: 1) the equivalent annual benefit
computed using the interest rate and mortality table specified in the plan for
actuarial equivalence for the particular form of benefit payable; 2) the
equivalent annual benefit computed using an interest rate assumption of 5.5%
and the mortality table prescribed by the U.S. Secretary of the Treasury under
Section 415(b)(2)(E)(v) of the Code; and 3) the equivalent annual benefit
computed using the interest rate specified in Section 417(e)(3) of the Code and
the mortality table prescribed by the U.S. Secretary of the Treasury under
Section 415(b)(2)(E)(v) of the Code divided by 1.05. However, for the purposes
of such adjustment, any ancillary benefit that is not directly related to
retirement income benefits and that portion of any joint and survivor annuity
that is actuarially equivalent to the default form of payment benefit payable
to a married member shall not be taken into account.
      (2)   Actuarial equivalents prior to age 62.
         (a)   If the benefit of a member who is not a "qualified participant,"
as defined in Section 415(b)(2)(H) of the Code, begins before he or she reaches
age 62 (other than on account of becoming disabled by reason of personal
injuries or sickness or death), the maximum permissible benefit shall be
adjusted in accordance with Section 415(b) of the Code, to an amount (beginning
when the payment of benefits begins) that is actuarially equivalent to an
annual benefit equal to the maximum permissible benefit determined under
Subsection A [adjusted through the limitation year when payment of benefits
begins for increases in the cost of living in accordance with Section 415(d) of
the Code] beginning at age 62.
            [1]   For limitation years beginning before July 1, 2007, the
defined benefit dollar limitation applicable at an age prior to age 62 is
determined as the lesser of: a) the actuarial equivalent (at such age) of the
defined benefit dollar limitation computed using a five-percent interest rate
and the Unisex UP-84 Mortality Table; and b) the actuarial equivalent (at such
age) of the maximum permissible benefit computed using a five-percent interest
rate and the applicable mortality table-prescribed by the U.S. Secretary of the
Treasury under Section 415(b)(2)(E)(v) of the Code.
            [2]   For limitation years beginning on or after July 1, 2007, the
defined benefit dollar limitation applicable at an age prior to age 62 is
determined as the lesser of: a) the actuarial equivalent (at such age) of the
defined benefit dollar limitation computed using a five-percent interest rate
and the applicable mortality table within the meaning of Section 417(e)(3)(B)
of the Code (and expressing the member's age based on completed calendar months
as of the annuity starting date); and b) the defined benefit dollar limitation
multiplied by the ratio of the annual amount of the immediately commencing
straight life annuity under the plan at the member's annuity starting date to
the annual amount of the immediately commencing straight life annuity under the
plan at age 62, both determined without applying the limitations of Section 415
of the Code.
            [3]   For limitation years beginning prior to 2002, the reduction
shall not reduce the maximum permissible benefit below $75,000 if the benefit
begins at or after age 55, or, if the benefit begins before age 55, the
equivalent of the seventy-five-thousand-dollar-limit for age 55.
         (b)   Any decrease in the maximum permissible benefit made in
accordance with this subsection shall not reflect a mortality decrement.
      (3)   Actuarial equivalents after age 55.
         (a)   If the benefit of a member begins after he or she reaches age
65, the maximum permissible benefit of Subsection A shall be increased in
accordance with Section 415(b) of the Code and the regulations thereunder to an
amount (beginning when the payment of benefits begins) that is actuarially
equivalent to an annual benefit equal to the maximum permissible benefit of
Subsection A [adjusted through the limitation year when payment of benefits
begins for increases in the cost of living in accordance with Section 415(d) of
the Code] beginning at age 65.
            [1]   For limitation years beginning before July 1, 2007, the
actuarial equivalent of the maximum permissible benefit applicable at an age
after age 65 is the lesser of: a) the actuarial equivalent (at such age) of the
maximum permissible benefit computed using a five-percent interest rate and the
unisex UP-84 mortality table; and b) the actuarial equivalent (at such age) of
the maximum permissible benefit computed using a five-percent interest rate
assumption and the applicable mortality table prescribed by the U.S. Secretary
of the Treasury under Section 415(b)(2)(E)(v) of the Code.
            [2]   For limitation years beginning on or after July 1, 2007, the
actuarial equivalent of the maximum permissible benefit applicable at an age
after age 65 is the lesser of: a) the actuarial equivalent (at such age) of the
maximum permissible benefit using a five-percent interest rate and the
applicable mortality table within the meaning of Section 417(e)(3)(B) of the
Code (and expressing the member's age based on completed calendar months as of
the annuity starting date); and b) the maximum permissible benefit multiplied
by the ratio of the annual amount of the immediately commencing straight life
annuity payable to the member, computed disregarding the member's accruals
after age 65, but including any actuarial adjustments even if those adjustments
are applied to off set accruals, to the annual amount of the straight life
annuity that would be payable under the plan to a hypothetical member who is 65
years old and has the same accrued benefit (with no actuarial increases for
commencement after age 65) as the member receiving the distribution (determined
disregarding the member's accruals after age 65 and without applying the rules
of Section 415 of the Code).
         (b)   For purposes of both Subsection B(3)(a)[1] and [2] above,
mortality between age 65 and the annuity starting date shall be ignored.
   C.   Lowest limitation of maximum permissible benefit. Except as provided in
Subsection D hereof, the maximum permissible benefit shall never be deemed to
be an amount which is less than $10,000, provided the member is not, and has
never been, a member in any Code Section 401(a) qualified defined contribution
plan of the employer.
   D.   Maximum permissible benefit applicable to certain members who have less
than 10 years of participation service with the City. The maximum permissible
benefit applicable to any member, other than a retiree receiving disability
benefits by reasons of personal injuries or sickness or beneficiaries,
survivors, or the estate of a member, who has less than 10 years of
participation service with the City shall be equal to the lesser of the maximum
permissible benefit or $10,000 multiplied by a fraction, the numerator of which
is the number of the member's years (or part thereof) of participation service
in the plan as of and including the current limitation year, and the
denominator of which is 10.
   E.   Limitation of accrued benefit if annual benefit exceeds maximum
permissible benefit. If the member's annual benefit exceeds the maximum
permissible benefit after the application of the appropriate factors, such
member's accrued benefit shall be limited to an amount which produces an annual
benefit equal to the maximum permissible benefit, adjusted, where applicable,
as set forth in this section.
   F.   For purposes of this section, "participation service" means an accrual
computation period for which the following conditions are met: A) the member is
credited with at least the period of service for benefit accrual purposes,
required hereunder in order to accrue a benefit for the accrual computation
period; and B) the member is included in the plan for at least one day of the
accrual computation period. If these two conditions are met, participation
service credited to the member hereunder shall equal the amount of benefit
accrual service credited to the member for such accrual computation period.
§ 62-115. Required minimum distributions – Code Section 401(a)(9).
Notwithstanding any other provision herein, beginning after 1986, any and all
benefit distributions made under the plan on or after shall be made in
accordance with a reasonable and good faith interpretation of Section 401(a)(9)
of the Code, including the incidental death benefit requirements of Section 401
(a)(9). In accordance with this requirement, the following rules shall apply:
   A.   Distributions that begin during the member's lifetime shall begin no
later than April 1 following the calendar year in which the member retires or
the calendar year in which the member attains age 70 1/2 and be distributed
over the life of the member or the joint lives of the member and his
beneficiary (or over a period not extending beyond the life expectancy of the
member or the joint life expectancy of the member and his beneficiary).
   B.   If a member dies before his entire interest has been distributed, the
remaining portion shall be distributed at least as rapidly as under the method
of distribution being used as of the date of the member's death.
   C.   If the member dies before receiving any distributions from the plan and
A) the death benefit is payable to his surviving spouse, such death benefit
shall be distributed over a period not exceeding such spouse's life (or life
expectancy) beginning no later than: 1) December 31 of the calendar year
immediately following the calendar year in which the member died; or 2)
December 31 of the calendar year in which the member would have attained age 70
1/2; B) the death benefit is payable to a designated beneficiary other than the
member's surviving spouse, such death benefit shall be distributed to such
beneficiary over a period not exceeding the beneficiary's life (or life
expectancy) beginning no later than December 31 of the calendar year following
the member's death; and C) if the death benefit is not payable to the member's
surviving spouse or designated beneficiary, the member's entire interest will
be paid no later than December 31 of the calendar year which includes the fifth
anniversary of the member's date of death.
§ 62-116. Direct rollovers.
   A.   Direct rollovers. Notwithstanding any provision herein to the contrary
that would otherwise limit a distributee's election under this subsection, on
and after January 1, 1993, a distributee may elect, at the time and in the
manner prescribed by the Board, to have any portion of an eligible rollover
distribution paid directly to an eligible retirement plan specified by the
distributee in a direct rollover.
   B.   For purposes of this section, the following definitions shall apply:
   DIRECT ROLLOVER — A direct rollover is a payment by the system to the
eligible retirement plan specified by the distributee.
   DISTRIBUTEE — A distributee includes any member. In addition, a member's
surviving spouse and the member's spouse or former spouse who is the alternate
payee under a domestic relations order, as defined in Section 414(p) of the
Code, are distributees with regard to the interest of the spouse or former
spouse. Effective with respect to distributions after 2009, a distributee also
means a beneficiary of a member other than a surviving spouse.
   ELIGIBLE RETIREMENT PLAN — An eligible retirement plan is an individual
retirement account described in Code Section 408(a), an individual retirement
annuity described in Code Section 408(b), a Roth IRA as pursuant to Code
Section 408A(e), for distributions made after December 31, 2001, an annuity
plan described in Code Section 403(a) or an annuity contract described in Code
Section 403(b), a qualified trust described in Code Section 401(a), or for
distributions made after December 31, 2001, an eligible plan under Code Section
457(b) which is maintained by a state, political subdivision of a state, or any
agency or instrumentality of a state or political subdivision of a state and
which agrees to separately account for amounts transferred into such plan from
this plan. The definition of eligible retirement plan shall also apply in the
case of a distribution to a surviving spouse, or to a spouse or former spouse
who is the alternate payee under a domestic relation order, as defined in Code
Section 414(p). Effective in the case of an eligible rollover distribution to a
surviving spouse before 2002 or to a beneficiary other than a surviving spouse
after 2009, an eligible retirement plan is an individual retirement account or
individual retirement annuity.
   ELIGIBLE ROLLOVER DISTRIBUTION — An eligible rollover distribution is any
distribution of all or any portion of the balance to the credit of the
distributee, except that an eligible rollover distribution does not include any
distribution that is one of a series of substantially equal periodic payments
(not less frequently than annually) made for the life (or life expectancy) of
the distributee or the joint lives (or joint life expectancies) of the
distributee and the distributee's designated beneficiary, or for a specified
period of 10 years or more; any distribution to the extent such distribution is
required under Code Section 401(a)(9); the portion of any distribution that is
not includible in gross income (determined without regard to the exclusion for
net unrealized appreciation with respect to employer securities); and any
distribution that is made upon hardship of a member. Notwithstanding anything
in this definition to the contrary, for distributions made after December 31,
2001, a portion of a distribution shall not fail to be an eligible rollover
distribution merely because the portion consists of after-tax employee
contributions that are not includible in gross income. However, such portion
may be paid only to an individual retirement account or annuity, or to a
qualified defined contribution plan described in Section 401(a) or 403(a) of
the Code, or a governmental 457 plan that agrees to separately account for
amounts so transferred, including separately accounting for the portion of such
distribution which is includible in gross income and the portion of such
distribution which is not.
§ 62-117. Miscellaneous.
   A.   Nonrepealer and severability. This part does not repeal the existing
City ordinance outlining the provisions of the City of Reading Officers and
Employees' Pension Fund but establishes new provisions for officers and
employees hired on or after January 1, 1988 (Part 2 of this chapter). The
provisions of this part are severable, and if any of the provisions shall be
held to be illegal, invalid or unconstitutional, the decision of the court so
holding shall not affect or impair any of the remaining provisions of this
part. It is hereby declared to be the intent of Council that this part would
have been adopted if such illegal, invalid or unconstitutional provision or
provisions had not been included herein.
   B.   Construction. The masculine gender includes the feminine and the
singular includes the plural, unless the context clearly indicates otherwise.
   C.   Governing law. The plan and fund are governed by the Third Class City
Code of Pennsylvania. 3  The plan is a governmental plan as defined in Section
414(d) of the Code and Section 3(32) of the Employee Retirement Income Security
Act of 1974 (ERISA), as amended, and as such is exempt from the requirements of
ERISA and those requirements of the Code from which a governmental plan is
specifically exempt.
   D.   Pre-ERISA vesting requirement. In the event of the plan's termination
or the City's permanent cessation of contributions, each member shall be vested
to the extent the plan is funded.
   E.   Reemployments rights of veterans. Notwithstanding anything in this plan
to the contrary, benefits contributions, and service credit with respect to
qualified military service [as defined in Section 414(u)(5) of the Code] will
be provided in accordance with Section 414(u) of the Code.
   F.   Amendments. The City Council shall have the authority to amend, freeze,
or terminate the plan in its sole discretion, subject to any limitations
imposed by applicable law.
   G.   Return of overpayments correction methods. Overpayments as a result of
amounts being paid in excess of the amounts provided by the provisions of the
plan may be corrected using the return of overpayment correction methods set
forth as follows:
      (1)   The Board shall take reasonable steps to have the overpayment
together with an amount equal to 5% simple interest returned by the Member
(employee or former employee) to the plan and correct future benefit payments,
if any, due the Member to reflect the appropriate calculations of the Member's
pension. In addition, the Board shall notify the Member that the overpayment is
not eligible for favorable tax treatment accorded distributions from qualified
plans and specifically is not eligible for tax free roll over treatment.
      (2)   In addition to the return of overpayment correction method set
forth above in the case of plan benefits that are being distributed in the form
of periodic payments, overpayments as a result of amounts being paid in excess
of the plan requirements may be corrected by reducing the future periodic
payments due to the Member. The adjustment of the future periodic payments
shall be made over a period not to exceed a period established by the Board to
recoup the overpayments. [Amended 3-27-2017 by Ord. No. 27-2017]
3.   Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 35101 et seq.
Part 2
Officers and Employees Retirement System
[Adopted 4-27-1998 by Ord. No. 13-1998 (
Ch. 1, Part 6C, of the 2001 Code of Ordinances); amended in its entirety 4-22-
2013 by Ord. No. 25-2013 4 ]
4.   Editor's Note: This ordinance provided an effective date of 1-1-2012.
§ 62-201. Definitions.
The following words and phrases, unless a different meaning is plainly required
by the context, shall have the following meanings:
   BOARD — Officers and Employees Retirement Board.
   BOARD ADMINISTRATOR — The position designated by the Board to act on behalf
of the Board in matters of day-to-day administration of the plan.
   CITY — The City of Reading, Pennsylvania.
   CODE — The United States Internal Revenue Code, as amended, including
reference, where applicable, to regulations and other guidance issued by the
United States Department of Treasury and the Commissioner of the Internal
Revenue Service.
   EMPLOYEE — A person employed by the City.
   FUND — Officers and Employees Retirement Fund.
   OFFICER — A person elected or appointed to City service.
   MEMBER — A current or former employee or officer of the City who is elected
or appointed to the staff of the City, for the first time prior to January 1,
1988, and excluding for such period of time those individuals who are
concurrently eligible to accrue benefits under the City's Police Pension Fund
or Fireman's Pension Fund.
   PERSON — An officer or employee of the City.
   PLAN (or SYSTEM) — The Officers and Employee Retirement Plan.
   QUALIFIED MILITARY SERVICE — Any service in the uniformed services (as
defined in Chapter 3 of Title 38, United States Code) by any individual if such
individual is entitled to reemployment rights under such chapter with respect
to such service.
   SALARY, WAGES, PAY or COMPENSATION — Pickup contributions plus remuneration
received as a City employee excluding refunds for expenses, contingency and
accountable expense allowances and excluding severance payments or payments for
unused vacation or unused sick leave or comp time that is paid upon
termination. Salary, wages, pay or compensation includes amounts excluded from
income pursuant to a member's election under a cash or deferred compensation
arrangement described in Sections 401(k) of the Code, an eligible deferred
compensation plan described in Section 457(b) of the Code, a cafeteria plan
described in Section 125 of the Code, and, effective January 1, 1998, a
qualified transportation fringe benefit plan under Section 132(f) of the Code.
Notwithstanding the preceding, the annual salary, wages, pay, or compensation
of a member shall be limited as set forth in Section 401(a)(17) of the Code [as
adjusted annually pursuant to Section 401(a)(17)(B) of the Code and
announcement by the Internal Revenue Service; for 2011, $245,000]. Salary,
wages, pay or compensation for any prior year shall be subject to the
limitations set forth in Appendix A, A-1. 5  If salary, wages, pay or
compensation for any prior determination period is taken into account in
determining a member's benefits for the current year, the salary, wages, pay or
compensation for such prior determination period is subject to the applicable
annual compensation limit in effect for that prior period.
   SPOUSE — The spouse of a member, as determined under law of the Commonwealth
of Pennsylvania. Effective for designations made after December 31, 2006, a
member may designate his/her spouse to be the beneficiary of the member's
pension, regardless of the date of the marriage.
5.   Editor's Note: Appendix A is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 62-202. System created.
The City of Reading has heretofore and does reaffirm the creation and hereby
does create under the provisions of 11 Pa.C.S. § 14340, under the conditions
and subject to the qualifications hereinafter stated, a retirement system for
officers and employees of the City, but not including firemen and policemen or
employees and officials hired or after January 1, 1988.
§ 62-203. Officers and Employees Retirement Board.
[Amended 1-25-2021 by Ord. No. 6-2021; 5-19-2020 by Referendum]
The Council of the City of Reading hereby reconstitutes an Officers and
Employees Retirement Board which shall consist of the following:
   A.   The Officers and Employees Retirement Board which has heretofore been
created shall henceforth consist of the Mayor or his/her designee, the City
Auditor, the Finance Department Director, two employees to be chosen by the
employees contributing to the retirement fund and a retired City employee who
shall be appointed by the Mayor subject to confirmation by City Council.
   B.   When any of the following are unavailable: the Mayor, City Auditor
orFinance Director, then the City Auditor or Finance Director shall in writing
appoint a designee to act in his/her place for such period or periods as shall
be necessary with the approval of the Board. In the event that one or more of
the foregoing offices are vacant, then the acting City Auditor or acting
Finance Department Director shall serve on the Board until the applicable
office is no longer vacant.
   C.   The representatives elected by the employees shall be elected for the
term to run concurrently with the term of the Mayor, and shall be from two
different departments of the City government.
   D.   Members of the Board shall serve for the term for which they are
elected and until their successors are elected.
   E.   The members of the Board shall serve without compensation, but shall be
reimbursed for any necessary expenditures.
   F.   It shall be the duty of said Board to register all persons employed by
the City other than firemen or policemen and to administer the collection,
investment and distribution of the fund herein provided for, and make such
reasonable rules in the premises as said Board may deem necessary for its
efficient organization, and to carry into effect the provisions of this part.
   G.   The Board shall keep a complete set of books showing all of its
transactions, and a complete record of all its proceedings, which shall be open
to inspection by any employee contributing to the fund and to the public.
   H.   All payments of compensation made under the provisions of this part
shall be made by check only, signed in such manner as may be fixed by the rules
of the Board.
§ 62-204. Fund created; receipt of contributions; payment from and investment
of fund.
[Amended 5-19-2020 by Referendum]
   A.   There shall be created by said Board a fund to be known as the
“Officers and Employees Pension Fund.”
   B.   It shall be the exclusive duty of the Board to serve as fund trustees
and to receive, disburse, retain, invest and reinvest the fund created by
virtue of this part 2 and to pay over by warrant or check the amount due under
this plan to members or their widows or widowers or their estates or children.
The Board, with the approval of the Finance Director of the City, may enter
into agreements with reputable institutions to perform any of the aforesaid
duties, including, but not limited to, advising the Board with respect to any
and all of its duties, but in the event the Board does so, any such agreement
shall require the institutions involved to provide the Board with written
reports concerning its activities at least once every six months. The
compensation of such institutions shall be paid by the fund or such source of
pay as is designated by applicable law. The fund shall be used for the
exclusive purpose of funding and paying benefits provided hereunder, and a
reversion of fund assets or a return of City contributions is prohibited,
except as otherwise provided by applicable law or IRS Revenue Ruling 91-4.
§ 62-205. Employment statement.
[Amended 5-19-2020 by Referendum]
The Finance Department of the City shall, on the first day of each calendar
month, notify the Board of the employment, or the entering into office of new
City officers and employees, and shall submit to the Board a statement showing
the name, sex, title, date of birth, compensation, duties, and commencement
date of each of such new City officers and employees, and shall also certify to
the Board, at the same time, all removals, withdrawals, and changes in salary
of any member of the officers and employees’ retirement system, which shall
have occurred during the preceding month.
   A.   The Finance Director or his designee has cause and shall continue to
cause to be deducted on each and every payroll of a member for each and every
payroll period subsequent to November 1, 1946, the following per centum of the
total amount of salary earned by each member, in such payroll period in
accordance with the provisions of this part, which sum so deducted shall be
applied to the purposes provided for by this part.
   B.   The Finance Director or his designee shall pay each of the amounts so
deducted into the Treasury of the officers and employees’ retirement fund, and
he shall transmit to the Pension Administrator each pay period a detailed
statement of all amounts so paid in.
 
                             Single Married
Single coverage              3%     3 1/2%
Single coverage + increments 3 1/2% 4%
Joint coverage               3 1/2% 4%
Joint coverage + increments  4%     4 1/2%
Dual coverage                5%     5 1/2%
Dual coverage + increments   5 1/2% 6%
   C.   Single coverage is a deduction for pension only (does not include
Social Security). This coverage is no longer available (since September 1959).
Joint coverage includes Social Security but is subject to a 40% of Social
Security deduction to be applied against the City pension. This offset can be
eliminated by payment of 1 1/2% of the salary earned since January 1960 or date
of employment, whichever is the earliest date. Upon payment of the offset, the
coverage is then known as "dual coverage," which entitles the employee to
pension and Social Security without deduction of the offset.
§ 62-206. Right to and amount of pension benefits.
Every person now or hereafter elected or appointed to an office of, or employed
by, the City of the age of 60 years and upwards who shall have so served as an
employee for a period of 20 years or more shall, upon application to the Board,
be retired from service, and shall during the remainder of his life receive the
compensation fixed by the provisions of 11 Pa.C.S. § 14340 and this part, as
amended.
   A.   If any person shall have served 20 years and voluntarily retires he
shall, by continuing his contributions until the age of 55, be entitled to the
above compensation.
   B.   During the lifetime of any such person he shall be entitled to receive
as compensation annually from the fund set aside for the purpose 50% of the
amount which would constitute the highest average annual salary or wages which
he earned during any five years of his service for the City, or which would be
determined by the rate of the monthly pay of such person at the date of
retirement, whichever is higher. Said compensation shall be paid in semimonthly
payments.
   C.   Retirement compensation for members who are integrated into federal
Social Security payable after early or normal retirement age and upon that
portion of annual compensation on which Social Security benefits are payable
shall be reduced by an amount of equal to 40% of the primary insurance amount
of Social Security, paid or payable to the member. In determining such age
eligibility and such amount, only wages or compensation for services performed
in the employ of the City shall be included. (Note: These provisions change if
the offset is eliminated by payment of the additional 1 1/2% of all salary and
wages retroactive to January 1, 1960).
   D.   Widows or widowers of members who die or are killed in the service
shall receive pension payments calculated at the rate of 50% of the pension the
member was receiving, or would have been receiving had the member been retired
at the time of his or her death. A widow or widower is entitled to receive
these payments during his or her lifetime or until he or she remarries.
   E.   Where an officer or employee who shall have served for 12 years, or
more, and his tenure of office or employment shall be terminated without his
voluntary action before the expiration of 20 years of service and has attained
the age of 60, he shall, in such event, during the remainder of his life, be
entitled to receive such portion of the full compensation as the period of his
service up to date of its termination bears to the full twenty-year period of
service. Where an officer or employee who has served for 12 years, or more, and
shall not have attained 60 years of age and his tenure of office or employment
shall be terminated without his voluntary action, before the expiration of 20
years of service, he shall, in such event, during the remainder of his life
after attaining the age of 60 years, be entitled to receive such portion of the
full compensation as the period of his service up to date of its termination
bears to the full twenty-year period of service. Both are conditioned upon his
payment of contributions into the fund until he attains contribution for 20
years upon state of benefits of age 60 years.
   F.   Notwithstanding anything herein contained to the contrary, a member may
be entitled to a limited vested benefit under the following conditions:
      (1)   A member who has completed 12 years or more of full-time continuous
service but shall not have attained the minimum age and minimum period of
continuous service may be entitled to vest his retirement benefits subject to
all of the following conditions:
         (a)   The member must file with the Officers and Employees Retirement
Board of the fund a written notice of his intention to vest.
         (b)   The member must include in the notice the date the member
intends to terminate his service.
         (c)   The termination date shall be at least 30 days later than the
date of notice to vest.
         (d)   The member must be in good standing with the City on the date of
the notice to vest.
         (e)   The Board shall indicate on the notice to vest the rate of the
monthly pay of the member as of the date of the notice to vest or the highest
average annual salary which the member received during any five years of
service preceding that date, whichever is higher.
      (2)   Upon reaching the date which would have been the member's
retirement date had the member continued employment with the City, the member
shall notify the Board in writing that the member desires to collect his
pension. The amount of retirement benefits the member is entitled to receive
under this section shall be computed as follows:
         (a)   The initial determination of the member's base retirement
benefits shall be computed on the salary indicated on the notice to vest; and
         (b)   The portion of the base retirement due the member shall be
determined by applying to the base amounts the percentage that his years of
service actually rendered bears to the years of service which would have been
rendered had the member continued to be employed by the City until his minimum
retirement date. As used in this section, the term "salary" means the fixed
amount of compensation paid at regular, periodic intervals by the City to the
member and from which pension contributions have been deducted.
   G.   Where an officer or employee has served for 20 years, or more, and his
tenure of office or employment shall be terminated without his voluntary
action, then he shall be entitled to full compensation for the remainder of his
life after attaining age 55 years conditioned upon his continuing his
contributions into the fund at the same rate as when he was dismissed, until he
attains age of 55 years.
§ 62-207. Disability benefits.
[Amended 7-11-2022 by Ord. No. 68-2022]
Should an officer or employee, however, become so permanently disabled as to
render him unable to perform the duties of his position or office after 15
years of service, he shall be entitled to full compensation during such
disability. Proof of such disability shall consist of the sworn statement of
three practicing physicians, designated by the Board, that the employee is in a
condition of health which would permanently disable him from performing the
duties of his position or office. Such person shall thereafter be subject to
physical examination at any reasonable time or times, upon order of the Board,
and upon his refusal to submit to any such examination his compensation shall
cease. At its sole discretion, the Board by public vote may accept fewer than
three sworn physician statements as proof of permanent disability.
§ 62-208. Member contributions.
   A.   Beginning on November 1, 1946, all the aforesaid officers and employees
of the City of Reading shall pay into such fund semimonthly an amount equal to
3% of their monthly wages or salaries and beginning on January 1, 1960, all the
aforesaid officers and employees of the City of Reading, who as members are
integrated with federal Social Security, shall pay into such fund every payroll
period an amount equal to 3 1/2% of their earnings and 5% in excess of that on
which Social Security is payable, which shall be applied to the purpose of this
part.
   B.   The Board hereby authorizes every joint coverage member of the optional
retirement system to elect to receive compensation in accordance therewith
without the reduction (commonly known as the "offset") set forth in Subsection
(c) of the Act of the General Assembly of May 23, 1945, as amended, provided:
      (1)   The member makes his election to buy out his offset in writing in
manner and form approved by the Board.
      (2)   The member makes his aforesaid election to buy out his offset
before his date of retirement, which election to do so shall be irrevocable and
forever binding upon the member.
      (3)   The member making his election to buy out his offset shall make a
lump sum payment equivalent to 1 1/2% of his gross payroll earnings from the
date of his affirmative election, retroactive to January 1, 1960, or, as to a
member who became employed by the City after January 1, 1960, then an amount
equivalent to 1 1/2% of his gross payroll earnings from the date of his
affirmative election, retroactive to his date of employment by the City, after
which time of lump sum payment the member shall pay to the fund by payroll
deduction an amount equivalent to 5% of his gross earnings to a maximum annual
gross allowed by Social Security (i.e., $65,400 for 1997).
§ 62-209. Additional payments to extend benefits.
If upon retirement any compensation be granted to a person who has not been a
contributor to the fund, as herein provided, for an aggregate period of 20
years, such person shall be required to pay to the Board for the benefit of the
fund monthly an amount equal to the same per centum rate when he separated from
the service of his compensation until such time as his contribution shall have
been extended to a period of 20 years which shall be deducted from his
semimonthly payment.
§ 62-210. Termination prior to benefit entitlement.
If for any cause any person contributing to the fund who has served less than
12 years shall cease to be in the service of the City, he shall become entitled
to the total amount of the contributions paid into the funds by him, without
interest. Any person who has served for a period of less than 20 years, and who
has not reached the age of 60 years, and who voluntarily retires from such
service shall be entitled only to the return of his total contributions paid
into the funds by him without interest. Except in the event of the notification
by a member to obtain a limited benefit but in such event such person shall
still be covered by the provisions of this section with respect to any refunds
without interest.
§ 62-211. Refunds.
If for any cause any person contributing to the fund shall cease to be in the
service of the City before he shall have become entitled to any compensation,
the total amount shall be refunded in full without interest; provided, however,
if any such person shall have had returned to him the amount contributed as
aforesaid, and shall afterward re-enter the service of the City, he shall not
be entitled to the compensation designated unless he shall return to the fund
the amount withdrawn, in which event, the required period of service under this
part shall be computed from the time he first entered the service of the City,
otherwise the date of his period of service shall commence upon re-entry. For
those members who became a member of the fund for the first time after January
1, 1988, reference shall be made to Ordinance No. 79-1987, 9-30-1987, § 9 (§
62-110).
§ 62-212. Council contributions.
The City Council shall annually set aside, apportion and appropriate out of all
taxes and income of the City to the fund, a sum of money sufficient to maintain
the pension payable to members of the system including sufficient funds of
payments to widows or widowers retired on pension or who die or were killed in
the service of the City.
§ 62-213. Benefits.
The benefits conferred by this part shall apply to all persons regularly
employed in any capacity, by or holding positions in the City in accordance
with the provisions of this part, except as herein provided.
§ 62-214. Time of service.
   A.   The time of service herein specified shall be computed from the time of
the first or original service to the City and need not be continuous.
   B.   If, after the expiration of authorized sick leave, an employee although
without pay, is absent from work, such employee, upon presentation of
satisfactory evidence to the Board that such absence was because of health,
will be given credit for pension purposes only for an additional period not
exceeding 90 calendar days total during the entire period of service with the
City; provided, however, said employee contributed to the pension fund for such
period of absence an amount which is equal to the sum he would have contributed
had he been working, based on his salary or wages, for a full regular work week
at the contributing percentage in force for such employee.
§ 62-215. Military service.
   A.   The person must have been an employee of the City at the time he
entered the armed forces. Any person who was an employee of the City on or
after October 9, 1946, the date of the ordinance, Bill No. 51, and who was an
employee of the City prior thereto, may secure credit for time spent in the
armed forces, if he pays before the time of his retirement on pension into the
pension fund, the amount equal to 3% of his last monthly salary or wage prior
to entering active service with the armed services and for each month he was
not employed by the City, because of such active duty. Any person now an
employee of the City and a contributor to the pension fund and who now enters
the armed forces shall have his years of service credited to his retirement,
provided he pays 3% of his monthly salary or wages into the pension fund for
each month spent in the armed services.
   B.   Credit for the years of service for military service shall not at any
time exceed in the aggregate six years spent by the employee on active duty
with the armed forces and subject to a certificate of satisfactory service and
payment to the Board of an amount equal to 3% of his monthly wages or salaries,
and beginning on January 1, 1960, credit for such years of military service may
be purchased by paying the Board the same amount he was contributing at the
time he left employ of the City to enter the Armed Forces of the United States,
for each month he is not employed by the City because of his active duty with
the armed forces.
   C.   USERRA and HEART requirements. Effective December 12, 1994, any member
who is absent on account of qualified military service and returns to City
service within the period of time during which his reemployment rights are
protected by federal law shall receive service credit, contributions, benefits
and other rights provided under this subsection in lieu of the service credit,
contributions, benefits or other rights to which the member would otherwise be
entitled under this section, except to the extent the member would be entitled
to more advantageous service credit, contributions, or benefits or more
valuable rights under other provisions of this section. A member described in
this subsection shall be credited with years of service for the full period of
qualified military service, provided such member pays into the fund an amount
equal to the contributions such member would have been required to make but for
his absence on account of qualified military service, within the five-year
period of time beginning on his reemployment date (or the lesser period of time
beginning on such reemployment date that is three times the length of his
qualified military service), and the City shall make all contributions that
would have been due on account of such member contributions, and the member
shall be entitled to all other rights and benefits accruing on account of such
contributions and service. For purposes of this subsection, a member shall be
treated as having received compensation during his qualified military service
based on the rate of compensation the member would have received but for his
qualified military service compensation, or if such amount is not reasonably
certain, his average compensation during the twelve-month period immediately
preceding his qualified military service (or, if shorter, the period of time
immediately preceding his qualified military service). This subsection shall be
applied in a manner consistent with Section 414(u) of the Code.
      (1)   Effective January 1, 2007, in the case of a member who dies while
performing qualified military service, the member's surviving beneficiary shall
be entitled to any additional benefits (other than benefit accruals relating to
the period of qualified military service) provided herein as though the member
had resumed employment with the City on the day before death and then
terminated employment on account of death in accordance with Section 401(a)(37)
of the Code.
      (2)   Effective with respect to years beginning after December 31, 2008,
for purposes of applying the limits on annual benefits and contributions and
for purposes of applying other applicable provisions of the Code, but not for
purposes of determining benefits and contributions, "compensation" shall also
include differential wage payments, as defined in Section 3401(h) of the Code,
paid by the City to an employee on account of qualified military service.
§ 62-216. Payment only to beneficiary.
Benefit payments shall not be subject to attachment, execution, assignment or
transfer, and shall be payable only to the beneficiary designated by this part
and shall not be subject to assigned or transfer.
§ 62-217. Method of payment.
The payment of compensation shall be paid in semimonthly payments.
§ 62-218. Service increment.
In addition to the retirement allowance which is authorized to be paid from the
pension fund by this part, notwithstanding the limitation therein placed upon
such retirement allowances and upon contributions, every member who shall
become entitled to the retirement allowance shall be entitled to the payment of
a "service increment" in accordance with and subject to the conditions
hereinafter set forth:
   A.   Service increment shall be the sum obtained by computing the number of
whole years after having served 20 years, required by this part, during which a
contributor has been employed by the City of Reading and paid out of the City
treasury and multiplying the said number of years so computed by an amount
equal to 1/40 of the retirement allowance which has become payable to such
contributor in accordance with the provisions of this Act. In computing the
service increment, no employment after the contributor has reached the age of
65 years shall be included.
   B.   Each contributor who so chooses to become entitled to the service
increments provided by this part, shall, from and after August 5, 1968, pay
into the retirement fund a monthly sum in addition to his or her retirement
contribution, which shall be equal to 1/2% of his or her salary; provided that
such service increment contribution shall not be paid after a contributor has
reached the age of 65 years.
   C.   Persons who were contributors on August 5, 1968, who have since reached
the age of 65 years shall have his or her service increment computed on the
years of employment prior to the date of reaching his or her 65th birthday.
   D.   Service increment contributions shall be paid at the same time and in
the same manner as retirement contributions, and may be withdrawn in full,
without interest, by persons who leave the employment of the said City, subject
to the same conditions by which retirement contributions may be withdrawn, or
by persons who retire before becoming entitled to any service increment.
   E.   All persons who are now contributors or were contributors to the
retirement fund prior to January 1, 1988, shall be subject to the provisions of
this part.
§ 62-219. Federal income tax exemption of employee contribution to fund.
   A.   Employee contributions to the fund shall be deemed to have been paid by
the employer, the City, in lieu of compensation to the employee.
   B.   Employees do not have the option of choosing to receive the contributed
amount directly in lieu of having them paid by the employer to the fund.
   C.   Employee contributions to the fund treated in the manner set forth in
Subsection A shall be excluded from wages for the purpose of determining
individual employee federal income tax deduction of municipal wages earned.
   D.   This program shall not be applicable to any other federal, state, or
local payroll taxes. The deductions in all other instances shall occur per
applicable schedule on compensation earned by the employee.
   E.   The earnings used to calculate the benefits received by an employee, at
the time he or she withdraws from the fund or is eligible to receive a pension
benefit, shall not be affected by the provisions of this section. The earnings
used to calculate the benefit shall be actual earnings received as set forth in
§
62-206 of this part.
   F.   The provisions of this section shall not act to increase the City's
contribution rate to the pension program.
§ 62-220. Direct rollovers.
   A.   Direct rollovers. Notwithstanding any provision herein to the contrary
that would otherwise limit a distributee's election under this subsection, on
and after January 1, 1993, a distributee may elect, at the time and in the
manner prescribed by the Board, to have any portion of an eligible rollover
distribution paid directly to an eligible retirement plan specified by the
distributee in a direct rollover.
   B.   For purposes of this section, the following definitions shall apply:
   DIRECT ROLLOVER — A direct rollover is a payment by the system to the
eligible retirement plan specified by the distributee.
   DISTRIBUTEE — A distributee includes any member. In addition, a member's
surviving spouse and the member's spouse or former spouse who is the alternate
payee under a domestic relations order, as defined in section 414(p) of the
Code, are distributees with regard to the interest of the spouse or former
spouse. Effective with respect to distributions after 2009, a distributee also
means a beneficiary of a member other than a surviving spouse.
   ELIGIBLE RETIREMENT PLAN — An eligible retirement plan is an individual
retirement account described in Code Section 408(a), an individual retirement
annuity described in Code Section 408(b), a Roth IRA as pursuant to Code
Section 408A(c), for distributions made after December 31, 2001, an annuity
plan described in Code Section 403(a) or an annuity contract described in Code
Section 403(b), a qualified trust described in Code Section 401(a), or for
distributions made after December 31, 2001, an eligible plan under Code Section
457(b) which is maintained by a state, political subdivision of a state, or any
agency or instrumentality of a state or political subdivision of a state and
which agrees to separately account for amounts transferred into such plan from
this plan. The definition of eligible retirement plan shall also apply in the
case of a distribution to a surviving spouse, or to a spouse or former spouse
who is the alternate payee under a domestic relation order, as defined in Code
Section 414(p). Effective in the case of an eligible rollover distribution to a
surviving spouse before 2002 or to a beneficiary other than a surviving spouse
after 2009, an eligible retirement plan is an individual retirement account or
individual retirement annuity.
   ELIGIBLE ROLLOVER DISTRIBUTION — An eligible rollover distribution is any
distribution of all or any portion of the balance to the credit of the
distributee, except that an eligible rollover distribution does not include any
distribution that is one of a series of substantially equal periodic payments
(not less frequently than annually) made for the life (or life expectancy) of
the distributee or the joint lives (or joint life expectancies) of the
distributee and the distributee's designated beneficiary, or for a specified
period of 10 years or more; any distribution to the extent such distribution is
required under Code Section 401(a)(9); the portion of any distribution that is
not includible in gross income (determined without regard to the exclusion for
net unrealized appreciation with respect to employer securities); and any
distribution that is made upon hardship of a member. Notwithstanding anything
in this definition to the contrary, for distributions made after December 31,
2001, a portion of a distribution shall not fail to be an eligible rollover
distribution merely because the portion consists of after-tax employee
contributions that are not includible in gross income. However, such portion
may be paid only to an individual retirement account or annuity, or to a
qualified defined contribution plan described in section 401(a) or 403(a) of
the Code, or a governmental 457 plan that agrees to separately account for
amounts so transferred, including separately accounting for the portion of such
distribution which is includible in gross income and the portion of such
distribution which is not.
§ 62-221. Maximum permissible benefits and contributions – Code Section 415.
   A.   In general. Notwithstanding anything herein to the contrary, effective
for limitation years beginning on or after January 1, 1995, the annual benefit
(attributable to City contributions and pickup contributions treated as City
contributions) with respect to a member payable under the plan and all other
defined benefit plans of the City, when expressed in the form of a straight
life annuity, shall not exceed the "maximum permissible benefit." Effective for
limitation years beginning on or after January 1, 2008, in no case shall any
amount accrue in a limitation year, with respect to a member under the plan or
all other deferred benefits plans of the City, that would exceed the maximum
permissible benefit. For purposes of this section, the member's maximum
permissible benefit shall equal the dollar limit prescribed in Section 415(b)
(1)(A) of the Code ($195,000 in 2011) or such other amount as may be prescribed
under regulations issued by the U.S. Secretary of the Treasury under Section
415(d) of the Code, adjusted in accordance with Subsections B, C and D, below.
In addition, the "annual additions," as defined in Section 415(e)(2) of the
Code, made by or on behalf of any member attributable to member contributions
to the plan other than pickup contributions treated as City contributions,
together with any annual additions, to any Code Section 401(a) qualified
defined contribution plan maintained by the City shall not exceed the maximum
amount determined under Section 415(c)(1) of the Code for any limitation year.
Solely for purposes of determining the maximum annual addition prescribed in
Section 415(c) of the Code, "compensation" means a member's wages as defined in
Section 3401(a) of the Code and all other payments of compensation to the
member from the City for which the City is required to furnish the member a
written statement under Sections 6041(d) and 6051(a)(3) of the Code.
Compensation shall be determined without regard to any rules that limit the
compensation included in wages based on the nature or location of the
employment or the services performed. Compensation shall include any amount
which would otherwise be deemed compensation under this definition but for the
fact that it is subject to a salary reduction agreement under any plan
described in Section 457(b), 132(f), or 125 of the Code. Solely for this
purpose, compensation also includes regular compensation received after such
member's severance from employment [as defined in Treas. Reg. § 1.415(a)-1(f)
(5) (but not severance payments)]; provided that payment of such compensation
is made by the later of 2 1/2 months after the member's severance from
employment or the end of the calendar year that includes the member's severance
from employment; and provided, further, that in order for these postseverance
payments to be considered compensation for this purpose, these amounts may only
consist of the following (which would otherwise constitute compensation): i)
regular compensation for services during the member's regular working hours, or
compensation for service outside the member's regular work hours (such as
overtime or shift differential), commission, bonuses, or similar payments, if
such payment would have been paid to the member prior to severance from
employment if the member had continued in employment with the City; ii) payment
for unused, accrued, bona fide sick, vacation or other leave (but only if the
member would have been able to use the leave if employment had continued); and
iii) for plan years beginning on or after January 1, 2009, payments to members
who do not currently perform services for the City by reason of qualified
military service [as that term is defined in section 414(u)(l) of the Code] to
the extent those payments do not exceed the amounts the individual would have
received if the individual had continued to perform services for the City
rather than entering qualified military service. Other types of payments paid
to the member after severance from employment shall not be considered
compensation for this purpose, even if paid within the time frame described
above. In no event, however, shall compensation for this purpose include any
amounts not permitted to be included under Section 415 of the Code.
   B.   Adjustment to the maximum permissible benefit. Adjustments shall be
made to the maximum permissible benefit in accordance with Subsection B(1), (2)
or (3) below:
      (1)   If a member's benefit is payable in any form other than a straight
life annuity, the determination as to whether the limitation of this section
has been satisfied shall be made by adjusting such benefit to the form of a
straight life annuity beginning when the payment of benefits begins. The
adjustment described in the preceding sentence shall be made in the manner
prescribed by the U.S. Secretary of the Treasury, such that the equivalent
annual benefit would be the greater of: 1) the equivalent annual benefit
computed using 7% interest rate and GAM83 mortality table; and 2) the
equivalent annual benefit computed using an interest assumption of 5% (for
distributions made during plan years beginning in 2004 or 2005, 5.5%) and the
mortality table prescribed by the U.S. Secretary of the Treasury under Section
415(b)(2)(E)(v) of the Code. Notwithstanding the preceding sentence, effective
for plan years beginning after 2005, for purposes of determining whether any
benefit payable as a lump sum satisfies the limitation of this section, the
adjustment described in the preceding sentence shall be made in the manner
prescribed by the U.S. Secretary of the Treasury, such that the equivalent
annual benefit would be the greatest of: 1) the equivalent annual benefit
computed using the interest rate and mortality table specified in the plan for
actuarial equivalence for the particular form of benefit payable; 2) the
equivalent annual benefit computed using an interest rate assumption of 5.5%
and the mortality table prescribed by the U.S. Secretary of the Treasury under
Section 415(b)(2)(E)(v) of the Code; and 3) the equivalent annual benefit
computed using the interest rate specified in Section 417(e)(3) of the Code and
the mortality table prescribed by the U.S. Secretary of the Treasury under
Section 415(b)(2)(E)(v) of the Code divided by 1.05. However, for the purposes
of such adjustment, any ancillary benefit that is not directly related to
retirement income benefits and that portion of any joint and survivor annuity
that is actuarially equivalent to the default form of payment benefit payable
to a married member shall not be taken into account.
      (2)   Actuarial equivalent prior to age 62.
         (a)   If the benefit of a member who is not a "qualified participant,"
as defined in Section 415(b)(2)(H) of the Code, begins before he or she reaches
age 62 (other than on account of becoming disabled by reason of personal
injuries or sickness or death), the maximum permissible benefit shall be
adjusted in accordance with Section 415(b) of the Code, to an amount (beginning
when the payment of benefits begins) that is actuarially equivalent to an
annual benefit equal to the maximum permissible benefit determined under
Subsection A [adjusted through the limitation year when payment of benefits
begins for increases in the cost of living in accordance with Section 415(d) of
the Code] beginning at age 62:
            [1]   For limitation years beginning before July 1, 2007, the
defined benefit dollar limitation applicable at an age prior to age 62 is
determined as the lesser of: a) the actuarial equivalent (at such age) of the
defined benefit dollar limitation computed using a five-percent interest rate
and the Unisex UP-84 Mortality Table; and b) the actuarial equivalent (at such
age) of the maximum permissible benefit computed using a five-percent interest
rate and the applicable mortality table prescribed by the U.S. Secretary of the
Treasury under Section 415(b)(2)(E)(v) of the Code.
            [2]   For limitation years beginning on or after July 1, 2007, the
defined benefit dollar limitation applicable at an age prior to age 62 is
determined as the lesser of: a) the actuarial equivalent (at such age) of the
defined benefit dollar limitation computed using a five-percent interest rate
and the applicable mortality table within the meaning of Section 417(e)(3)(B)
of the Code (and expressing the member's age based on completed calendar months
as of the annuity starting date); and b) the defined benefit dollar limitation
multiplied by the ratio of the annual amount of the immediately commencing
straight life annuity under the plan at the member's annuity starting date to
the annual amount of the immediately commencing straight life annuity under the
plan at age 62 both determined without applying the limitations of Section 415
of the Code.
            [3]   For limitation years beginning prior to 2002, the reduction
shall not reduce the maximum permissible benefit below $75,000 if the benefit
begins at or after age 55; or, if the benefit begins before age 55, the
equivalent of the $75,000 limit for age 55.
         (b)   Any decrease in the maximum permissible benefit made in
accordance with this subsection shall not reflect a mortality decrement.
      (3)   Actuarial equivalent after age 65.
         (a)   If the benefit of a member begins after he or she reaches age 65
the maximum permissible benefit of Subsection A shall be increased in
accordance with Section 415(b) of the Code and the regulations thereunder to an
amount (beginning when the payment of benefits begins) that is actuarially
equivalent to an annual benefit equal to the maximum permissible benefit of
Subsection A [adjusted through the limitation year when payment of benefits
begins for increases in the cost of living in accordance with Section 415(d) of
the Code] beginning at age 65.
            [1]   For limitation years beginning before July 1, 2007, the
actuarial equivalent of the maximum permissible benefit applicable at an age
after age 65 is the lesser of: a) the actuarial equivalent (at such age) of the
maximum permissible benefit computed using a five-percent interest rate and the
unisex UP-84 mortality table; and b) the actuarial equivalent (at such age) of
the maximum permissible benefit computed using a five-percent interest rate
assumption and the applicable mortality table prescribed by the U.S. Secretary
of the Treasury under Section 415(b)(2)(E)(v) of the Code.
            [2]   For limitation years beginning on or after July 1, 2007, the
actuarial equivalent of the maximum permissible benefit applicable at an age
after age 65 is the lesser of: a) the actuarial equivalent (at such age) of the
maximum permissible benefit using a five-percent interest rate and the
applicable mortality table within the meaning of Section 417(e)(3)(B) of the
Code (and expressing the member's age based on completed calendar months as of
the annuity starting date); and b) the maximum permissible benefit multiplied
by the ratio of the annual amount of the immediately commencing straight life
annuity payable to the member, computed disregarding the member's accruals
after age 65, but including any actuarial adjustments even if those adjustments
are applied to offset accruals, to the annual amount of the straight life
annuity that would be payable under the plan to a hypothetical member who is 65
years old and has the same accrued benefit (with no actuarial increases for
commencement after age 65 as the member receiving the distribution (determined
disregarding the member's accruals after age 65 and without applying the rules
of Section 415 of the Code).
         (b)   For purpose of both Subsection B(3)(a)[1] and [2] above,
mortality between age 65 and the annuity starting date shall be ignored.
   C.   Lowest limitation of maximum permissible benefit. Except as provided in
Subsection D hereof, the maximum permissible benefit shall never be deemed to
be an amount which is less than $10,000, provided the member is not, and has
never been, a member in any Code Section 401(a) qualified defined contribution
plan of the employer.
   D.   Maximum permissible benefit applicable to certain members who have less
than 10 years of participation service with the City. The maximum permissible
benefit applicable to any member, other than a retire receiving disability
benefits by reasons of personal injuries or sickness or beneficiaries,
survivors, or the estate of a member, who has less than 10 years of
participation service with the City shall be equal to the lesser of the maximum
permissible benefit or $10,000 multiplied by a fraction, the numerator of which
is the number of the member's years (or part thereof) of participation service
in the plan as of and including the current limitation year, and the
denominator of which is 10.
   E.   Limitation of accrued benefit if annual benefit exceeds maximum
permissible benefit. If the member's annual benefit exceeds the maximum
permissible benefit after the application of the appropriate factors, such
member's accrued benefit shall be limited to an amount which produces an annual
benefit equal to the maximum permissible benefit, adjusted, where applicable,
as set forth in this section.
   F.   For purposes of this section, "participation service" means an accrual
computation period for which the following conditions are met: A) the member is
credited with at least the period of service for benefit accrual purposes,
required hereunder in order to accrue a benefit for the accrual computation
period; and B) the member is included in the plan for at least one day of the
accrual computation period. If these two conditions are met, participation
service credited to the member hereunder shall equal the amount of benefit
accrual service credited to the member for such accrual computation period.
§ 62-222. Required minimum distributions – Code Section 401(a)(9).
Notwithstanding any other provision herein, beginning after 1986, any and all
benefit distributions made under the plan on or after shall be made in
accordance with a reasonable and good faith interpretation of Section 401(a)(9)
of the Code, including the incidental death benefit requirements of section 401
(a)(9). In accordance with this requirement, the following rules shall apply:
   A.   Distributions that begin during the member's lifetime shall begin no
later than April 1 following the calendar year in which the member retires or
the calendar year in which the member attains age 70 1/2 and be distributed
over the life of the member or the joint lives of the member and his
beneficiary (or over a period not extending beyond the life expectancy of the
member or the joint life expectancy of the member and his beneficiary).
   B.   If a member dies before his entire interest has been distributed, the
remaining portion shall be distributed at least as rapidly as under the method
of distribution being used as of the date of the member's death.
   C.   If the member dies before receiving any distributions from the plan and
A) the death benefit is payable to his surviving spouse, such death benefit
shall be distributed over a period not exceeding such spouse's life (or life
expectancy) beginning no later than: 1) December 31 of the calendar year
immediately following the calendar year in which the member died; or 2)
December 31 of the calendar year in which the member would have attained age 70
1/2; B) the death benefit is payable to a designated beneficiary other than the
member's surviving spouse, such death benefit shall be distributed to such
beneficiary over a period not exceeding the beneficiary's life (or life
expectancy) beginning no later than December 31 of the calendar year following
the member's death; and C) if the death benefit is not payable to the member's
surviving spouse or designated beneficiary, the member's entire interest will
be paid no later than December 31 of the calendar year which includes the fifth
anniversary of the member's date of death.
§ 62-223. Miscellaneous.
   A.   Construction. The masculine gender includes the feminine and the
singular includes the plural, unless the context clearly indicates otherwise.
   B.   Governing law. The plan and fund are governed by the Third Class City
Code of Pennsylvania. 6  The plan is a governmental plan as defined in Section
414(d) of the Code and Section 3(32) of the Employee Retirement Income Security
Act of 1974 (ERISA), as amended, and as such is exempt from the requirements of
ERISA and those requirements of the Code from which a governmental plan is
specifically exempt.
   C.   Pre-ERISA vesting requirement. In the event of the plan's termination
or the City's permanent cessation of contributions, each member shall be vested
to the extent the plan is funded.
   D.   Reemployment rights of veterans. Notwithstanding anything in this plan
to the contrary, benefits contributions, and service credit with respect to
qualified military service [as defined in section 414(u)(5) of the Code] will
be provided in accordance with Section 414(u) of the Code.
   E.   Amendments. The City Council shall have the authority to amend, freeze,
or terminate the plan in its sole discretion, subject to any limitations
imposed by applicable law.
   F.   Return of overpayments correction methods. Overpayments as a result of
amounts being paid in excess of the amounts provided by the provisions of the
plan may be corrected using the return of overpayment correction methods set
forth as follows:
      (1)   The Board shall take reasonable steps to have the overpayment
together with an amount equal to 5% simple interest returned by the Member
(employee or former employee) to the plan and correct future benefit payments,
if any, due the Member to reflect the appropriate calculations of the Member's
pension. In addition, the Board shall notify the Member that the overpayment is
not eligible for favorable tax treatment accorded distributions from qualified
plans and specifically is not eligible for tax free roll over treatment.
      (2)   In addition to the return of overpayment correction method set
forth above in the case of plan benefits that are being distributed in the form
of periodic payments, overpayments as a result of amounts being paid in excess
of the plan requirements may be corrected by reducing the future periodic
payments due to the Member. The adjustment of the future periodic payments
shall be made over a period not to exceed a period established by the Board to
recoup the overpayments. [Amended 3-27-2017 by Ord. No. 28-2017]
6.   Editor's Note: See 11 Pa.C.S. §§ 10101 et seq.
Part 3
Firemen's Pension Fund
[Adopted 4-27-2000 by Ord. No. 5-2000 (
Ch. 1, Part 6B, of the 2001 Code of Ordinances); amended in its entirety 4-22-
2013 by Ord. No. 23-20137]
7.   Editor's Note: This ordinance provided an effective date of 1-1-2012.
§ 62-301. Definitions.
As used in this part, the following words and phrases, unless a different
meaning is plainly required by the context, shall have the following respective
meanings:
   BOARD — The Board of Managers of the Firemen's Pension Fund.
   BOARD ADMINISTRATOR — The position designated by the Board to act on behalf
of the
Board in matters of day-to-day administration of the plan.
   CITY — The City of Reading, Pennsylvania.
   CITY COUNCIL — The City Council of the City of Reading, Pennsylvania.
   CODE — The United States Internal Revenue Code, as amended, including
reference, where applicable, to regulations and other guidance issued by the
United States Department of Treasury and the Commissioner of the Internal
Revenue Service.
   DEPARTMENT OF FIRE AND RESCUE — The Department of Fire and Rescue of the
City of Reading.
   DROP — Deferred Retirement Option Plan.
   DROP ACCOUNT — Separate account created to accept DROP member's monthly
pension check while an employee is a DROP member.
   EMPLOYEE — A regularly salaried paid uniformed employee of the Department of
Fire and Rescue.
   FUND — Firemen's Pension Fund, established pursuant to §
62-308.
   MEMBER — A current or past employee eligible to participate in the plan.
   PAY, SALARY, WAGES or COMPENSATION — Pickup contributions plus remuneration
received as a City employee excluding refunds for expenses, contingency and
accountable expense allowances and excluding severance payments or payments for
unused vacation or unused sick leave or comp time that is paid upon
termination. Pay, salary, wages or compensation includes amounts excluded from
income pursuant to a member's election under a cash or deferred compensation
arrangement described in Sections 401(k) of the Code, an eligible deferred
compensation plan described in Section 457(b) of the Code, a cafeteria plan
described in Section 125 of the Code, and, effective January 1, 1998, a
qualified transportation fringe benefit plan under Section 132(f) of the Code.
Notwithstanding the preceding, the annual pay, salary, wages or compensation of
a member shall be limited as set forth in Section 401(a)(17) of the Code [as
adjusted annually pursuant to Section 401(a)(17)(B) of the Code and
announcement by the Internal Revenue Service; for 2011, $245,000]. Pay, salary,
wages or compensation for any prior year shall be subject to the limitations
set forth in Appendix A, A-1. 8  If pay, salary, wages or compensation for any
prior determination period is taken into account in determining a member's
benefits for the current year, the pay, salary, wages or compensation for such
prior determination period is subject to the applicable annual compensation
limit in effect for that prior period.
   PLAN — The Firemen's Pension Plan.
   QUALIFIED MILITARY SERVICE — Any service in the uniformed services (as
defined in Chapter 3 of Title 38, United States Code) by any individual if such
individual is entitled to reemployment rights under such chapter with respect
to such service.
   SPOUSE — The spouse of a member, as determined under law of the Commonwealth
of Pennsylvania. Effective for designations made after December 31, 2006, a
member may designate his/her spouse to be the beneficiary of the member's
pension, regardless of the date of the marriage.
8.   Editor's Note: Appendix A is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 62-302. Board of Managers created.
The Board shall be responsible for the distribution of pensions and service
increments from the plan to appropriate members and beneficiaries.
§ 62-303. Board of Managers; members, term and vacancy.
[Amended 1-25-2021 by Ord. No. 6-2021]
The Board shall consist of the Mayor or his/her designee, Finance Department
Director, Director of Public Safety, City Auditor and Chief of the Department
of Fire and Rescue, ex officio, whose term on the Board shall be concurrent
with their tenure of office; and two active members of the Department of Fire
and Rescue to be chosen by the members of the Department of Fire and Rescue. Of
the first managers to be chosen by the members of the Department of Fire and
Rescue, one shall be chosen for a term of two years and one for a term of four
years. Biennially thereafter, one manager shall be chosen for a term of four
years to take the place of one whose term expires. In case of vacancy among the
managers chosen by the Department of Fire and Rescue, a successor shall be
chosen for the unexpired term. In the event that the office of any of the said
selectees shall become vacant by reason of death, resignation, or otherwise,
such manager’s office shall be filled for its unexpired term by members of the
Department of Fire and Rescue by special election.
§ 62-304. Board officers.
[Amended 1-25-2021 by Ord. No. 6-2021]
The Mayor or his/her designee shall be the President; the City Auditor, the
Secretary; and the Finance Director, the Treasurer of said Board.
§ 62-305. Surety bond of Treasurer.
The Treasurer shall give to the City, and maintain a surety bond for the
benefit of the Plan, in an amount equivalent to the probable amount of money
and securities that shall come into his hands for the faithful performance of
his duties, the premium on which bond, however, shall be paid from the fund.
§ 62-306. Board expenses.
All direct and incidental expenditures (such as stationery, postage,
miscellaneous supplies, etc.) necessary to the transaction of the business of
the Board shall be provided for from the fund.
§ 62-307. Board compensation.
Board members shall receive no compensation for their services with respect to
the plan and fund.
§ 62-308. Fund created; receipt of contributions; payment from and investment
of fund.
   A.   There shall be created by said Board a fund to be known as the
“Firemen’s Pension Fund.”
   B.   It shall be the exclusive duty of the Board to serve as fund trustees
and to receive, disburse, retain, invest and reinvest the fund created by
virtue of this part and to pay over by warrant or check the amount due under
this plan to members or their widows or widowers or their estates or children.
The Board, with the approval of the Finance Director of the City, may enter
into agreements with reputable institutions to perform any of the aforesaid
duties, including, but not limited to, advising the Board with respect to any
and all of its duties, but in the event the Board does so, any such agreement
shall require the institutions involved to provide the Board with written
reports concerning its activities at least once every six months. The
compensation of such institutions shall be paid by the fund or such source of
pay as is designated by applicable law. The fund shall be used for the
exclusive purpose of funding and paying benefits provided hereunder, and a
reversion of fund assets or a return of City contributions is prohibited except
as otherwise provided by applicable law or IRS Revenue Ruling 91-4.
§ 62-309. Fund sources.
   A.   In addition to paying into the fund City contributions and applicable
employee contributions, there shall be paid into the fund all bequests,
legacies, gifts or donations made to the fund, and all sums subscribed by the
public, as well as all net incomes resulting from all games, sports,
entertainment, or any and all other sources of income conducted by or under the
supervision of the Department of Fire and Rescue.
   B.   The fund shall also hold in trust contributions made by the City in its
sole discretion, and by members as required herein.
§ 62-310. Gifts and grants.
Any gifts, grants, devises or bequests of any monies, real estate, personal
property or other valuable things from whatever source received by the Board
shall be contributed to the fund.
§ 62-311. Reward proceeds.
There shall also be turned over and paid to the fund 1/2 of all rewards that
may be paid or given for or on account of extraordinary service by said
Department of Fire and Rescue or by any fireman who is covered by the
provisions of this part.
§ 62-312. DiLauro interest arbitration.
Section 62-313, entitled "Members contributions, increase," §
62-320, entitled "Entitlement to benefits," §
62-321, entitled "Member right to and amount of benefits," §
62-323, entitled "Disability benefits," and §
62-325, entitled "Application," are hereby amended to conform precisely with
Paragraph 7, Page 7, of the DiLauro Interest Arbitration award of December 28,
1982, entitled "Proposed Pension Changes for Members Employees hired (SIC)
after January 1, 1982," quoted verbatim as follows:
"A. Twenty-five years of service and attained age 50 for normal retirement.
B. Monthly pension shall be 50% of pay.
C. Service increment based on 25 years completed before the age 65.
D. Average pay shall be highest of any five years employment or pay at date of
retirement.
E. Pay shall be construed to be base salary plus longevity.
F. Employee contribution of 5% shall apply only to pay as defined in Subsection
(a)(5), hereof."
§ 62-313. Member contributions; increase.
   A.   Each employee shall contribute to the fund 4% of his pay, which amount
shall be withheld from the employee's paycheck, as prescribed by City policy.
In the event the City Council shall deem it necessary, in order to provide
sufficient funds for payment to widows of members retired on pension, or
killed, or who die in service, it shall, upon resolution, increase the
aforesaid deduction to a maximum of 5%.
   B.   There shall be paid into the fund the amount of 5% to be deducted by
the City from the salary of each fireman or employee of the Department of Fire
and Rescue, until such time that the fireman or employee shall be retired under
the provisions of the Firemen's Pension Fund.
§ 62-314. City contributions.
The City shall annually appropriate to the fund, such amount as the City
Council may consider proper within the limitation fixed by law.
§ 62-315. Board rewards, rules and meetings.
The Board shall keep full and accurate accounts of all transactions. It shall
have full power to make rules for the transaction of its business, the
application and investment of its fund, its time and place of meeting, but
shall meet at least four times in each and every year (special meetings upon
call of the Board President).
§ 62-316. Board to request budget funds from Council.
It shall be the duty of the Board, each year at the time of making up the
budget ordinance, to prepare a full and detailed statement of the assets of the
fund and the amount which the City is required to contribute to the fund as an
annual contribution, and to present the same to the City Council together with
a statement of the amount of money required to enable the Board to pay pensions
and service increments in full, together with refunds, under the plan.
§ 62-317. Board voting and decisions.
No resolution shall be passed or order made for payment of money, unless by
affirmative vote of a majority of the members of the Board. In all questions
coming before the Board, the Board's decision on all questions with respect to
the plan and any member's rights to benefits under the plan shall be conclusive
and binding on both the member, the plan, and the City.
§ 62-318. Board to issue payment certificates.
The Board shall issue certificates signed by its President and Secretary to the
member entitled to retirement and pension, and also service increment under
this part, for the amount of money ordered paid to such member out of the fund,
which certificate shall state for what purpose said payment is to be made.
§ 62-319. Employment termination prior to pension entitlement.
If, for any cause, any person contributing to the fund shall cease to be in the
service of the Department of Fire and Rescue before he shall become eligible to
receive any pension benefits, the total amount of the contributions paid into
the fund by him shall be refunded in full without interest; provided, however,
if any such person shall have had returned to him the amount contributed as
aforesaid, and shall afterward re-enter the service of the Department of Fire
and Rescue, he shall not be entitled to the pension benefits designated unless
he shall return to the fund the entire amount withdrawn, in which event, the
required period of service under this part shall be computed from the time he
first entered the service of the Department of Fire and Rescue, excluding any
period of time during which the member was not employed by the Department of
Fire and Rescue. Absent repayment of contributions by the re-entering member,
the date of his service shall commence upon re-entry to the Department of Fire
and Rescue.
§ 62-320. Entitlement to benefits.
   A.   Every fireman or employee of the Department of Fire and Rescue who
shall have served a continuous period of 20 years shall be entitled to be
retired and eligible to pension, and may make application to the said Board for
retirement, provided he has attained 50 years of age.
   B.   The term “continuous period of 20 years” shall be interpreted in such a
way as to encompass the provisions of 11 Pa.C.S. §§ 14319 et seq.
   C.   Should a member of the plan cease to be employed as a full-time fireman
for any reason prior to completing the minimum age and minimum period of
continuous service requirements, but after having completed 12 years of full-
time service, then such member shall be entitled to vest in a reduced pension
benefit as provided for in §
62-321C of this part, subject to the following conditions, and as provided for
elsewhere herein:
      (1)   The member must file with the Board written notice of his or her
intent to vest.
      (2)   The member must include in the notice the date the member intends
to terminate his or her service as a full-time fireman.
      (3)   The termination date shall be at least 30 days later than the date
the member submits the notice to the Board.
      (4)   The member must be in good standing with the Department of Fire and
Rescue on the date of the notice to vest.
      (5)   The Board shall indicate on the notice to vest the rate of the
monthly pay of the member as of the date of the notice to vest or the highest
average annual salary which the member received during any five years of
service preceding the date, whichever shall be higher.
   D.   Military service.
      (1)   All members of the plan who are contributors and who called to
military service subsequent to September 1, 1940, and who were not members of
the plan prior to such military service, shall be entitled to have full credit
for each year or fraction thereof, not to exceed five years of such service
upon their payment to the fund of an amount equal to that which they would have
paid had they been members during the period for which they desire credit, and
their payment to such fund of an additional amount as the equivalent of the
contributions of the City plus any interest the City would have been required
to pay on the contributions on account of such military service.
      (2)   USERRA and HEART requirements. Effective December 12, 1994, any
member who is absent on account of qualified military service and returns to
City service within the period of time during which his reemployment rights are
protected by federal law shall receive service credit, contributions, benefits
and other rights provided under this subsection in lieu of the service credit,
contributions, benefits or other rights to which the member would otherwise be
entitled under this section, except to the extent the member would be entitled
to more advantageous service credit, contributions, or benefits or more
valuable rights under other provisions of this section. A member described in
this subsection shall be credited with years of service for the full period of
qualified military service, provided such member pays into the fund an amount
equal to the contributions such member would have been required to make but for
his absence on account of qualified military service, within the five-year
period of time beginning on his reemployment date (or the lesser period of time
beginning on such reemployment date that is three times the length of his
qualified military service), and the City shall make all contributions that
would have been due on account of such member contributions, and the member
shall be entitled to all other rights and benefits accruing on account of such
contributions and service. For purposes of this subsection, a member shall be
treated as having received compensation during his qualified military service
based on the rate of compensation the member would have received but for his
qualified military service compensation, or if such amount is not reasonably
certain, his average compensation during the twelve-month period immediately
preceding his qualified military service (or, if shorter, the period of time
immediately preceding his qualified military service). This subsection shall be
applied in a manner consistent with Section 414(u) of the Code.
         (a)   Effective January 1, 2007, in the case of a member who dies
while performing qualified military service, the member's surviving beneficiary
shall be entitled to any additional benefits (other than benefit accruals
relating to the period of qualified military service) provided herein as though
the member had resumed employment with the City on the day before death and
then terminated employment on account of death in accordance with Section 401
(a)(37) of the Code.
         (b)   Effective with respect to years beginning after December 31,
2008, for purposes of applying the limits on annual benefits and contributions
and for purposes of applying other applicable provisions of the Code, but not
for purposes of determining benefits and contributions, "compensation" shall
also include differential wage payments, as defined in Section 3401(h) of the
Code, paid by the City to an employee on account of qualified military service.
§ 62-321. Member right to and amount of benefits; service increment
contributions.
   A.   Amount.
      (1)   Payments of pension shall not be a charge on any fund in the
Treasury of the City nor any account under its control save the Firemen's
Pension Fund herein provided for.
      (2)   Except as to service increments provided for in Subsection B of
this section, the annual pension of a vested eligible member, whether for
disability or by reason of age or service, shall be 50% of the greater of 1) 12
times the monthly salary (including base salary, overtime, holiday and
longevity) of the member at the date of vesting under §
62-320 or retirement; or 2) the highest average annual salary (including base
salary, overtime, holiday and longevity), which the member received during any
five years of service preceding retirement.
      (3)   In the case of the payment of a pension to a member for permanent
injury incurred in service, and to the family of a member killed or who dies in
service, the account and commencement of the payment of the pension shall be
fixed by regulations of the Board. Such regulations shall not take into
consideration the amount and duration of the workers' compensation allowed by
law.
      (4)   Payments to widows of members retired on pension or killed in the
service on or after January 1, 1968, shall be the amount payable to the member
which would have been payable had he been retired at the time of his death. If
a member dies leaving no widow but leaving to survive him a dependent child or
children under the age of 18, such child or children shall be entitled to the
same benefits as a widow, as hereinbefore set forth, until such child or
children reach the age of 18, marry, or die.
   B.   In addition to the pension which is authorized to be paid from the fund
by this part, and notwithstanding the limitations therein placed upon such
pensions and upon contributions, every member who shall become entitled to a
pension shall also be entitled to the payment of a "service increment" in
accordance with and subject to the conditions hereinafter set forth.
      (1)   Service increment of a member shall be the sum obtained by
computing the number of whole years after having served the minimum required by
this part during which a member has been employed by the City and multiplying
the said number of years so computed by an amount equal to 1/40th of the
retirement allowance which has become payable to such member in accordance with
the provisions of this part. In computing the service increment, no employment
after the member has reached the age of 65 years shall be included, and no
service increment shall be paid in excess of $500 per month.
      (2)   Each member shall pay into the fund a monthly sum in addition to
his pension contribution, which shall not exceed the sum of $5 per month and,
provided that such service increment contribution shall not be paid after a
member has reached the age of 65 years.
      (3)   Any person who is a member of the Department on July 20, 1968, who
has already reached the age of 65, shall have his service increment computed on
the year of employment prior to the date of reaching his 65th birthday.
      (4)   Service increment contributions shall be paid at the same time and
in the same manner as pensions, and may be withdrawn in full without interest
by persons who leave the employment of such City, subject to the same
conditions by which retirement contributions may be withdrawn, or by persons
who retire before becoming entitled to any service increment.
      (5)   All members of the Department of Fire and Rescue who are now
contributors to the fund and all those employed by the City after July 20,
1968, if required to become contributors to the pension fund, shall be subject
to the provisions of this part.
   C.   In the event that a member of the fund shall be eligible for a reduced
retirement benefit based upon the twelve-year vesting detailed in §
62-320C and provided that such member shall have complied with all the
conditions of §
62-320C and all other applicable conditions and requirements of this part, then
in such event the reduced benefit of the member shall be calculated as detailed
in this subsection. Upon reaching the date which would have been the member's
retirement date had the member continued his or her full-time employment with
the Department of Fire and Rescue, the member shall notify the Board, in
writing, that the member desires to collect his or her pension. The amount of
retirement benefits the member is entitled to receive under this section shall
be computed as follows:
      (1)   The initial determination of the member's base retirement benefits
shall be computed based upon the salary indicated on the notice to vest.
      (2)   The portion of the base retirement benefit due the member shall be
determined by applying to the base amount the percentage of his or her years of
service actually rendered bears to the years of service which would have been
rendered had the member continued to be employed by the Department of Fire and
Rescue until his or her minimum retirement date.
§ 62-322. Benefits to be uniform; widows and children of members.
The fund shall be applied under such regulations as the Board of Managers shall
prescribe for the benefit of such members of the Department of Fire and Rescue
as shall receive honorable discharge therefrom by reason of the service of age
or disability, widows of retired members and families of such as may be killed
or who die in the service. All such pensions as shall be allowed to those who
are retired by reason of the disabilities or of the service or age shall be in
conformity with a uniform scale, together with service increments as hereafter
provided. Benefits allowed from such fund to families of such as are killed or
who die in service shall take into consideration the member's widow and his
minor children under 18 years of age, if any survive.
§ 62-323. Disability benefits.
   A.   The Board, upon receipt of a member's application, shall pay a full
pension to a member who is physically or mentally incapacitated from performing
his duty in the Department of Fire and Rescue. Said pension shall be monthly
payments for the life of the member of not less than 1/2 (50%) of the
employee's monthly salary as of the date of disability.
   B.   The Board shall, upon application received, retire on pension any paid
fireman or employee if he is physically or mentally incapacitated, through
injury or disease incurred off the job from performing his duty in the
Department of Fire and Rescue, provided the disabled fireman or employee has
completed a minimum of five years in the Department. The monthly pension that
an employee shall receive hereunder shall be an amount equal to 1/40 of his
monthly salary as of the date of disability for each year of service. In
computing years of service, a fraction of year shall be counted as such, a
fraction of years.
§ 62-324. Deferred Retirement Option Program (DROP).
   A.   Eligibility. Effective January 1, 2006, members of the Department of
Fire and Rescue that have not retired prior to the implementation of the DROP
program may enter into the DROP on the first day of any month following
completion of 20 years of credited service.
   B.   Written election. Any member of the Department of Fire and Rescue
electing to participate in the DROP must complete and execute a “drop option
form” prepared by the City of Reading Finance Department, which shall evidence
the member’s participation in the DROP. The form must be signed by the member
and notarized and submitted to the City of Reading Finance Department, prior to
the date on which the member wishes the DROP option to be effective. The DROP
option notice shall include an irrevocable notice to the City, by the member,
that the member shall resign from employment with the Department of Fire and
Rescue effective on a specific date not more than 60 months from the effective
date of the DROP option. In addition, all retirement documents required by the
Firemen’s Pension Fund must be filed and presented to the Pension Board for
approval of retirement and payment of pension. Once a retirement application
has been approved by the Board it is irrevocable.
   C.   Limitation on pension accrual. After the effective date of the DROP
option, the member shall no longer earn or accrue additional years of
continuous service for pension purposes.
   D.   Benefit calculation. For all retirement fund purposes, continuous
service of a member participating in the DROP shall remain as it existed on the
effective date of commencement of participation in the DROP. Service thereafter
shall not be recognized or used for the calculation or determination of any
benefits payable by the Reading Firemen's Pension Fund. The average monthly pay
of the member for pension calculation purposes shall remain as it existed on
the effective date of commencement of participating in the DROP. Earnings or
increases in earnings thereafter shall not be recognized or used for the
calculation or determination of any benefits payable by the pension fund. The
pension benefit payable to the members shall increase only as a result of the
cost-of-living adjustments in effect on the effective date of the member's
participation in the DROP, or applicable cost-of-living adjustments granted
thereafter.
   E.   Payments to DROP account. The monthly retirement benefits that would
have been payable had the member elected to cease employment and receive a
normal retirement benefit shall, upon the member commencing participation in
the DROP, be paid into the separate DROP account established to receive the
member's monthly pension payments. The fund shall maintain the account. Such
DROP account shall be credited with interest in a manner prescribed by the
Board.
   F.   Payout. Upon the termination date set forth in the member's drop option
notice or, such date as the member withdraws or is terminated from the DROP
program, the retirement benefits payable to the member or the member's
beneficiary, if applicable, shall be paid to the member or beneficiary and
shall no longer be paid to the member's deferred retirement option account.
Within 30 days following termination of a member's employment pursuant to their
participating in the DROP program, the balances in the member's DROP account
shall be paid to the member in the single lump sum payment or, at the member's
option, in any fashion permitted by law.
   G.   Disability during DROP. If a member becomes temporarily disabled during
his participation in DROP, his participation freezes and the time period while
on disability does not count towards the five-year participation limit. Upon
return to duty, membership in DROP shall resume, continuing with the remaining
time left in the five-year membership period. The member shall receive
disability pay in the same amount as disabled firefighters that are not
participating in DROP. In no event shall a member on temporary disability have
the ability to draw from his DROP account. However, notwithstanding any other
provision in this subsection, if a firefighter is disabled and has not returned
to work as of the date of his required resignation, then such resignation shall
take precedence over all other provisions herein and said firefighter shall be
required to resign.
   H.   Death. If a DROP member dies before the DROP account balance is paid in
full, the participant member's legal beneficiary shall have the same rights as
the member to withdraw the account balance.
   I.   Individual DROP investment account. The Firemen's Pension Board may, at
its discretion, select a third party to provide a mutual fund or other
investment option(s), recordkeeping and reporting to the members and the Board.
All investment and administrative costs shall be charged against the individual
DROP investment account of the member.
   J.   Limitation of eligible members. There shall be a limit of 10 bargaining
unit members eligible to opt into the DROP on an annual basis. In the event
that more than 10 bargaining unit members opt to participate in the program in
any given year, eligibility for the 10 available slots shall be determined
exclusively by seniority.
   K.   The DROP shall not be available to an elected official, except for an
official first elected prior to September 18,2009.
   L.   Amendment. Any amendments to the DROP ordinance shall be consistent
with the provisions covering deferred retirement option plans set forth in the
applicable collective bargaining agreement and shall be binding upon all future
DROP members and upon all DROP members who have balances in their deferred
retirement option accounts.
§ 62-325. Application.
This part shall apply to all regular salaried paid firemen and employees of the
Department of Fire and Rescue.
§ 62-326. Contribution payment to estate.
In the event of the death of a pensioner, before he shall have received as much
as he contributed to said fund, the balance thereof remaining, without
interest, shall be paid to his estate.
§ 62-327. Pension investment account.8A
   A.   The Board may create a Firemen's Pension investment Account.
   B.   The Board is hereby authorized to invest for the credit of said account
the surplus money accumulated in said fund in excess of such sum as may be
fixed by said Board together with such amounts as may be required for the
payment of pensions and service increments as directed by this part during the
year.
   C.   The interest received from such investments shall be paid into the fund
upon receipt of same, and if at any time sufficient funds are not available
(inclusive of the monies appropriated by the City up to the amount it may be
permitted to pay under the law) for the payment of all pensions and service
increments in full, then said Board may dispose of and sell such securities as
it may hold in its investment account and use the proceeds thereof to supply
such deficiency.
   D.   All monies invested for the credit of said account shall be invested in
such investments as are permissible under the Fiduciaries Investment Act of
1949, being the Act of May 26, 1949, P.L. 1828.
   E.   All securities are to be deposited with the Treasurer of said Board for
the credit of its investment account.
8A   Editor’s Note: See 20 Pa.C.S. §§ 7301 et seq.
§ 62-328. Exemption from attachment or execution; nonassignability.
All pensions and service increments granted under this part and every portion
thereof shall be exempt from attachment of garnishment processes and shall not
be seized, taken or subject to detainer or levied upon by virtue of an
execution of any processes or proceedings whatsoever, issued out of or by any
court in this commonwealth for the payment and satisfaction in whole or in part
of any claim, damage, demand or judgment against any pensioner. No pensioner
shall have the right to transfer or assign his or her pension or any part
thereof, either by way of mortgage or otherwise.
§ 62-329. Effective date.
   A.   The provisions of this part pertaining to service increments, as
provided for by Act No. 204 of the 1968 Pennsylvania Legislature, shall become
effective retroactive to July 20, 1968, 53 P.S. § 39320 et seq.
   B.   Except as otherwise provided in Subsection A hereof, all provisions of
this part shall become effective January 31, 1972.
   C.   The provision of this part pertaining to service increments, as
provided for by Act No. 204 of the 1968 Pennsylvania Legislature, shall become
effective retroactive to July 20, 1968.
§ 62-330. Direct rollovers.
   A.   Direct rollovers. Notwithstanding any provision herein to the contrary
that would otherwise limit a distributee's election under this subsection, on
and after January 1, 1993, a distributee may elect, at the time and in the
manner prescribed by the Board, to have any portion of an eligible rollover
distribution paid directly to an eligible retirement plan specified by the
distributee in a direct rollover.
   B.   For purposes of this section, the following definitions shall apply:
   DIRECT ROLLOVER — A direct rollover is a payment by the system to the
eligible retirement plan specified by the distributee.
   DISTRIBUTEE — A distributee includes any member. In addition, a member's
surviving spouse and the member's spouse or former spouse who is the alternate
payee under a domestic relations order, as defined in Section 414(p) of the
Code, are distributees with regard to the interest of the spouse or former
spouse. Effective with respect to distributions after 2009, a distributee also
means a beneficiary of a member other than a surviving spouse.
   ELIGIBLE RETIREMENT PLAN — An eligible retirement plan is an individual
retirement account described in Code Section 408(a), an individual retirement
annuity described in Code Section 408(b), a Roth IRA as pursuant to Code
Section 408A(e), for distributions made after December 31, 2001, an annuity
plan described in Code Section 403(a) or an annuity contract described in Code
Section 403(b), a qualified trust described in Code Section 401(a), or for
distributions made after December 31, 2001, an eligible plan under Code Section
457(b) which is maintained by a state, political subdivision of a state, or any
agency or instrumentality of a state or political subdivision of a state and
which agrees to separately account for amounts transferred into such plan from
this plan. The definition of eligible retirement plan shall also apply in the
case of a distribution to a surviving spouse, or to a spouse or former spouse
who is the alternate payee under a domestic relation order, as defined in Code
Section 414(p). Effective in the case of an eligible rollover distribution to a
surviving spouse before 2002 or to a beneficiary other than a surviving spouse
after 2009, an eligible retirement plan is an individual retirement account or
individual retirement annuity.
   ELIGIBLE ROLLOVER DISTRIBUTION — An eligible rollover distribution is any
distribution of all or any portion of the balance to the credit of the
distributee, except that an eligible rollover distribution does not include any
distribution that is one of a series of substantially equal periodic payments
(not less frequently than annually) made for the life (or life expectancy) of
the distributee or the joint lives (or joint life expectancies) of the
distributee and the distributee's designated beneficiary, or for a specified
period of 10 years or more; any distribution to the extent such distribution is
required under Code Section 401(a)(9); the portion of any distribution that is
not includible in gross income (determined without regard to the exclusion for
net unrealized appreciation with respect to employer securities); and any
distribution that is made upon hardship of a member. Notwithstanding anything
in this definition to the contrary, for distributions made after December 31,
2001, a portion of a distribution shall not fail to be an eligible rollover
distribution merely because the portion consists of after-tax employee
contributions that are not includible in gross income. However, such portion
may be paid only to an individual retirement account or annuity, or to a
qualified defined contribution plan described in Section 401(a) or 403(a) of
the Code, or a governmental 457 plan that agrees to separately account for
amounts so transferred, including separately accounting for the portion of such
distribution which is includible in gross income and the portion of such
distribution which is not.
§ 62-331. Maximum permissible benefits and contributions – Code Section 415.
   A.   In general. Notwithstanding anything herein to the contrary, effective
for limitation years beginning on or after January 1, 1995, the annual benefit
(attributable to City contributions and pickup contributions treated as City
contributions) with respect to a member payable under the plan and all other
defined benefit plans of the City, when expressed in the form of a straight
life annuity, shall not exceed the "maximum permissible benefit." Effective for
limitation years beginning on or after January 1, 2008, in no case shall any
amount accrue in a limitation year, with respect to a member under the plan or
all other deferred benefits plans of the City, that would exceed the maximum
permissible benefit. For purposes of this section, the member's maximum
permissible benefit shall equal the dollar limit prescribed in Section 415(b)
(1)(A) of the Code ($195,000 in 2011) or such other amount as may be prescribed
under regulations issued by the U.S. Secretary of the Treasury under Section
415(d) of the Code, adjusted in accordance with Subsections B, C and D, below.
In addition, the "annual additions," as defined in Section 415(c)(2) of the
Code, made by or on behalf of any member attributable to member contributions
to the plan other than pickup contributions treated as City contributions,
together with any annual additions, to any Code Section 401(a) qualified
defined contribution plan maintained by the City shall not exceed the maximum
amount determined under Section 415(c)(1) of the Code for any limitation year
as adjusted under Section 415(d) of the Code and applicable guidance. Solely
for purposes of determining the maximum annual addition prescribed in Section
415(c) of the Code, "compensation" means a member's wages as defined in Section
3401(a) of the Code and all other payments of compensation to the member from
the City for which the City is required to furnish the member a written
statement under Sections 6041(d) and 6051(a)(3) of the Code. Compensation shall
be determined without regard to any rules that limit the compensation included
in wages based on the nature or location of the employment or the services
performed. Compensation shall include any amount which would otherwise be
deemed compensation under this definition but for the fact that it is subject
to a salary reduction agreement under any plan described in Section 457(b), 132
(f), or 125 of the Code. Solely for this purpose, compensation also includes
regular compensation received after such member's severance from employment [as
defined in Treas. Reg. § 1.415(a)-1(f)(5) (but not severance payments)];
provided that payment of such compensation is made by the later of 2 1/2 months
after the member's severance from employment or the end of the calendar year
that includes the member's severance from employment; and provided, further,
that in order for these postseverance payments to be considered compensation
for this purpose, these amounts may only consist of the following (which would
otherwise constitute compensation): i) regular compensation for services during
the member's regular working hours, or compensation for service outside the
member's regular work hours (such as overtime or shift differential),
commission, bonuses, or similar payments, if such payment would have been paid
to the member prior to severance from employment if the member had continued in
employment with the City; ii) payment for unused, accrued, bona fide sick,
vacation or other leave (but only if the member would have been able to use the
leave if employment had continued); and iii) for plan years beginning on or
after January 1, 2009, payments to members who do not currently perform
services for the City by reason of qualified military service [as that term is
defined in Section 414(u)(l) of the Code] to the extent those payments do not
exceed the amounts the individual would have received if the individual had
continued to perform services for the City rather than entering qualified
military service. Other types of payments paid to the member after severance
from employment shall not be considered compensation for this purpose, even if
paid within the time frame described above. In no event, however, shall
compensation for this purpose include any amounts not permitted to be included
under Section 415 of the Code.
   B.   Adjustment to the maximum permissible benefit. Adjustments shall be
made to the maximum permissible benefit in accordance with Subsection B(1), (2)
or (3) below:
      (1)   If a member's benefit is payable in any form other than a straight
life annuity, the determination as to whether the limitation of this section
has been satisfied shall be made by adjusting such benefit to the form of a
straight life annuity beginning when the payment of benefits begins. The
adjustment described in the preceding sentence shall be made in the manner
prescribed by the U.S. Secretary of the Treasury, such that the equivalent
annual benefit would be the greater of: 1) the equivalent annual benefit
computed using 7% interest rate and GAM83 mortality table; and 2) the
equivalent annual benefit computed using an interest assumption of 5% (for
distributions made during plan years beginning in 2004 or 2005, 5.5%) and the
mortality table prescribed by the U.S. Secretary of the Treasury under Section
415(b)(2)(E)(v) of the Code. Notwithstanding the preceding sentence, effective
for plan years beginning after 2005, for purposes of determining whether any
benefit payable as a lump sum satisfies the limitation of this section, the
adjustment described in the preceding sentence shall be made in the manner
prescribed by the U.S. Secretary of the Treasury, such that the equivalent
annual benefit would be the greatest of: 1) the equivalent annual benefit
computed using the interest rate and mortality table specified in the plan for
actuarial equivalence for the particular form of benefit payable; 2) the
equivalent annual benefit computed using an interest rate assumption of 5.5%
and the mortality table prescribed by the U.S. Secretary of the Treasury under
Section 415(b)(2)(E)(v) of the Code; and 3) the equivalent annual benefit
computed using the interest rate specified in Section 417(c)(3) of the Code and
the mortality table prescribed by the U.S. Secretary of the Treasury under
Section 415(b)(2)(E)(v) of the Code divided by 1.05. However, for the purposes
of such adjustment, any ancillary benefit that is not directly related to
retirement income benefits and that portion of any joint and survivor annuity
that is actuarially equivalent to the default form of payment benefit payable
to a married member shall not be taken into account.
      (2)   Actuarial equivalent prior to age 62.
         (a)   If the benefit of a member who is not a "qualified participant,"
as defined in Section 415(b)(2)(H) of the Code, begins before he or she reaches
age 62 (other than on account of becoming disabled by reason of personal
injuries or sickness or death), the maximum permissible benefit shall be
adjusted in accordance with Section 415(b) of the Code, to an amount (beginning
when the payment of benefits begins) that is actuarially equivalent to an
annual benefit equal to the maximum permissible benefit determined under
Subsection A [adjusted through the limitation year when payment of benefits
begins for increases in the cost of living in accordance with Section 415(d) of
the Code] beginning at age 62.
            [1]   For limitation years beginning before July 1, 2007, the
defined benefit dollar limitation applicable at an age prior to age 62 is
determined as the lesser of: a) the actuarial equivalent (at such age) of the
defined benefit dollar limitation computed using a five-percent interest rate
and the Unisex UP-84 Mortality Table; and b) the actuarial equivalent (at such
age) of the maximum permissible benefit computed using a five-percent interest
rate and the applicable mortality table prescribed by the U.S. Secretary of the
Treasury under Section 415(b)(2)(E)(v) of the Code.
            [2]   For limitation years beginning on or after July 1, 2007, the
defined benefit dollar limitation applicable at an age prior to age 62 is
determined as the lesser of: a) the actuarial equivalent (at such age) of the
defined benefit dollar limitation computed using a five-percent interest rate
and the applicable mortality table within the meaning of Section 417(e)(3)(B)
of the Code (and expressing the member's age based on completed calendar months
as of the annuity starting date); and b) the defined benefit dollar limitation
multiplied by the ratio of the annual amount of the immediately commencing
straight life annuity under the plan at the member's annuity starting date to
the annual amount of the immediately commencing straight life annuity under the
plan at age 62, both determined without applying the limitations of Section 415
of the Code.
            [3]   For limitation years beginning prior to 2002, the reduction
shall not reduce the maximum permissible benefit below $75,000 if the benefit
begins at or after age 55, or, if the benefit begins before age 55 the
equivalent of the seventy-five-thousand-dollar-limit for age 55.
         (b)   Any decrease in the maximum permissible benefit made in
accordance with this subsection shall not reflect a mortality decrement.
      (3)   Actuarial equivalent after age 65.
         (a)   If the benefit of a member begins after he or she reaches age 65
the maximum permissible benefit of Subsection A shall be increased in
accordance with Section 415(b) of the Code and the regulations thereunder to an
amount (beginning when the payment of benefits begins) that is actuarially
equivalent to an annual benefit equal to the maximum permissible benefit of
Subsection A [adjusted through the limitation year when payment of benefits
begins for increases in the cost of living in accordance with Section 415(d) of
the Code] beginning at age 65.
            [1]   For limitation years beginning before July 1, 2007, the
actuarial equivalent of the maximum permissible benefit applicable at an age
after age 65 is the lesser of: a) the actuarial equivalent (at such age) of the
maximum permissible benefit computed using a five-percent interest rate and the
unisex UP-84 mortality table; and b) the actuarial equivalent (at such age) of
the maximum permissible benefit computed using a five-percent interest rate
assumption and the applicable mortality table prescribed by the U.S. Secretary
of the Treasury under Section 415(b)(2)(E)(v) of the Code.
            [2]   For limitation years beginning on or after July 1, 2007, the
actuarial equivalent of the maximum permissible benefit applicable at an age
after age 65 is the lesser of: a) the actuarial equivalent (at such age) of the
maximum permissible benefit using a five-percent interest rate and the
applicable mortality table within the meaning of Section 417(e)(3)(B) of the
Code (and expressing the member's age based on completed calendar months as of
the annuity starting date); and b) the maximum permissible benefit multiplied
by the ratio of the annual amount of the immediately commencing straight life
annuity payable to the member, computed disregarding the member's accruals
after age 65 but including any actuarial adjustments even if those adjustments
are applied to offset accruals, to the annual amount of the straight life
annuity that would be payable under the plan to a hypothetical member who is 65
years old and has the same accrued benefit (with no actuarial increases for
commencement after age 65 as the member receiving the distribution (determined
disregarding the member's accruals after age 65 and without applying the rules
of Section 415 of the Code).
         (b)   For purposes of both Subsection B(3)(a)[1] and [2] above,
mortality between age 65 and the annuity starting date shall be ignored.
   C.   Lowest limitation of maximum permissible benefit. Except as provided in
Subsection D hereof, the maximum permissible benefit shall never be deemed to
be an amount which is less than $10,000, provided the member is not, and has
never been, a member in any Code Section 401(a) qualified defined contribution
plan of the employer.
   D.   Maximum permissible benefit applicable to certain members who have less
than 10 years of participation service with the City. The maximum permissible
benefit applicable to any member, other than a retiree receiving disability
benefits by reasons of personal injuries or sickness or beneficiaries,
survivors, or the estate of a member, who has less than 10 years of
participation service with the City shall be equal to the lesser of the maximum
permissible benefit or $10,000 multiplied by a fraction, the numerator of which
is the number of the member's years (or part thereof) of participation service
in the plan as of and including the current limitation year, and the
denominator of which is 10.
   E.   Limitation of accrued benefit if annual benefit exceeds maximum
permissible benefit. If the member's annual benefit exceeds the maximum
permissible benefit after the application of the appropriate factors, such
member's accrued benefit shall be limited to an amount which produces an annual
benefit equal to the maximum permissible benefit, adjusted, where applicable,
as set forth in this section.
   F.   For purposes of this section, "participation service" means an accrual
computation period for which the following conditions are met: A) the member is
credited with at least the period of service for benefit accrual purposes,
required hereunder in order to accrue a benefit for the accrual computation
period; and B) the member is included in the plan for at least one day of the
accrual computation period. If these two conditions are met, participation
service credited to the member hereunder shall equal the amount of benefit
accrual service credited to the member for such accrual computation period.
§ 62-332. Required minimum distributions – Code Section 401(a)(9).
Notwithstanding any other provision herein, beginning after 1986, any and all
benefit distributions made under the plan on or after shall be made in
accordance with a reasonable and good faith interpretation of Section 401(a)(9)
of the Code, including the incidental death benefit requirements of Section 401
(a)(9). In accordance with this requirement, the following rules shall apply:
   A.   Distributions that begin during the member's lifetime shall begin no
later than April 1 following the calendar year in which the member retires or
the calendar year in which the member attains age 70 1/2 and be distributed
over the life of the member or the joint lives of the member and his
beneficiary (or over a period not extending beyond the life expectancy of the
member or the joint life expectancy of the member and his beneficiary).
   B.   If a member dies before his entire interest has been distributed, the
remaining portion shall be distributed at least as rapidly as under the method
of distribution being used as of the date of the member's death.
   C.   If the member dies before receiving any distributions from the plan and
A) the death benefit is payable to his surviving spouse, such death benefit
shall be distributed over a period not exceeding such spouse's life (or life
expectancy) beginning no later than: 1) December 31 of the calendar year
immediately following the calendar year in which the member died; or 2)
December 31 of the calendar year in which the member would have attained age 70
1/2; B) the death benefit is payable to a designated beneficiary other than the
member's surviving spouse, such death benefit shall be distributed to such
beneficiary over a period not exceeding the beneficiary's life (or life
expectancy) beginning no later than December 31 of the calendar year following
the member's death; and C) if the death benefit is not payable to the member's
surviving spouse or designated beneficiary, the member's entire interest will
be paid no later than December 31 of the calendar year which includes the fifth
anniversary of the member's date of death.
§ 62-333. Miscellaneous.
   A.   Construction. The masculine gender includes the feminine and the
singular includes the plural, unless the context clearly indicates otherwise.
   B.   Governing law. The plan and fund are governed by the Third Class City
Code of Pennsylvania. 9  The plan is a governmental plan as defined in Section
414(d) of the Code and Section 3(32) of the Employee Retirement Income Security
Act of 1974 (ERISA), as amended, and as such is exempt from the requirements of
ERISA and those requirements of the Code from which a governmental plan is
specifically exempt.
   C.   Pre-ERISA vesting requirement. In the event of the plan's termination
or the City's permanent cessation of contributions, each member shall be vested
to the extent the plan is funded.
   D.   Reemployment rights of veterans. Notwithstanding anything in this plan
to the contrary, benefits contributions, and service credit with respect to
qualified military service [as defined in Section 414(u)(5) of the Code] will
be provided in accordance with Section 414(u) of the Code.
   E.   Amendments. The City Council shall have the authority to amend, freeze,
or terminate the plan in its sole discretion, subject to any limitations
imposed by applicable law.
9.   Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 35101 et seq.
Part 4
Police Pension Fund
[Adopted 5-8-2000 by Ord. No. 6-2000 (
Ch. 1, Part 6A, of the 2001 Code of Ordinances); amended in its entirety 4-22-
2013 by Ord. No. 24-201310]
10. Editor's Note: This ordinance provided an effective date of 1-1-2012.
§ 62-401. Definitions.
As used in this part, the following words and phrases, unless a different
meaning is plainly required by the context, shall have the following respective
meanings:
   AVERAGE ANNUAL PAY — The amount which would constitute the highest average
annual compensation which the member earned during any five calendar years of
his service for the City, or which would be determined by the rate of the
monthly pay of such member at the date of retirement, whichever is the higher.
With respect to members hired after December 31, 2011, "average annual pay"
means the member's rate of monthly pay at the date of termination or the
highest annual salary during any five years of service. [Amended 9-14-2015 by
Ord. No. 47-2015]
   BOARD — The Police Pension Fund Association Board to which reference is made
in §
62-402.
   BOARD ADMINISTRATOR — The position designated by the Board to act on behalf
of the Board in matters of day-to-day administration of the plan.
   CITY — The City of Reading, Pennsylvania.
   CODE — The United States Internal Revenue Code, as amended, including
reference, where applicable, to regulations and other guidance issued by the
United States Department of Treasury and the Commissioner of the Internal
Revenue Service.
   COMPENSATION — Pickup contributions plus remuneration received as a City
employee excluding refunds for expenses, contingency and accountable expense
allowances and excluding severance payments or payments for unused vacation or
unused sick leave or comp time that is paid upon termination. Compensation
includes amounts excluded from income pursuant to a member's election under a
cash or deferred compensation arrangement described in Sections 401(k) of the
Code, an eligible deferred compensation plan described in Section 457(b) of the
Code, a cafeteria plan described in Section 125 of the Code, and, effective
January 1, 1998, a qualified transportation fringe benefit plan under Section
132(f) of the Code. Notwithstanding the preceding, the annual compensation of a
member shall be limited as set forth in Section 401(a)(17) of the Code [as
adjusted annually pursuant to section 401(a)(17)(B) of the Code and
announcement by the Internal Revenue Service; for 2011, $245,000]. Compensation
for any prior year shall be subject to the limitations set forth in Appendix A,
A-1. 11  If compensation for any prior determination period is taken into
account in determining a member's benefits for the current year, the
compensation for such prior determination period is subject to the applicable
annual compensation limit in effect for that prior period.
   DROP — Deferred Retirement Option Plan.
   DROP ACCOUNT — Separate account created to accept a DROP member's monthly
pension check while an employee is a DROP member.
   EMPLOYEE — A person in the service of the City as a member of the police
force.
   FUND — The Police Pension Fund, which shall hold the assets of the plan in
trust.
   MEMBER — A current or former employee who has made or makes required
contributions under the plan.
   MILITARY SERVICE — Honorable active service in the uniformed services listed
below is considered military service for pension purposes: Navy; Air Force;
Marine Corps; Coast Guard; Reserve Corps.
   NEW EMPLOYEE — An employee who enters the service of the City on or after
January 1,1977.
   NEW MEMBER — An employee who is a member of the retirement system on or
after January 1, 1977.
   PENSION BENEFITS — The financial allowances provided to members pursuant to
the provisions of this part.
   PERSON — An officer or employee of the City. PLAN — The City of Reading
Police Pension Plan.
   PRESENT EMPLOYEE — An employee in the service of the City prior to January
1,1997.
   PRESENT MEMBER — An employee who is a member of the retirement system prior
to January 1, 1977.
   QUALIFIED MILITARY SERVICE — Any service in the uniformed services (as
defined in Chapter 3 of Title 38, United States Code), by any individual if
such individual is entitled to reemployment rights under such chapter with
respect to such service.
   RATE OF MONTHLY PAY — One-twelfth of the base pay as set forth in the salary
ordinance, in effect as of date of retirement, adopted pursuant to a collective
bargaining agreement and/or Act 111 arbitration, plus 1/12 of longevity pay
plus 1/12 of holiday pay the member is entitled to for the calendar year.
   SALARY — The base pay as set forth in the salary ordinance adopted pursuant
to a collective bargaining agreement and/or Act 111 arbitration and shall not
include any other compensation subject to the limits on compensation set forth
in Section 401(a)(17) of the Code. With respect to members hired after December
31, 2011, "salary" means the fixed amount of compensation paid at regular,
periodic intervals by the City to the member and from which pension
contributions have been deducted. [Amended 9-14-2015 by Ord. No. 47-2015]
   SPOUSE — The spouse of a member, as determined under law of the Commonwealth
of Pennsylvania. Effective for designations made after December 31, 2006, a
member may designate his/her spouse to be the beneficiary of the member's
pension, regardless of the date of the marriage.
   YEARS ON RETIREMENT — The number of whole years that a police officer has
been retired as of January 1, 2001.
   YEARS OR WHOLE YEARS OF SERVICE — For the purposes of computing the period
of time during which a member has been employed by the City, each whole twelve-
month period commencing from the date of employment of a member.
11. Editor's Note: Appendix A is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 62-402. Police Pension Fund Association.
   A.   There is hereby created a Board to be known as the "Police Pension Fund
Association Board," consisting of:
      (1)   The Mayor or his designee.
      (2)   The City Auditor, formerly known as the "City Controller."
      (3)   The Finance Director, formerly known as “Director of Accounts and
Finance.”
      (4)   The Chief of Police.
      (5)   One retiree member of the system to be elected by the members of
the retirement system.
      (6)   One active police person to be chosen by members of the retirement
system.
   B.   The representatives chosen by the members shall be elected for terms of
four years. The terms of the members of the Board shall run concurrently with
the term of the Mayor.
   C.   A vacancy in the Board occurring during the term of the representatives
elected by the members of the retirement system shall be filled for the
unexpired term by members of the retirement system.
   D.   Board members shall serve without compensation.
   E.   It shall be the duty of the Board to register all members and to
administer the collection and distribution of the fund herein provided for and
to make such reasonable rules and regulations as the Board may deem necessary
in order to effectuate the provisions to a responsible institution experienced
in administering the collection, distribution and investment of pension funds,
but in such event the Board shall require any such institution to provide the
Board with written reports of its activities relating to the fund at least once
every six months.
§ 62-403. Duties of Finance Director.
   A.   It shall be the duty of the Finance Director of the City to submit to
the Board statements showing the name, sex, title, compensation, duties, date
of birth and date of full-time employment of a person who is eligible for
membership in the retirement system.
   B.   In addition, it shall be the duty of the Finance Director to submit to
the Board through, the Pension Administrator, a statement providing years of
full-time service, date of termination, total contributions to the fund by each
employee and compensation for the highest five calendar years of the employment
of any such terminated individual.
§ 62-404. Contributions to fund.
   A.   Each member shall contribute to the fund an amount equal to 5% of his
salary or wages plus $1 per month. Effective January 1, 2007, said mandatory
member contribution to the fund shall increase to 6.5% of his base salary plus
$1 per month.
   B.   Contributions to the fund shall be made by the City deducting the same
from the salary or wages of the member and paying said deductions to the fund.
Notwithstanding the foregoing, members hired after December 31, 2011, shall
contribute to the fund an amount equal to 5% of their salary or wages per
month. All employees shall, at all times, be fully vested in such contributions
to the pension fund until the date of their termination, for whatever reason.
[Amended 9-14-2015 by Ord. No. 47-2015]
§ 62-405. Right of members to pension benefits and amount of pension benefits.
   A.   Normal retirement benefits.
      (1)   Amount.
         (a)   Effective January 1, 1999, all members of the plan shall be
eligible for a normal retirement of 50% of average annual pay upon having
completed 20 years of service, without regard to age.
         (b)   Effective January 1, 2007, members may retire with the following
benefit:
            [1]   Sixty percent of average annual pay with 20 years of service.
            [2]   Sixty two percent of average annual pay with 21 years of
service.
            [3]   Sixty four percent of average annual pay with 22 years of
service.
            [4]   Sixty six percent of average annual pay with 23 years of
service.
            [5]   Sixty eight percent of average annual pay with 24 years of
service.
            [6]   Seventy percent of average annual pay with 25 years of
service.
         (c)   Effective January 1, 2008, all members shall be required to
retire upon the completion of 30 years of service.
         (d)   Notwithstanding the foregoing sentence, members hired after
December 31, 2011, shall be eligible for a normal retirement of 50% of average
annual pay upon having completed 20 years of service and reaching 50 years of
age. [Added 9-14-2015 by Ord. No. 47-2015]
      (2)   During the lifetime of any retired member, such member shall be
entitled to receive 1/12 of the annual pension benefit specified in Subsection
A(1). Such pension benefits shall be paid monthly, in advance, in accordance
with and subject to the conditions set forth herein. Members hired after
December 31, 2011, shall not be entitled to the increased benefits provided by
this §
62-405A(2). Such members shall be eligible for a normal retirement of 50% of
average annual pay upon having completed 20 years of service and reaching 50
years of age. [Amended 9-14-2015 by Ord. No. 47-2015]
      (3)   In addition to the pension benefits which are authorized to be paid
in accordance with the previous Subsection A(2), each member who may become
entitled to pension benefits shall also become entitled to the payment of a
service increment in accordance with and subject to the conditions hereinafter
set forth:
         (a)   Service increments shall be the sum obtained by computing the
number of whole years a member shall have continued as a paid City employee
after having served in the employment of the City for a period of 20 years and
multiplying the number of years in excess of 20 by an amount equal to 1/40 of
the pension benefit which becomes payable to such member in accordance with the
provisions of this part. The maximum service increment pension shall be $500
per month.
   B.   Members entitled to reduced retirement benefits. Any member who ceases
to be employed by the City for any reason prior to completing the minimum
required period for continuous service under Subsection C, but after having
completed 12 years of full-time service shall be entitled upon retirement to
receive benefits in accordance with Subsection C of this section.
   C.   Computation of reduced retirement benefits. Should a member of the
Police Pension Fund cease to be employed as a full-time employee for any reason
prior to completing the minimum period of continuous service requirement, but
after completing 12 years of full- time service, the member shall be entitled
to cease his or her employment and vest in his or her retirement benefit
computed under §
62-405, subject to the following conditions:
      (1)   The member must file on a fund-authorized form with the Board
Administrator a written notice of his or her intention to vest.
      (2)   The member must include in the notice the date the member intends
to terminate his or her service as a full-time employee.
      (3)   The termination date shall be at least 30 days later than the date
the notice to vest is received by the Board.
      (4)   The member must be in good standing with the Police Department on
the date of notice to vest.
      (5)   The Board shall indicate on the notice to vest the rate of the
monthly pay of the member as of the date of said notice to vest or the highest
average annual salary which the member received during any five calendar years
of service preceding said date, whichever is higher.
      (6)   Upon reaching the date which would have been the member's
retirement date had the member continued his or her full-time employment with
the Police Department, the member shall notify the Board, in writing, that the
member desires to collect his or her pension. The amount of pension benefits
the member is entitled to receive under this section shall be computed as
follows:
         (a)   The initial determination of the member's base retirement
benefits shall be computed on the salary indicated on the notice to vest.
         (b)   The portion of the base retirement due the member shall be
determined by applying to the base amount the percentage that his or her years
of service actually rendered bears to the years of service which would have
been rendered had the member continued to be employed by the Department until
his or minimum retirement date.
   D.   Refund of payments used to parchase intervening military service,
nonintervening military service and/or police service. At the cessation of
employment, any member that has purchased service time as permitted under §§
62-414A, B, C or 62-415, may elect to obtain a refund of all or a portion of
the payments used to purchase such service time, without interest, rather than
receive the benefits, if any, of the additional service time so purchased for
purposes of calculating service time under this Police Pension Fund, subject to
the following conditions: [Added 9-14-2015 by Ord. No. 47-2015]
      (1)   The member must file with the Police Pension Fund Association Board
written notice of his or her intention to request a refund.
      (2)   The member must include in the notice the date that the member
intends to terminate his or her service as an employee.
      (3)   The refund will be scheduled for approval at the next suitable
Police Pension Board meeting.
      (4)   The member must include in the written notice the amount of the
requested refund. When requesting a partial refund, such members should give
notice of their requested refund amount by stating the number of purchased
years of service for which they are not requesting a refund. In this case, the
remaining funds used to purchase additional service time will be refunded.
      (5)   The member must include in the written notice a statement
acknowledging that by requesting a refund he or she forfeits any benefits,
rights or entitlements, if any, associated with the additional service time
purchased with the refunded payments and will be treated, for the purposes of
this Police Pension Plan, as not having served the time that was purchased with
the refunded payments.
      (6)   All refunds will be subject to tax withholding as required by
applicable law. Notwithstanding the foregoing, if any member that has purchased
service time as permitted under §§
62-414A, B, C or 62-415 has previously requested and has received, prior to
cessation of employment, a refund of all or a portion of the payments used to
purchase such service time, and such refund has not been repaid prior to
cessation of employment, the member may not obtain a refund pursuant to this §
62-405D of any purchases of service time that had previously been refunded.
§ 62-406. Right to refund of contribution in lieu of receipt of pension
benefit.
[Amended 9-14-2015 by Ord. No. 47-2015]
Any member who becomes entitled to pension benefits in accordance with the
provisions of §
62-405 may elect to obtain a refund of all his contributions without interest
rather than to receive the pension benefits provided for in any of said
section. Such election must be made in writing to the Board prior to the date
on which the first pension payment is made to the member. Such refund of
contributions shall include all payments used to purchase service time under §§
62-414A, B, C or 62-415, without interest.
§ 62-407. Termination of employment of members prior to being entitled to
pension benefits.
Any member who has been in the service of the City for a period of less than 20
years and whose service shall terminate prior to his or her spouse or children
becoming eligible for a pension shall be paid the total amount of the
contributions paid into the fund by him and without interest, except as
provided in §
62-405C.
§ 62-408. Permanent disability pension.
[Amended 9-14-2015 by Ord. No. 47-2015]
Any member who becomes totally disabled as a result of injury or illness in the
line of duty or, if not in the line of duty, after he shall have completed 10
years of service, shall be entitled to full pension benefits during such
disability. Any member who becomes totally disabled not as a result of injury
or illness in the line of duty and shall not have completed 10 years of service
shall be entitled to a pension of 1/2 (50%) of the full pension to which he
would otherwise be entitled. Proof of such disability shall consist of the
sworn statement of three practicing physicians, designated by the Board, that
the member is in a condition of health which totally disables him from
performing the duties of his position or office or of any other gainful
employment within the police force of the City to which he may be assigned. Any
such member receiving pension benefits shall thereafter be subject to physical
examination at any reasonable time or times, upon order of the Board, and upon
his failure to submit to any such examination, his pension shall cease.
Effective January 1, 1999, all police officers hired on or after January 1,
1977, who are injured in the performance of their duties and due to that injury
are unable to perform the duties of a Reading Police Officer, shall be entitled
to the same pension benefits as those officers hired prior to January 1, 1977.
§ 62-409. Widow or widowers and children of members.
   A.   The widow or widower of a member who has retired on pension hereunder,
or if not retired has completed 10 years of service, shall be entitled to full
pension benefits. The widow or widower of a member who has not completed 10
years of service shall be entitled to a pension benefit of 1/2 (50%) of the
full pension. However, the widow or widower of a member who has been killed in
service, regardless of his or her years of service shall be entitled to receive
full pension benefits. Such pension shall be payable so long as such widow or
widower survives and upon the death of the widow or widower such pension shall
be divided equally among the children of the member under the age of 18 years.
Such pension shall cease on the later date of:
      (1)   The death of the widow or widower.
      (2)   The 18th birthday of the youngest child.
   B.   Notwithstanding the foregoing, effective January 1, 2004, the
survivor's benefit as a result of a killed-in-service benefit shall be equal to
the pension that the member would have received had he been retired at the time
of his death. [Added 9-14-2015 by Ord. No. 47-2015]
§ 62-410. Computation of time of service.
   A.   Except as set forth in Subsection B of this section, the period of
service used to determine whether a member is eligible for pension benefits
under the provisions of this part shall be computed from the date on which a
person becomes a member of the Police Pension Fund. If, after becoming a
member, a person leaves the service of the City and is subsequently re-
employed, for purposes of determining eligibility for benefits, his time of
service shall be computed from the date on which he last became a member of the
fund.
   B.   A member who terminates his service in the police force of the City and
has been re- employed as a member of the police force shall be entitled to
credit for prior service in determining his eligibility for pension benefits
under the following circumstances:
      (1)   Such member shall be entitled to a credit for prior service if he
has repaid to the fund any contributions which he withdrew from the fund upon
leaving the service of the City. The extent of prior service for which such
member shall be entitled to a credit shall be based on the length of time
during which such member originally paid the contributions which he withdrew
and which he repaid.
§ 62-411. Receipt of contributions; payment from and investment of fund.
   A.   It shall be the exclusive duty of the Board to serve as fund trustees
and to receive, disburse, retain, invest and reinvest the fund created by
virtue of this part and to pay over by warrant or check the amount due under
this plan to members or their widows or widowers or their estates or children.
The Board, with the approval of the Finance Director of the City, may enter
into agreements with reputable institutions to perform any of the aforesaid
duties, including, but not limited to, advising the Board with respect to any
and all of its duties, but in the event the Board does so, any such agreement
shall require the institutions involved to provide the Board with written
reports concerning its activities at least once every six months. The
compensation of such institutions shall be paid by the fund or such source of
pay as is designated by applicable law. The fund shall be used for the
exclusive purpose of funding and paying benefits provided hereunder, and a
reversion of fund assets or a return of City contributions is prohibited,
except as otherwise provided by applicable law or IRS Revenue Ruling 91-4.
   B.   The City shall contribute to the fund an amount sufficient to meet the
requirements of the fund but such amount shall not be less than Subsection B
(1), nor more than Subsection B(2).
      (1)   An amount equal to 1/2% of all City taxes levied by the City, other
than taxes levied to pay interest on or to extinguish the debt of the City or
any part thereof, plus such additional amounts as are actuarially necessary to
provide for the cost of pensions paid to widows, widowers and children of
members.
      (2)   An amount equal to 3% of all City taxes levied by the City other
than taxes levied to pay interest on or to extinguish the debt of the City or
any part thereof, plus such additional amounts as are actuarially necessary to
provide for the cost of pensions paid to widows, widowers and children of
members.
      (3)   The City may take by gift, grant, devise or bequest any money or
property, real, personal or mixed, for the benefit of this fund. The Board
shall enter into such agreements for the care, management and disposal of such
funds, in a manner consistent with the directions of the respective donors.
   C.   Effective January 1, 2007, notwithstanding anything the contrary
provided herein, the City shall guarantee placement of funds to make the
current police pension solvent to accommodate the increase in benefit. Said
fund amount shall be determined and agreed upon by both the City and FOP.
§ 62-412. Exemption from attachment or execution; nonassignability.
The pension benefits and service increments herein provided for shall not be
subject to attachment or execution, assignment or transfer and shall be payable
only to the person designated by this part.
§ 62-413. Payment to estate.
In the event that any member dies prior to becoming entitled to any pension
benefits hereunder, and leaves no widow or widower or children eligible for
benefits hereunder, the member's remaining contributions in the fund shall be
paid without interest to the following parties in the order designated:
   A.   To the estate of the member;
   B.   To a person entitled to the contributions in accordance with the
interstate laws of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
§ 62-414. Military service.
   A.   Intervening. Any member who enters active military service at a time
when he is a member of the plan shall have his years (or completed calendar
months) of active military service, not to exceed a total of five, credited as
years of service for retirement purposes; provided that:
      (1)   He receives an honorable discharge, certificate of satisfactory
service or the equivalent thereof, and produces same to the Board.
      (2)   He is re-employed by the City within 90 days of such discharge or
within such longer period as his re-employment rights are protected by law.
      (3)   He shall pay into the fund the amount which he would have been
obligated to pay during the period of his military service, but not to exceed a
total of five years, if he had been an active employee of the City, which
amount shall be based on his salary or wages as a City employee immediately
before his departure for active military service.
Members hired after December 31, 2011, may not purchase intervening military
service credit.
[Added 9-14-2015 by Ord. No. 47-2015]
   B.   Nonintervening. Any member who has not retired and who entered military
service subsequent to September 1, 1940, and was not a member of the plan prior
to such military service, shall be entitled to make application (on a form, if
any, prescribed by the Board) to the plan and have completed months of military
service, not to exceed five years, credited as years of service for retirement
purposes, under the following conditions:
      (1)   The member shall pay to the fund an amount equal to the total of
Subsection B(1)(a) and (b) below:
         (a)   An amount equivalent to the pension contribution of Patrol
Trainee for the first year, Patrolman 1 for the second year, Patrolman 2 for
the third year and Patrolman 3 for the fourth and fifth years during the years
the military service was credited, each of which to be determined as of the
date the employee becomes a member.
         (b)   An amount equivalent to 15.7% of such member's salary
representing the City's normal cost (as determined by the actuary), or such
rate as computed under the most recent actuarial valuation available as of the
date the person becomes a member.
      (2)   A member who has not completed payment, either through payroll
deduction or by any other payment method, of the entire amount required under
the previous subsections by the time the member files a letter of resignation
or retirement the member shall not be permitted to receive credit for such
nonintervening military service. Any partial payment made by such member on or
prior to termination of the member shall be refunded to such member.
Members hired after December 31, 2011, may not purchase nonintervening military
service credit.
[Added 9-14-2015 by Ord. No. 47-2015]
   C.   USERRA and HEART requirements. Effective December 12, 1994, any member
who is absent on account of qualified military service and returns to City
service within the period of time during which his reemployment rights are
protected by federal law shall receive service credit, contributions, benefits
and other rights provided under this subsection in lieu of the service credit,
contributions, benefits or other rights to which the member would otherwise be
entitled under this section, except to the extent the member would be entitled
to more advantageous service credit, contributions, or benefits or more
valuable rights under other provisions of this section. A member described in
this subsection shall be credited with years of service for the full period of
qualified military service, provided such member pays into the fund an amount
equal to the contributions such member would have been required to make but for
his absence on account of qualified military service, within the five-year
period of time beginning on his reemployment date (or the lesser period of time
beginning on such reemployment date that is three times the length of his
qualified military service), and the City shall make all contributions that
would have been due on account of such member contributions, and the member
shall be entitled to all other rights and benefits accruing on account of such
contributions and service. For purposes of this subsection, a member shall be
treated as having received compensation during his qualified military service
based on the rate of compensation the member would have received but for his
qualified military service compensation, or if such amount is not reasonably
certain, his average compensation during the twelve-month period immediately
preceding his qualified military service (or, if shorter, the period of time
immediately preceding his qualified military service). This subsection shall be
applied in a manner consistent with Section 414(u) of the Code.
      (1)   Effective January 1, 2007, in the case of a member who dies while
performing qualified military service, the member's surviving beneficiary shall
be entitled to any additional benefits (other than benefit accruals relating to
the period of qualified military service) provided herein as though the member
had resumed employment with the City on the day before death and then
terminated employment on account of death in accordance with Section 401(a)(37)
of the Code.
      (2)   Effective with respect to years beginning after December 31, 2008,
for purposes of applying the limits on annual benefits and contributions and
for purposes of applying other applicable provisions of the Code, but not for
purposes of determining benefits and contributions, "compensation" shall also
include differential wage payments, as defined in Section 3401(h) of the Code,
paid by the City to an employee on account of qualified military service.
§ 62-415. Police service.
Any member who has not retired shall be entitled to have full credit
(consistent with the military service purchase rules in §
62-414) for each year or fraction thereof, to the completed month, not to
exceed five years under the following conditions:
   A.   He shall pay the buyback rate set forth in §
62-414B(1) based upon his first year of hire.
   B.   Buyback may be made at any time prior to retirement (installment
payment plans shall be allowed and implemented) but current retirement
standards shall apply.
   C.   Members hired after December 31, 2011, may not purchase police service
credit.
§ 62-416. Increases in allowances following retirement.
   A.   On and after the effective date of this section, pension benefits shall
be increased to those members who have previously retired only upon the action
of the City Council and only if the funded status of the fund is such that
sufficient provision is made to provide for the accrual of normal cost of
future service benefits and of interest on unfunded accrued liabilities.
   B.   The fund shall pay a member a special ad hoc postretirement adjustment
if all of the following apply:
      (1)   The retiree has terminated active employment with the City as a
member.
      (2)   The retiree is receiving a retirement benefit from the City on the
basis of active employment with the City as a police officer.
      (3)   The retiree began receiving the pension benefit before January 1,
1996.
   C.   Except as provided in Subsections D and E, the fund shall pay a member
a monthly special ad hoc postretirement adjustment under this section that
shall be calculated as follows:
      (1)   The base adjustment shall be determined by multiplying 15 cents by
the years of service and then multiplying that product by the years on
retirement.
      (2)   The longevity factor shall be determined as the sum of the products
calculated by multiplying 0.025 by the years on retirement and 0.05 by the
years on retirement in excess of 25, if any.
      (3)   The longevity adjustment shall be determined by multiplying the
base adjustment calculated under Subsection C(1) by the longevity factor
calculated under Subsection C(2).
      (4)   The special ad hoc postretirement adjustment payable under this
section shall be the sum of the base adjustment calculated under Subsection C
(1) and the longevity adjustment calculated under Subsection C(3).
   D.   Limitation. If a retiree is entitled to be paid a special ad hoc
postretirement adjustment by more than one municipal retirement system, the
amount of the special ad hoc postretirement adjustment under Subsection C shall
be reduced before such payments commence so that the total of all these
adjustments paid to the retiree does not exceed the amount specified in
Subsection C.
   E.   Modification in the amount of 2002 special ad hoc postretirement
adjustment. The amount of the special ad hoc postretirement adjustment
calculated under Subsection C shall be reduced annually by 65% of the total
amount of any postretirement adjustments provided to the retiree under any
other City pension plan after December 31, 1988, and before January 1, 2002,
and paid in the immediately preceding year.
   F.   The special ad hoc postretirement adjustment under this section is
effective on the date of the first pension benefit payment issued after June
30, 2002. If the special ad hoc postretirement adjustment under this section is
not commenced in the initial retirement benefit payment occurring after June
30, 2002, the special ad hoc postretirement adjustment shall be included as
soon as practicable in the pension benefit payment of the retiree, and the
initial pension benefit payment that includes the special ad hoc postretirement
adjustment also shall include the total amount of the special ad hoc
postretirement adjustments previously omitted from the pension benefit payments
made after June 30, 2002.
§ 62-417. Deferred Retirement Option Program (DROP).
   A.   Eligibility. Effective January 1, 2001, members of the Reading Police
Department, who have not retired prior to the implementation of the DROP
program may enter into the DROP on the first day of any month following
completion of 20 years of credited service. Members of the Reading Police
Department hired after December 31, 2011, shall not be eligible for or
permitted to participate in the DROP program. [Amended 9-14-2015 by Ord. No.
47-2015]
   B.   Written election. An eligible member electing to participate in the
DROP must complete and execute a “DROP option form” prepared by the City of
Reading, Finance Department, which shall evidence the member’s participation in
the DROP. The form must be signed by the member and notarized and submitted to
the City of Reading, Finance Department, prior to the date on which the member
wishes the DROP option to be effective. The DROP option form shall include an
irrevocable notice to the City, by the member, that the member shall resign
from employment with the City of Reading Police Department effective on a
specific date not more than 60 months from the effective date of the DROP
option. In addition, and consistent with the member’s resignation date, all
retirement documents required by the Board Administrator must be filed and
presented to the Board for approval of retirement and payment of pension. Once
a retirement application has been approved by the Board it is irrevocable.
   C.   Limitation on pension accrual. After the effective date of the DROP
option, the member shall no longer earn or accrue additional years of
continuous service nor will the member's compensation change for pension
purposes.
   D.   Benefit calculation. For all retirement fund purposes, continuous
service of a member participating in the DROP shall remain as it existed on the
effective date of commencement of participation in the DROP. Service thereafter
shall not be recognized or used for the calculation or determination of any
benefits payable by the fund. The average monthly pay of the member for pension
calculation purposes shall remain as it existed on the effective date of
commencement of participation in the DROP. Earnings or increases in earnings
thereafter shall not be recognized or used for the calculation or determination
of any benefits payable by the Pension Fund. The pension benefit payable to the
member shall increase only as a result of cost-of-living adjustments in effect
on the effective date of the member's participation in the DROP, or by
applicable cost-of-living adjustments granted thereafter. During the period the
member participates in the DROP, such member shall contribute to the fund an
amount equal to 5% of his salary or wages per month. However, members who made
an election to participate in the DROP prior to January 1, 2012, shall not be
required to make mandatory contributions to the fund during the period such
members participate in the DROP. [Amended 9-14-2015 by Ord. No. 47-2015]
   E.   Payments to DROP account. The monthly retirement benefits that would
have been payable had the member elected to cease employment and receive a
normal retirement benefit shall, upon the member commencing participation in
the DROP, be paid into a separate DROP account established to receive the
member's monthly pension payments. Such DROP account shall be credited with
interest in a manner prescribed by the Board.
   F.   Payout. Upon the termination date set forth in the member's drop option
form, or such date as the member withdraws or is terminated from the DROP
program, the retirement benefits payable to the member or the member's
beneficiary, if applicable, shall be paid to the member or beneficiary and
shall no longer be paid to the member's deferred retirement option account.
Within 30 days following termination of a member's employment pursuant to their
participating in the DROP program, the balances in the member's deferred
retirement option account shall be paid to the member in a single lump sum
payment, or at the member's option, in any fashion permitted by law.
   G.   Disability During DROP. If a member becomes temporarily disabled during
his participation in DROP, his participation freezes and the time period while
on disability does not count towards the five-year participation limit. Upon
return to duty, membership in DROP shall resume, continuing with the remaining
time left in the five-year membership period. The member shall receive
disability pay in the same amount as a disabled member who is not participating
in DROP. In no event shall a member on temporary disability have the ability to
draw from his DROP account. However, notwithstanding any other provisions in
this subsection, if an officer is disabled and has not returned to work as of
the date of his required resignation, then such resignation shall take
precedence over all other provisions herein and said officer shall be required
to resign.
   H.   Death. If a DROP member dies before the DROP account balance is paid,
the member's legal beneficiary shall have the same rights as the member to
withdraw the account balance.
   I.   The DROP shall not be available to an elected official, except for an
official first elected prior to September 18, 2009.
   J.   Except as may be required by applicable law, or otherwise noted in the
Plan, any amendments to this §
62-417 shall be consistent with the provisions covering deferred retirement
options plans set forth in any applicable collective bargaining agreement and
shall be binding upon all future DROP members and upon all DROP members who
have balances in their deferred retirement option accounts. [Amended 9-14-2015
by Ord. No. 47-2015]
§ 62-418. Direct rollovers.
   A.   Direct rollovers. Notwithstanding any provision herein to the contrary
that would otherwise limit a distributee's election under this subsection, on
and after January 1, 1993, a distributee may elect, at the time and in the
manner prescribed by the Board, to have any portion of an eligible rollover
distribution paid directly to an eligible retirement plan specified by the
distributee in a direct rollover.
   B.   For purposes of this section, the following definitions shall apply:
   DIRECT ROLLOVER — A direct rollover is a payment by the system to the
eligible retirement plan specified by the distributee.
   DISTRIBUTEE — A distributee includes any member. In addition, a member's
surviving spouse and the member's spouse or former spouse who is the alternate
payee under a domestic relations order, as defined in Section 414(p) of the
Code, are distributees with regard to the interest of the spouse or former
spouse. Effective with respect to distributions after 2009, a distributee also
means a beneficiary of a member other than a surviving spouse.
   ELIGIBLE RETIREMENT PLAN — An eligible retirement plan is an individual
retirement account described in Code Section 408(a), an individual retirement
annuity described in Code Section 408(b), a Roth IRA as pursuant to Code
Section 408A(e), for distributions made after December 31, 2001, an annuity
plan described in Code Section 403(a) or an annuity contract described in Code
Section 403(b), a qualified trust described in Code Section 401(a), or for
distributions made after December 31, 2001, an eligible plan under Code Section
457(b) which is maintained by a state, political subdivision of a state, or any
agency or instrumentality of a state or political subdivision of a state and
which agrees to separately account for amounts transferred into such plan from
this plan. The definition of eligible retirement plan shall also apply in the
case of a distribution to a surviving spouse, or to a spouse or former spouse
who is the alternate payee under a domestic relation order, as defined in Code
Section 414(p). Effective in the case of an eligible rollover distribution to a
surviving spouse before 2002 or to a beneficiary other than a surviving spouse
after 2009, an eligible retirement plan is an individual retirement account or
individual retirement annuity.
   ELIGIBLE ROLLOVER DISTRIBUTION — An eligible rollover distribution is any
distribution of all or any portion of the balance to the credit of the
distributee, except that an eligible rollover distribution does not include any
distribution that is one of a series of substantially equal periodic payments
(not less frequently than annually) made for the life (or life expectancy) of
the distributee or the joint lives (or joint life expectancies) of the
distributee and the distributee's designated beneficiary, or for a specified
period of 10 years or more; any distribution to the extent such distribution is
required under Code Section 401(a)(9); the portion of any distribution that is
not includible in gross income (determined without regard to the exclusion for
net unrealized appreciation with respect to employer securities); and any
distribution that is made upon hardship of a member. Notwithstanding anything
in this definition to the contrary, for distributions made after December 31,
2001, a portion of a distribution shall not fail to be an eligible rollover
distribution merely because the portion consists of after-tax employee
contributions that are not includible in gross income. However, such portion
may be paid only to an individual retirement account or annuity, or to a
qualified defined contribution plan described in Section 401(a) or 403(a) of
the Code, or a governmental 457 plan that agrees to separately account for
amounts so transferred, including separately accounting for the portion of such
distribution which is includible in gross income and the portion of such
distribution which is not.
§ 62-419. Maximum permissible benefits and contributions – Code Section 415.
   A.   In general. Notwithstanding anything herein to the contrary, effective
for limitation years beginning on or after January 1, 1995, the annual benefit
(attributable to City contributions and pickup contributions treated as City
contributions) with respect to a member payable under the plan and all other
defined benefit plans of the City, when expressed in the form of a straight
life annuity, shall not exceed the "maximum permissible benefit." Effective for
limitation years beginning on or after January 1, 2008, in no case shall any
amount accrue in a limitation year, with respect to a member under the plan or
all other deferred benefits plans of the City, that would exceed the maximum
permissible benefit. For purposes of this section, the member's maximum
permissible benefit shall equal the dollar limit prescribed in Section 415(b)
(1)(A) of the Code ($195,000 in 2011) or such other amount as may be prescribed
under regulations issued by the U.S. Secretary of the Treasury under Section
415(d) of the Code, adjusted in accordance with Subsection B, C and D, below.
In addition, the "annual additions," as defined in Section 415(c)(2) of the
Code, including payments to a member's DROP account, made by or on behalf on
any member attributable to member contributions to the plan other than pickup
contributions treated as City contributions, together with any annual
additions, to any Code Section 401(a) qualified defined contribution plan
maintained by the City shall not exceed the maximum amount determined under
Section 415(c)(1) of the Code for any limitation year, as adjusted under
Section 415(d) of the Code and applicable guidance. Solely for purposes of
determining the maximum annual addition prescribed in Section 415(c) of the
Code, compensation means a member's wages as defined in Section 3401(a) of the
Code and all other payments of compensation to the member from the City for
which the City is required to furnish the member a written statement under
Sections 6041(d) and 6051(a)(3) of the Code. Compensation shall be determined
without regard to any rules that limit the compensation included in wages based
on the nature or location of the employment or the services performed.
Compensation shall include any amount which would otherwise be deemed
compensation under this definition but for the fact that it is subject to a
salary reduction agreement under any plan described in Section 457(b), 132(f),
or 125 of the Code. Solely for this purpose, compensation also includes regular
compensation received after such member's severance from employment [as defined
in Treas. Reg. § 1.415(a)-1(f)(5) (but not severance payments)]; provided that
payment of such compensation is made by the later of 2 1/2 months after the
member's severance from employment or the end of the calendar year that
includes the member's severance from employment; and provided, further, that in
order for these postseverance payments to be considered compensation for this
purpose, these amounts may only consist of the following (which would otherwise
constitute compensation): i) regular compensation for services during the
member's regular working hours, or compensation for service outside the
member's regular work hours (such as overtime or shift differential),
commission, bonuses, or similar payments, if such payment would have been paid
to the member prior to severance from employment if the member had continued in
employment with the City; ii) payment for unused, accrued, bona fide sick,
vacation or other leave (but only if the member would have been able to use the
leave if employment had continued); and iii) for plan years beginning on or
after January 1, 2009, payments to members who do not currently perform
services for the City by reason of qualified military service [as that term is
defined in section 414(u)(1) of the Code] to the extent those payments do not
exceed the amounts the individual would have received if the individual had
continued to perform services for the City rather than entering qualified
military service. Other types of payments paid to the member after severance
from employment shall not be considered compensation for this purpose, even if
paid within the time frame described above. In no event, however, shall
compensation for this purpose include any amounts not permitted to be included
under Section 415 of the Code.
   B.   Adjustment to the maximum permissible benefit. Adjustments shall be
made to the maximum permissible benefit in accordance with Subsection B(1), (2)
or (3) below:
      (1)   If a member's benefit is payable in any form other than a straight
life annuity, the determination as to whether the limitation of this section
has been satisfied shall be made by adjusting such benefit to the form of a
straight life annuity beginning when the payment of benefits begins. The
adjustment described in the preceding sentence shall be made in the manner
prescribed by the U.S. Secretary of the Treasury, such that the equivalent
annual benefit would be the greater of: 1) the equivalent annual benefit
computed using 7% interest rate and GAM83 mortality table; and 2) the
equivalent annual benefit computed using an interest assumption of 5% (for
distributions made during plan years beginning in 2004 or 2005, 5.5%) and the
mortality table prescribed by the U.S. Secretary of the Treasury under Section
415(b)(2)(E)(v) of the Code. Notwithstanding the preceding sentence, effective
for plan years beginning after 2005, for purposes of determining whether any
benefit payable as a lump sum satisfies the limitation of this section, the
adjustment described in the preceding sentence shall be made in the manner
prescribed by the U.S. Secretary of the Treasury, such that the equivalent
annual benefit would be the greatest of: 1) the equivalent annual benefit
computed using the interest rate and mortality table specified in the plan for
actuarial equivalence for the particular form of benefit payable; 2) the
equivalent annual benefit computed using an interest rate assumption of 5.5%
and the mortality table prescribed by the U.S. Secretary of the Treasury under
Section 415(b)(2)(E)(v) of the Code; and 3) the equivalent annual benefit
computed using the interest rate specified in Section 417(e)(3) of the Code and
the mortality table prescribed by the U.S. Secretary of the Treasury under
Section 415(b)(2)(E)(v) of the Code divided by 1.05. However, for the purposes
of such adjustment, any ancillary benefit that is not directly related to
retirement income benefits and that portion of any joint and survivor annuity
that is actuarially equivalent to the default form of payment benefit payable
to a married member shall not be taken into account.
      (2)   Actuarial equivalent prior to age 62.
         (a)   If the benefit of a member who is not a "qualified participant,"
as defined in Section 415(b)(2)(H) of the Code, begins before he or she reaches
age 62 (other than on account of becoming disabled by reason of personal
injuries or sickness or death), the maximum permissible benefit shall be
adjusted in accordance with Section 415(b) of the Code, to an amount (beginning
when the payment of benefits begins) that is actuarially equivalent to an
annual benefit equal to the maximum permissible benefit determined under
Subsection A [adjusted through the limitation year when payment of benefits
begins for increases in the cost of living in accordance with Section 415(d) of
the Code] beginning at age 62.
            [1]   For limitation years beginning before July 1, 2007, the
defined benefit dollar limitation applicable at an age prior to age 62 is
determined as the lesser of: a) the actuarial equivalent (at such age) of the
defined benefit dollar limitation computed using a five-percent interest rate
and the Unisex UP-84 Mortality Table; and b) the actuarial equivalent (at such
age) of the maximum permissible benefit computed using a five-percent interest
rate and the applicable mortality table prescribed by the U.S. Secretary of the
Treasury under Section 415(b)(2)(E)(v) of the Code.
            [2]   For limitation years beginning on or after July 1, 2007, the
defined benefit dollar limitation applicable at an age prior to age 62 is
determined as the lesser of: a) the actuarial equivalent (at such age) of the
defined benefit dollar limitation computed using a five-percent interest rate
and the applicable mortality table within the meaning of Section 417(e)(3)(B)
of the Code (and expressing the member's age based on completed calendar months
as of the annuity starting date); and b) the defined benefit dollar limitation
multiplied by the ratio of the annual amount of the immediately commencing
straight life annuity under the plan at the member's annuity starting date to
the annual amount of the immediately commencing straight life annuity under the
plan at age 62 both determined without applying the limitations of Section 415
of the Code.
            [3]   For limitation years beginning prior to 2002, the reduction
shall not reduce the maximum permissible benefit below $75,000 if the benefit
begins at or after age 55, or, if the benefit begins before age 55, the
equivalent of the $75,000 limit for age 55.
         (b)   Any decrease in the maximum permissible benefit made in
accordance with this subsection shall not reflect a mortality decrement.
      (3)   Actuarial equivalent after age 65.
         (a)   If the benefit of a member begins after he or she reaches age
65, the maximum permissible benefit of Subsection A shall be increased in
accordance with Section 415(b) of the Code and the regulations thereunder to an
amount (beginning when the payment of benefits begins) that is actuarially
equivalent to an annual benefit equal to the maximum permissible benefit of
Subsection A [adjusted through the limitation year when payment of benefits
begins for increases in the cost of living in accordance with Section 415(d) of
the Code] beginning at age 65.
            [1]   For limitation years beginning before July 1, 2007, the
actuarial equivalent of the maximum permissible benefit applicable at an age
after age 65 is the lesser of: a) the actuarial equivalent (at such age) of the
maximum permissible benefit computed using a five-percent interest rate and the
unisex UP-84 mortality table; and b) the actuarial equivalent (at such age) of
the maximum permissible benefit computed using a five-percent interest rate
assumption and the applicable mortality table prescribed by the U.S. Secretary
of the Treasury under Section 415(b)(2)(E)(v) of the Code.
            [2]   For limitation years beginning on or after July 1, 2007, the
actuarial equivalent of the maximum permissible benefit applicable at an age
after age 65 is the lesser of: a) the actuarial equivalent (at such age) of the
maximum permissible benefit using a five-percent interest rate and the
applicable mortality table within the meaning of Section 417(e)(3)(B) of the
Code (and expressing, the member's age based on completed calendar months as of
the annuity starting date); and b) the maximum permissible benefit multiplied
by the ratio of the annual amount of the immediately commencing straight life
annuity payable to the member, computed disregarding the member's accruals
after age 65, but including any actuarial adjustments even if those adjustments
are applied to offset accruals, to the annual amount of the straight life
annuity that would be payable under the plan to a hypothetical member who is 65
years old and has the same accrued benefit (with no actuarial increases for
commencement after age 65 as the member receiving the distribution (determined
disregarding the member's accruals after age 65 and without applying the rules
of Section 415 of the Code.
         (b)   For purposes of both Subsection B(3)(a)[1] and [2] above,
mortality between age 65 and the annuity starting date shall be ignored.
   C.   Lowest limitation of maximum permissible benefit. Except as provided in
Subsection D hereof, the maximum permissible benefit shall never be deemed to
be an amount which is less than $10,000, provided the member is not, and has
never been, a member in any Code Section 401(a) qualified defined contribution
plan of the employer.
   D.   Maximum permissible benefit applicable to certain members who have less
than 10 years of participation service with the City. The maximum permissible
benefit applicable to any member, other than a retiree receiving disability
benefits by reasons of personal injuries or sickness or beneficiaries,
survivors, or the estate of a member, who has less than 10 years of
participation service with the City shall be equal to the lesser of the maximum
permissible benefit or $10,000 multiplied by a fraction, the numerator of which
is the number of the member's years (or part thereof) of participation service
in the plan as of and including the current limitation year, and the
denominator of which is 10.
   E.   Limitation of accrued benefit if annual benefit exceeds maximum
permissible benefit. If the member's annual benefit exceeds the maximum
permissible benefit after the application of the appropriate factors, such
member's accrued benefit shall be limited to an amount which produces an annual
benefit equal to the maximum permissible benefit, adjusted, where applicable,
as set forth in this section.
   F.   For purposes of this section, "participation service" means an accrual
computation period for which the following conditions are met: A) the member is
credited with at least the period of service for benefit accrual purposes,
required hereunder in order to accrue a benefit for the accrual computation
period; and B) the member is included in the plan for at least one day of the
accrual computation period. If these two conditions are met, participation
service credited to the member hereunder shall equal the amount of benefit
accrual service credited to the member for such accrual computation period.
§ 62-420. Required minimum distributions – Code Section 401(a)(9).
Notwithstanding any other provision herein, beginning after 1986, any and all
benefit distributions made under the plan on or after shall be made in
accordance with a reasonable and good faith interpretation of Section 401(a)(9)
of the Code, including the incidental death benefit requirements of Section 401
(a)(9). In accordance with this requirement, the following rules shall apply:
   A.   Distributions that begin during the member's lifetime shall begin no
later than April 1 following the calendar year in which the member retires or
the calendar year in which the member attains age 70 1/2 and be distributed
over the life of the member of the joint lives of the member and his
beneficiary (or over a period not extending beyond the life expectancy of the
member or the joint life expectancy of the member and his beneficiary).
   B.   If a member dies before his entire interest has been distributed, the
remaining portion shall be distributed at least as rapidly as under the method
of distribution being used as of the date of the member's death.
   C.   If the member dies before receiving any distributions from the plan and
A) the death benefit is payable to his surviving spouse, such death benefit
shall be distributed over a period not exceeding such spouse's life (or life
expectancy) beginning no later than: 1) December 31 of the calendar year
immediately following the calendar year in which the member died; or 2)
December 31 of the calendar year in which the member would have attained age 70
1/2; B) the death benefit is payable to a designated beneficiary other than the
member's surviving spouse, such death benefit shall be distributed to such
beneficiary over a period not exceeding the beneficiary's life (or life
expectancy) beginning no later than December 31 of the calendar year following
the member's death; and C) if the death benefit is not payable to the member's
surviving spouse or designated beneficiary, the member's entire interest will
be paid no later than December 31 of the calendar year which includes the fifth
anniversary of the member's date of death.
§ 62-421. Miscellaneous.
   A.   Construction. The masculine gender includes the feminine and the
singular includes the plural, unless the context clearly indicates otherwise.
   B.   Governing law. The plan and fund are governed by the Third Class City
Code of Pennsylvania.12 For employees hired after December 31, 2011, the City
shall not provide benefits under the plan that exceed the minimum mandatory
benefits as described in the Police Pension portion (11 Pa.C.S. §§14300 et
seq.) of the Third Class City Code. The plan is a government plan as defined in
§ 414(d) of the Code and § 3(32) of the Employee Retirement Income Security Act
of 1974 (ERISA), as amended, and as such is exempt from the requirements of
ERISA and those requirements of the Code from which a governmental plan is
specifically exempt. [Amended 9-14-2015 by Ord. No. 47-2015]
   C.   Pre-ERISA vesting requirement. In the event of the plan's termination
or the City's permanent cessation of contributions, each member shall be vested
to the extent the plan is funded.
   D.   Amendments. The City Council shall have the authority to amend, freeze,
or terminate the plan in its sole discretion, subject to any limitations
imposed by applicable law.
12. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 35101 et seq.
Part 5
Aggregated Pension Trust Fund
[Adopted 4-4-2017 by Ord. No. 39-2017]
§ 62-501. Establishment; funds transferred.
   A.   There is established an aggregated pension trust fund consisting of all
City-administered uniformed and nonuniformed pension fund assets, but shall
specifically exclude any funds administered by the Pennsylvania Municipal
Retirement Board, in the manner and under the conditions and subject to the
provisions of the Municipal Pension Plan Funding Standard and Recovery Act, Act
1984-205, and subject to future amendments, such pension trust fund to be
subject to all the definitions as set forth in the aforesaid Act of Assembly.
   B.   Transfer of funds. All pension fund assets now in the custody of the
City-administered uniform and nonuniformed pension funds (Officers and
Employees, Firemen's & Police) shall on July 1, 2017 be transferred to the
Aggregated Pension Trust Fund hereby created, together with all financial
records pertaining thereto.
§ 62-502. Board of Trustees.
   A.   There is established a board to be known as the Aggregated Pension
Trust Board of Trustees, composed of officials and persons as follows with the
powers and duties herein provided.
   B.   Members of the Board of Trustees shall serve without compensation but
shall be reimbursed for necessary expenses.
   C.   No person shall suffer loss of salary or wages by reason of service on
the Board.
§ 62-503. Composition of Board of Trustees.
The Board of Trustees shall be composed of the following:
   A.   Mayor, or his/her designee;
   B.   Finance Director, or his/her designee;
   C.   Managing Director (ex officio);
   D.   City Auditor;
   E.   One member each, elected from the active membership of each pension
plan included in the Aggregated Pension Trust Fund, or an alternate, also to be
elected by the individual; and
   F.   If there is a deadlock, the members of the managing boards shall
mutually agree upon a member of the general public to cast the deciding vote.
§ 62-504. Officers of the Board.
At the first meeting annually of the full Board of Trustees, the Board shall
elect a President and a Vice President, and Secretary/Treasurer from among its
members.
§ 62-505. Board members from active membership of existing pension plans.
An active member from each of the pension plans included in the Aggregated
Pension Trust Fund shall be qualified and elected for the terms as follows:
   A.   Qualifications. The employee member shall be actively contributing to
the applicable pension fund or a retiree of the applicable fund.
   B.   Terms.
      (1)   The employee members on the Board of Trustees shall serve a three-
year term beginning on June 1, except for the first term of this Board. The
first terms of the of the employee members shall be as follows:
         (a)   Member representing Fire & Rescue Services Pension Fund
membership, date of election to June 1, 2018;
         (b)   Member representing Police Relief and Pension Association
membership, date of election to June 1, 2019; and
         (c)   Member representing Employees' Retirement and Pension System
membership, date of election to June 1, 2020.
      (2)   Board memberships shall be held until the successors are elected
and enter upon their duties.
   C.   Elections. Employee members on the Board of Trustees shall be nominated
by the boards of the pension plans included in the aggregation. The nominees
receiving the highest number of votes shall be elected as the Board members.
   D.   Election of initial Board members. Within 14 days following the
effective date of this Part, the board of each of the pension plans included in
the aggregation shall conduct a meeting at a time and place specified by the
present governing bodies of such pension plans for the purpose of receiving
nominations and election for employee memberships on the Board.
   E.   Vacancy. Any employee membership on the Board which becomes vacant for
any reason shall be filled for the unexpired term by an election to be
conducted promptly by the Board consistent with the provisions for regular
elections herein stated.
§ 62-506. Legal title to assets.
Legal title to assets in the Aggregated Pension Trust Fund shall be in the
Board of Trustees, subject to the rights of any person having a beneficial
interest in a particular pension plan which is associated with the pension
trust fund.
§ 62-507. Investment of assets.
   A.   The standard of prudence to be applied by the Board of Trustees in the
investment of the aggregated pension funds shall be the "prudent investor
rule," which states, "Investments shall be made with judgment and care, under
circumstances then prevailing, which persons of prudence, discretion and
intelligence exercise in the management of their own affairs, not for
speculation, but for investment, considering the probable safety of their
capital as well as the probable income to be derived." The prudent investor
rule shall be applied in the context of managing the overall portfolio. The
Board acting in accordance with written procedures and exercising due diligence
shall be relieved of personal responsibility for an individual security's
credit risk or market price changes, provided deviation from expectations are
reported in a timely fashion and appropriate action is taken to control adverse
developments.
   B.   The assets of the Aggregated Pension Trust Fund shall be invested in
investment securities and/or other instruments which are authorized investments
pursuant to any applicable law for any of the associated pension plans.
   C.   The Board shall routinely monitor the contents of the portfolio, the
available markets and the relative values of competing instruments, and shall
adjust the portfolio accordingly.
   D.   Investments shall be diversified to preclude large losses from a single
position.
   E.   The Board may employ a professional money manager or portfolio manager
or other consultants or professionals as deemed necessary to aid in the
investment and/or administration of pension fund assets. Any procurement of
professional services shall be as required by Act 44.
   F.   Investment earnings shall be allocated to each associated pension plan
in proportion to the most recently determined participation value.
§ 62-508. Actuarial valuation, auditing and basis of accounting of pension
funds assets.
   A.   The Board of Trustees shall annually appoint an actuary or firm of
actuaries to complete such reports and provide such advice as are necessary for
the proper administration of the Aggregated Pension Trust Fund.
   B.   An actuarial valuation of assets shall be annually prepared pursuant to
the provisions of the Municipal Pension Plan Funding Standard and Recovery Act,
Act 1984-205, as amended, and any applicable rules and regulations issued by
the Public Employee Retirement Study Commission.
   C.   An actuarial valuation of the plan shall be prepared pursuant to the
provisions of the Municipal Pension Plan Funding and Standard Recovery Act and
any applicable rules and regulations issued by the Public Employee Retirement
Study Commission.
   D.   An annual audit shall be made by a certified public accountant or firm
of certified public accountants appointed by Board of Trustees. For accounting
purposes, the audit shall include a calculation of the value of participation
by each plan.
   E.   The accrual basis of accounting shall be used in conformance with
generally accepted accounting principles for the Aggregated Pension Trust Fund.
   F.   Value of participation by each plan to the Aggregated Pension Trust
Fund shall be calculated annually in accordance with the requirement of the
Municipal Pension Plan Funding Standard and Recovery Act, Act 1984-205, Section
607 (b)(1).
§ 62-509. Transfer of responsibility for investment, accounting, auditing and
administration to the Board of Trustees.
   A.   The existing managing boards of the pension funds aggregated hereunder,
following the effective date of this Part, continue to have the responsibility
for determining the eligibility for pension of any applicant under their
respective pension plan and for certifying of such determinations of
eligibility to the Board of Trustees created hereunder; such Boards, however,
shall, after May 1, 2017, no longer have any authority, right or responsibility
for the investment, accounting, auditing or administration of any of the funds
aggregated hereunder.
   B.   The Aggregated Pension Fund Board of Trustees shall not permit any
pension payment to any potential retiree without having first secured from the
appropriate pension board a certification as to the retiree's eligibility for
pension and calculation as to pensionable amount. Such documentation shall be
delivered to the Secretary of the aggregated board, accompanied by minutes of
the appropriate pension board, as to the board's vote regarding each individual
pension.
   C.   The Aggregated Pension Fund Board of Trustees shall, no later than
March 1 of each year, present to City Council:
      (1)   A report on the performance of the investments and of the
investment manager(s) for the prior calendar year; and
      (2)   A report summarizing by pension fund the name of each new
pensioner, the date on which retirement benefits began and the date on which
the appropriate board certified the pensioner's eligibility for pension.
   D.   The Aggregated Pension Fund Board of Trustees shall submit to City
Council with the administration's annual submission of the Budget a Board-
approved operating budget for the forthcoming calendar year.
Part 6
Officers and Employees Defined Contribution Plan
[Adopted 12-13-2021 by Ord. No. 75-2021]
§ 62-601. Officers and Employees Defined Contribution Plan.
   The City of Reading has adopted the City of Reading Officers and Employees
Defined Contribution Plan which is incorporated into this Chapter as
Appendix "B."
Appendix A
Corrective Retroactive Amendments
A-1. Definition of "compensation" is limited as follows:
   A.   For plan years beginning on or after January 1, 1989, and before
January 1, 1994.
Effective as of the first day of the first plan year beginning after 1988 and
ending before 1994, the annual compensation of each member taken into account
for any purpose under the system shall not exceed $200,000 [as adjusted under
Section 401(a)(17) of the code].
   B.   For plan years beginning on or after January 1, 1994, and before
January 1, 2002.
Effective for plan years beginning on or after January 1, 1994, and before
January 1, 1997, the annual compensation of each member taken into account for
any purpose under the system shall not exceed $150,000 [as adjusted under
Section 401(a)(17) of the code]. For plan years beginning on or after January
1, 1997, and before January 1, 2002, any reference herein to the limitation
under Section 401(a)(17) of the code shall mean the limit described herein;
specifically, $160,000 for any determination period beginning in 1997, 1998, or
1999; and $170,000 for any determination period beginning in 2000 or 2001. The
adjustment to the compensation limit under Section 401(a)(17) of the code in
effect for a calendar year applies to any period, not exceeding 12 months, over
which compensation is determined ("determination period") beginning in such
calendar year. If a determination period consists of fewer than 12 months, the
limit described herein will be multiplied by a fraction, the numerator of which
is the number of months in the determination period, and the denominator of
which is 12. If compensation for any prior determination period is taken into
account in determining a member’s benefit in the current plan year, the
compensation for that prior determination period is subject to the limit
described herein as in effect for that prior determination period.
   C.   Plan years beginning on or after January 1, 2002. The annual
compensation of each member taken into account in determining benefit accruals
in any plan year beginning after December 31, 2001, shall not exceed $200,000.
"Annual compensation" means compensation during the plan year or the
determination period. The $200,000 limit on annual compensation shall be
adjusted for cost-of- living increases in accordance with Section 401(a)(17)(B)
of the code. The cost-of- living adjustment in effect for a calendar year
applies to annual compensation for the determination period that begins with or
within such calendar year. If a determination period consists of fewer than 12
months, the annual compensation limit described herein will be multiplied by a
fraction, the numerator of which is the number of months in the determination
period, and the denominator of which is 12.
A-2. Section 415 limits on accrued benefits.
   A.   In general. Notwithstanding anything in the retirement system to the
contrary, the limitations on benefits and contributions contained in Section
415 of the code are generally applicable to benefits payable under the system
effective for plan years after December 31, 1975; except, however, a person who
was an active member before October 3, 1973, whose annual benefit [within the
meaning of Section 415(b)(2) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1954 (the 1954
code] does not exceed 100% of his annual rate of compensation on the earlier
of: i) October 2, 1973; or ii) the date on which he separated from City
service, and such annual benefit is not greater than the annual benefit which
would have been payable to the such member on retirement if: i) all the terms
and conditions of the system in existence on such date had remained in
existence until such retirement; and ii) his compensation taken into account
for any period after October 2, 1973, had not exceeded his annual rate of
compensation on such date, and in the case of a member who separated from City
service prior to October 2, 1973, such annual benefit is no greater than his
vested accrued benefit as of the date he separated from service, then such
annual benefit shall be treated as not exceeding the limitations of Subsection
415(b) of the 1954 Code.
   B.   Combined limit. Without negating the generality of A-2(A), for
limitation years beginning after December 31, 1975, and before January 1, 2000,
if a member participates in one or more defined benefit plans and makes member
contributions other than contributions treated as pickup contributions or
participates in one or more code Section 401(a) qualified defined contribution
plans, or a welfare benefit fund as defined in Section 419(e) of the code,
under which amounts attributable to postretirement medical benefits are
allocated to separate accounts of key employees, as defined in Section 419A(d)
(3) of the code, or an individual medical account, as defined in Section 415(1)
(2) of the code, which is part of a pension or annuity plan, the member’s
accrued benefit under the system shall be adjusted to the extent required, if
at all, so that the sum of the defined benefit fraction and the defined
contribution fraction for any limitation year shall not exceed 1.4 (effective
January 1, 1982, 1.0).
      (1)   Defined benefit fraction. The defined benefit fraction for any
limitation year is a fraction: a) the numerator of which is the member’s
projected annual benefit (determined as of the close of the limitation year)
under all such defined benefit plans (whether or not terminated); and b) the
denominator of which is i) the sum of the maximum amount of annual additions to
such account which could have been made for each year and for each prior year;
and ii) effective January 1, 1982, the lesser of A) $90,000, or the applicable
dollar limit under Section 415(b) of the code for such limitation year
multiplied by 1.25; or B) for limitation years ending before 1995, the member’s
average annual compensation for the three consecutive calendar years of active
participation, that produce the highest average, multiplied by 1.4.
      (2)   Defined contribution fraction. The defined contribution fraction
for any limitation year is a fraction: i) the numerator of which is the total
of the amount treated as annual additions, under Section 415(c) of the code, to
the member’s accounts as of the close of the limitation year under all defined
contribution plans (whether or not terminated); and ii) the denominator of
which is the lesser of the following amounts determined for the limitation year
and for each prior limitation year for which the member was an employee
(regardless of whether any plan was in existence during such year):
         (a)   Thirty thousand dollars, or the applicable dollar limit for each
such limitation year, multiplied by 1.25; or
         (b)   Thirty five percent of the member’s compensation, defined under
IRC § 415(c) as in effect before January 1, 2000, for each such limitation
year.
Appendix B
City of Reading Officers and Employees Defined Contribution Plan
[Adopted 12-13-2021 by Ord. No. 75-2021]
ARTICLE 1 - DEFINITIONS
B-1.1. References.
   A.   Act 205 means the Municipal Pension Plan Funding Standard and Recovery
Act, act of December 18, 1984, P.L.1005 no. 205, as amended, 53 P.S. 895.101,
et seq. as enacted by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
   B.   ERISA means the Employee Retirement Income Security Act of 1974, as
amended.
   C.   IRC means the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as it may be amended from
time to time.
B-1.2. Compensation.
   A.   Compensation means, except as provided in Section
B-1.2B. hereof, any earnings reportable as W-2 wages for federal income tax
withholding purposes plus elective contributions, for the determination period.
For this purpose, the determination period is the plan year.
      (1)   Picked-up contributions under IRC section 414(h)(2) shall be
included in the participant's compensation. Such earnings shall include any
amount contributed to a Roth elective deferral account under a qualified plan.
However, compensation shall not include any earnings reportable as W-2 wages
that are payable following the termination of employment pursuant to a
severance agreement.
      (2)   Elective contributions are amounts excludable from the employee's
gross income and contributed by the employer, at the employee's election to:
         (a)   A cafeteria plan (excludable under IRC section 125 and as
provided in Section
B-5.1C.(2));
         (b)   A IRC section 401(k) arrangement (excludable under IRC section
402(e)(3));
         (c)   A simplified employee pension (excludable under IRC section 402
(h));
         (d)   A tax sheltered annuity (excludable under IRC section 403(b));
         (e)   A deferred compensation plan excludable under IRC section 457
(b); or
         (f)   A IRC section 132(f)(4) qualified transportation fringe benefit
plan.
      (3)   Any reference in this plan to compensation shall be a reference to
the definition in this Section
B-1.2, unless the plan reference specifies a modification to this definition.
The plan administrator shall take into account only compensation actually paid
by the employer for the relevant period. A compensation payment includes
compensation by the employer through another person under the common paymaster
provisions in IRC sections 3121 and 3306. Compensation from an employer that is
not a participating employer under this plan shall be excluded.
   B.   Exclusions From Compensation - Notwithstanding the provisions of
Section
B-1.2A., the following types of remuneration shall be excluded from the
participant's compensation: No exclusions.
   C.   Limitations on Compensation.
      (1)   For any plan year beginning after December 31, 2001, the plan
administrator shall take into account only $200,000 (as adjusted for cost-of-
living increases in accordance with IRC section 401(a)(17)(B) for plan years
beginning on or after January 1, 2003) of any participant's annual compensation
for determining all benefits provided under the plan. The compensation dollar
limitation for a plan year shall be the limitation amount in effect on January
1 of the calendar year in which the plan year begins. Annual compensation means
compensation during the plan year or such other 12-consecutive-month period
over which compensation is otherwise determined under the plan (the
determination period for purposes of Section
B-1.2). If compensation for any prior determination period is taken into
account in determining a participant's allocations for the current plan year,
the compensation for such prior determination period is subject to the
applicable annual compensation limit in effect for that prior period. For any
plan year beginning on or before January 1, 2002, the plan administrator shall
take into account only $200,000. For any plan year beginning after December 31,
1995, the plan administrator shall take into account only $150,000 (or
beginning January 1, 1995, as adjusted for cost-of-living increases in
accordance with IRC section 401(a)(17)(B)) of any participant's compensation
for determining all benefits provided under the plan for a determination
period. If the plan should determine compensation on a period of time that
contains less than 12 calendar months (such as for a short plan year), the
annual compensation dollar limitation shall be an amount equal to the
compensation dollar limitation for the plan year multiplied by the ratio
obtained by dividing the number of full months in the period by 12.
      (2)   Notwithstanding the preceding, in the case of an eligible
participant, the annual compensation dollar limitation shall not apply to the
extent that the application of the limitation would reduce the amount of
compensation that is allowed to be taken into account under the plan below the
amount that was allowed to be taken into account under this plan as in effect
on July 1, 1993. For this purpose, an eligible participant is an individual who
first became a participant in the plan during a plan year prior to the first
day of the first plan year beginning after December 31, 1995.
B-1.3. Dates.
   A.   Accounting Date means the date(s) on which investment results are
allocated to participants' accounts as set forth below: December 31.
   B.   1.   Allocation Date means the last day of the of the plan year. The
allocation period for the employer contribution shall be the plan year.
      2.   Employee nondeductible contributions shall be allocated as of the
last day of each payroll period.
   C.   The Effective Date of the plan is January 1, 2022.
   D.   Plan Entry Date means the participation daters) specified in Article 2.
   E.   Plan Year means the 12-consecutive-month period beginning January 1,
2022 and ending December 31, 2022 and each succeeding 12-consecutive-month
period beginning on January 1 and ending on December 31.
   F.   Limitation Year means the plan year.
B-1.4. Employee.
   A.   Employee means any person employed by the employer. The term employee
shall include any employee of the employer maintaining the plan or of any other
employer required to be aggregated with such employer under IRC section 414(b),
(c), (m), or (o). The term employee shall also include any leased employee
deemed to be an employee of any such employer as provided in IRC section 414(n)
or (o) and as defined in Section
B-1.4B.
   B.   Leased Employee means an individual (who otherwise is not an employee
of the employer) who, pursuant to a leasing agreement between the employer and
any other person, has performed services for the employer (or for the employer
and any persons related "to the employer within the meaning of IRC section 414
(n)(6)) on a substantially full time basis for at least one year and such
services are performed under the primary direction or control of the employer.
If a leased employee is treated as an employee by reason of this Section
B-1.4B., compensation from the leasing organization that is attributable to
services performed for the employer shall be considered as compensation under
the plan. Contributions or benefits provided a leased employee by the leasing
organization that are attributable to services performed for the employer shall
be treated as provided by the employer.
B-1.5. Employer.
   A.   Employer means City of Reading, a political subdivision of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania (or agency or authority thereof), or any successor
entity that may assume the obligations of this plan with respect to its
employees by becoming a party to this plan.
   B.   In compliance with the exclusive benefit requirements of IRC section
401(a), the sponsorship of this plan may not be transferred to an unrelated
entity if the transfer is not in connection with a transfer of business assets
or operations from the employer to such entity.
B-1.6. Fiduciaries.
   A.   Chief Administrative Officer means the person appointed by the employer
or the employer's Board of Trustees as described in Section
B-6.2 who has primary responsibility for the execution of the administrative
affairs of the plan.
   B.   Plan Administrator means the person or persons appointed by the
employer to administer the plan.
   C.   Trustee means the trustee named in the trust agreement executed
pursuant to this plan, or any duly appointed successor trustee.
   D.   Investment Manager means a person or corporation other than the trustee
appointed for the investment of plan assets.
B-1.7. Participant/Beneficiary/Spouse.
   A.   Participant means an eligible employee of the employer who becomes a
member of the plan pursuant to the provisions of Article 2, or a former
employee who has an accrued benefit under the plan.
   B.   Beneficiary means a person designated by a participant who is or may
become entitled to a benefit under the plan. A beneficiary who becomes entitled
to a benefit under the plan remains a beneficiary under the plan until the
trustee has fully distributed his benefit to him. A beneficiary's right to (and
the plan administrator's, or a trustee's duty to provide to the beneficiary)
information or data concerning the plan shall not arise until he first becomes
entitled to receive a benefit under the plan.
   C.   Spouse means the person married to the participant at the time of the
determination as evidenced by a marriage certificate issued pursuant to a
license valid under the laws of the place of issuance.
   D.   Dependent means a dependent as defined by IRC section 152 without
regard to section 152(d)(1)(B).
B-1.8. Participant Accounts.
   A.   Accrued Benefit means the total of the participant's account balance(s)
as of the accounting date falling on or before the day on which the accrued
benefit is being determined.
   B.   Money Purchase Account means the balance of the separate account
derived from employer contributions provided under Section
B-3.2, including forfeitures (if any).
   C.   Employee Contribution Account means the balance of the separate account
derived from the participant's employee contributions as provided under Section
B-3.3.
   D.   Rollover/Transfer Account means the balance of the separate account
derived from rollover contributions and/or transfer contributions as provided
under Section
B-3.4.
B-1.9. Plan.
Plan means City of Reading Officers and Employees Defined Contribution Plan as
set forth herein and as it may be amended from time to time.
B-1.10. Service.
   A.   Application of This Section - The definitions and provisions of Section
B-1.10C. hour of service rules shall apply for the purpose of determining
vesting service. The definitions and provisions of Section
B-1.10D. elapsed time rule shall apply for the purpose of determining
eligibility service.
   B.   Service means any period of time the employee is in the employ of the
employer. Separation from service means that the employee no longer has an
employment relationship with the employer.
   C.   Service Determined by Hours of Service Credited.
      (1)   (a)   Hour of Service means:
            [1]   Each hour for which an employee is paid, or entitled to
payment, for the performance of duties for the employer. These hours shall be
credited to the employee for the computation period in which the duties are
performed; and
            [2]   Each hour for which an employee is paid, or entitled to
payment, by the employer on account of a period of time during which no duties
are performed (irrespective of whether the employment relationship has
terminated) due to vacation, holiday, illness, incapacity (including
disability), layoff, jury duty, military duty, or leave of absence. No more
than 501 hours of service shall be credited under this paragraph for any single
continuous period (whether or not such period occurs in a single computation
period). An hour of service shall not be credited to an employee under this
paragraph if the employee is paid, or entitled to payment, under a plan
maintained solely for the purpose of complying with applicable worker's
compensation or unemployment compensation or disability insurance laws; and
            [3]   Each hour for which back pay, irrespective of mitigation of
damages, is either awarded or agreed to by the employer, The same hours of
service shall not be credited both under clause (i) or clause (ii), as the case
may be, and under this clause (iii). These hours shall be credited to the
employee for the computation period or periods to which the award or agreement
pertains rather than the computation period in which the award, agreement, or
payment is made. Hours of service shall be determined on the basis of actual
hours for which an employee is paid or entitled to payment. The above
provisions shall be construed so as to resolve any ambiguities in favor of
crediting employees with hours of service.
         (b)   Solely for purposes of determining whether a break in service
for participation and vesting purposes has occurred in a computation period, an
individual who is absent from work on unpaid leave under the Family and Medical
Leave Act shall receive credit for the hours of service that would otherwise
have been credited to such individual but for such absence, or in any case in
which such hours cannot be determined, 8 hours of service per day of such
absence. Such an individual shall be treated as actively employed for the
purposes of participation and eligibility for an allocation of any employer
contribution that may be provided under this plan. Notwithstanding the
preceding, this paragraph shall not apply if the employer or the particular
employee is not subject to the requirements of the Family and Medical Leave Act
at the time of the absence.
         (c)   If the employer is a member of an affiliated service group under
IRC section 414(m) or a controlled group of corporations under IRC section 414
(b), or any other entity required to be aggregated with the employer pursuant
to IRC section 414(o) as these Internal Revenue Code provisions are applied to
a governmental entity, service shall be credited for any employment for any
period of time for any other member of such group. Service shall also be
credited for any leased employee who is considered an employee for purposes of
this plan under IRC section 414(n) or IRC section 414(o).
      (2)   Break in Service (or One Year Break in Service) means a 12-
consecutive-month computation period during which a participant or former
participant does not complete the specified number of hours of service with the
employer as set forth in Section
B-2.1B. (eligibility service) and Section
B-4.1B. (vesting service), as applicable per Section
B-1.10A.
      (3)   Year of Service means a 12-consecutive-month computation period
during which the employee completes the required number of hours of service
with the employer as specified in Section
B-2.1A. (eligibility service) and Section
B-4.1A. (vesting service), as applicable per Section
B-1.10A. For purposes of crediting years of service, hours of service credited
in accordance with Section
B-1.10C.(1)(c) shall be taken into account.
   D.   Service Determined by Elapsed Time.
      (1)   Hour of Service means each hour for which an employee is paid or
entitled to payment for the performance of duties for the employer.
      (2)   Break in Service means a period of severance of at least 12
consecutive months.
      (3)   (a)   Period of Severance means a continuous period of time during
which the employee is not employed by the employer and is not credited with an
hour of service. Such period begins on the date the employee retires,
terminates service, or if earlier, the date on which the employee was otherwise
first absent from service.
         (b)   If the employer is subject to the Family and Medical Leave Act
of 1993 due to its employment of fifty employees, in the case of an individual
who is absent from work for maternity or paternity reasons, the 12-consecutive-
month period beginning on the first anniversary of the first date of such
absence shall not constitute a break in service. For purposes of this
paragraph, an absence from work for maternity or paternity reasons means an
absence: (i) by reason of the pregnancy of the individual, (ii) by reason of
the birth of a child of the individual, (iii) by reason of the placement of a
child with the individual in connection with the adoption of such child by such
individual, or (iv) for purposes of caring for such child for a period
beginning immediately following such birth or placement.
      (4)   Other Service Credited -If the employer is a member of an
affiliated service group under IRC section 414(m) or a controlled group of
corporations under IRC section 414(b), or any other entity required to be
aggregated with the employer pursuant to IRC section 414(o) as these Internal
Revenue Code provisions are applied to a governmental entity, service shall be
credited for any employment for any period of time for any other member of such
group. Service shall also be credited for any leased employee who is considered
an employee for purposes of this plan under IRC section 414(n) or (o).
      (5)   Year of Service means 12 months of service, excluding any breaks in
service. For purposes of determining an employee's initial year of service upon
his employment or re-employment, the initial year of service shall commence on
the employee's first day of employment or re-employment. The first day of
employment is the first day the employee performs an hour of service. The first
day of reemployment is the first day the employee performs an hour of service
following a break in service. An initial year of service shall end on the day
immediately preceding the first anniversary of the employee's date of hire or
rehire. Any subsequent year of service shall commence on the day following the
completion of the immediately preceding year of service.
   E.   Crediting Years of Service - Generally, no service shall be credited
for periods during which the employee performs no services for the employer.
Further, no more than one year of service will be credited for any 12-
consecutive-month period.
   F.   Predecessor Service - If the employer maintains the plan of a
predecessor employer, service with such predecessor employer shall be treated
as service for the employer. If the employer does not maintain the plan of a
predecessor employer, then service as an employee of a predecessor employer
shall not be considered as service under the plan, unless this plan is so
amended.
   G.   Qualified Military Service.
      (1)   Notwithstanding any provision of this plan to the contrary,
effective December 12, 1994, contributions, benefits, and service credit with
respect to qualified military service will be provided in accordance with IRC
section 414(u) and the applicable Pennsylvania statutes. An employee reemployed
after qualified military service shall not be treated as having incurred a
break in service, for purposes of vesting and benefit accruals, solely because
of an absence due to qualified military service.
      (2)   Effective with respect to deaths occurring on or after January 1,
2007, in the case of a participant who dies while performing qualified military
service, the beneficiary(ies) of the participant shall be entitled to any
benefits payable under Section
B-4.2A.(5) that would have been payable had the participant resumed and then
immediately terminated employment on account of death.
B-1.11. Trust.
   A.   Trust means the qualified trust created under the employer's plan.
   B.   Trust Fund means all property held or acquired by the plan.
ARTICLE 2 - PARTICIPATION
B-2.1. Eligibility Service.
For purposes of determining an employee's initial or continued eligibility to
participate in the plan, an employee shall receive credit for the aggregate of
all time periods commencing with the employee's first day of employment or re-
employment and ending on the date a break in service begins, except for periods
of service disregarded under Section
B-2.4. The first day of employment or re-employment is the first day the
employee performs an hour of service. Fractional periods of a year will be
expressed in terms of days.
B-2.2. Plan Participation.
   A.   Eligibility.
      (1)   Eligibility for Purposes of Employee Contributions.
         (a)   Age/Service Requirements - An employee who is a member of the
eligible class of employees shall be eligible for the purpose of making
employee contributions (and any rights pertaining thereto) after he has
satisfied the following participation requirement(s):
            [1]   Completion of one hour of service with the employer.
            [2]   No age requirement.
         (b)   Eligible class of employees - All employees of the employer
shall be eligible to be covered under the plan except for employees in the
following categories:
            [1]   Individuals not directly employed by the employer as defined
in Section
B-1.5. An employee of an entity that is not a participating employer in this
plan shall not participate in this plan.
            [2]   Employees employed as police officers.
            [3]   Employees employed as paid firemen.
            [4]   Employees hired before January 1, 2022 who are covered under
the City of Reading Officers and Employees Pension Plan.
            [5]   Leased employees who are considered employees under the plan.
            [6]   Employees who are non-resident aliens (as defined in IRC
section 7701(b)(l)(B)) and who receive no earned income (as defined in IRC
section 911(d)(2)) from the employer that constitutes income from sources
within the United States (as defined in IRC section 861(a)(3)).
         (2)   Eligibility for All Other Purposes.
            (a)   Age/Service Requirements - An employee who is a member of the
eligible class of employees shall be eligible for participation for all
purposes under the plan after he has satisfied the following participation
requirement(s):
               [1]   Completion of 36 months of employment. An employee shall
not be required to complete any specified number of hours of service to receive
credit for such months of employment.
               [2]   No age requirement.
               [3]   Completion of the form consenting to mandatory employee
contributions under the plan.
            (b)   Eligible class of employees - All employees of the employer
shall be eligible to be covered under the plan except for employees in the
following categories:
               [1]   Individuals not directly employed by the employer as
defined in Section
B-1.5. An employee of an entity that is not a participating employer in this
plan shall not participate in this plan.
               [2]   Employees employed as police officers.
               [3]   Employees employed as paid firemen.
               [4]   Employees hired before January 1, 2022 who are covered
under the City of Reading Officers and Employees Pension Plan.
               [5]   Leased employees who are considered employees under the
plan.
               [6]   Employees who are non-resident aliens (as defined in IRC
section 7701(b)(l)(B)) and who receive no earned income (as defined in IRC
section 911(d)(2)) from the employer that constitutes income from sources
within the United States (as defined in IRC section 861(a)(3)).
   B.   Entry Date.
      (1)   Entry Date for Purposes of Employee Contribution Account
Contributions - An eligible employee shall participate in the plan for the
purpose of making employee contributions as of the first day for which he is
credited with an hour of service.
      (2)   Entry Date for All Other Purposes - An eligible employee shall
participate in the plan for all purposes as of the first day of the first
payroll period commencing on or after the date on which he has met the age and
service requirements, provided he is employed on that date.
B-2.3. Termination of Participation.
A participant shall continue to be an active participant of the plan so long as
he is a member of the eligible class of employees and he does not terminate
employment. He shall become an inactive participant when he terminates
employment or ceases to be a member of the eligible class of employees. He
shall cease participation completely upon the later of his receipt of a total
distribution of his nonforfeitable account balance under the plan or the
forfeiture of the nonvested portion of the account balance.
B-2.4. Re-Participation.
   A.   A former participant shall be deemed a new employee for participation
purposes.
   B.   If a participant becomes an inactive participant, because he is no
longer a member of the eligible class of employees; such inactive participant
shall become an active participant immediately upon returning to the eligible
class of employees. In the event an employee who is not a member of an eligible
class of employees becomes a member of an eligible class, such employee shall
participate immediately.
ARTICLE 3 - CONTRIBUTIONS TO PARTICIPANT ACCOUNTS
B-3.1. General Provisions.
   A.   Maintenance of Participant Accounts - The plan administrator shall
maintain one or more separate accounts covering each participant under the
plan. Such account(s) shall be increased by contributions, reallocation of
forfeitures (if any), investment income, and market value appreciation of the
fund. It shall be decreased by market value depreciation of the fund,
forfeiture of nonvested amounts, benefit payments, withdrawals, and expenses.
   B.   Amount and Payment of Employer Contribution.
      (1)   Amount of Contribution - For each plan year, the employer
contribution to the plan shall be the amount that is determined under the
provisions of this Article; provided, however, that the employer may not make a
contribution to the plan for any plan year to the extent the contribution would
exceed the participants' maximum permissible amounts under IRC section 415.
Further, the employer contribution shall not exceed the maximum amount that
would be deductible under IRC section 404.
      (2)   Payment of Contribution - The employer shall make its contribution
to the plan within the time prescribed by the IRC or applicable Treasury
regulations. The employer shall notify the trustee in writing as to the amount
being contributed with respect to each group of participants where this plan
covers more than one division, participating employer, eligible group, or
classification.
   C.   Limitations and Conditions.
      (1)   Notwithstanding the contribution amount set forth in this Article,
the contribution otherwise contributable to a participant's account under this
plan shall be limited or reduced as provided in Section
B-5.1.
      (2)   In any limitation year in which the contribution otherwise
contributable to a participant's account under this plan would exceed the
maximum permissible amount due to a contribution otherwise allocable to the
participant under another defined contribution plan that the employer also
sponsors, the contribution shall first be limited or reduced under such other
sponsored plan so that the annual additions for the limitation year will equal
the maximum permissible amount.
B-3.2. Allocation of Contributions and Forfeitures to Money Purchase Account.
   A.   Conditions for Allocations - An active participant shall be eligible
for an allocation of the employer contribution and forfeitures as of an
allocation date, provided that he completed at least one hour of service during
the current allocation period.
   B.   (1)   Contribution Formula. The employer will contribute a matching
contribution for each allocation period in an amount equal to:
         (a)   One hundred percent of the amount contributed by the participant
up to 5%. A participant's contributions in excess of 15% of his compensation
shall be disregarded for purposes of allocating the employer contribution.
      (2)   Compensation - For this purpose, compensation means compensation as
defined in Section
B-1.2A. and B. (subject to the limitations of Section
B-1.2C.) for the allocation period. Compensation includable under Section
B-1.2A. and B. but not paid through payroll shall be treated as being paid as
of the last day of the plan year or the last day of employment, if earlier.
   C.   Allocation of Forfeitures. Forfeitures for the plan year shall be used
to reduce employer contributions for the plan year in which such forfeitures
occur.
B-3.3. Employee Contribution Account.
   A.   Mandatory Contribution Amount - As a condition of participation in this
plan, each active participant must contribute 5% of his compensation each year
on an after-tax basis.
   B.   The employer shall contribute an amount equal to the mandatory employee
contribution amount set forth in Section
B-3.3A. as a pick-up contribution (pursuant to IRC section 414(h)(2)) in lieu
of the prior mandatory employee contribution. The contribution shall be made on
a pre-tax basis, and there shall be a corresponding reduction in compensation
paid to the participant. The contribution shall be credited to the
participant's employee contribution account.
   C.   Availability of Elective Employee Contributions - An active participant
may contribute, on an after-tax basis, a nondeductible amount not to exceed 85%
of his compensation (mandatory contributions inclusive). The contribution shall
be credited to the participant's employee contribution account. The plan
administrator may limit the amount of employee contributions, if he determines
that such limitation is necessary to meet the requirements under Code section
415, and regulations issued pursuant thereto, as set forth in Section
B-5.1.
   D.   Election Procedures - A notice of a participant's desire to make
employee contributions shall be given to the plan administrator in the manner
established by the plan administrator. The plan administrator shall provide a
written notice to all participants of the required procedures for making an
election and the date as of which an election will be effective. A participant
may make contributions in a single sum, or he may make periodic contributions
by authorizing the employer to withhold contributions from the compensation
paid to him by the employer. A participant electing to make periodic
contributions will be deemed to desire to continue to contribute at the same
rate, unless he notifies the plan administrator of his desire to contribute at
a different rate. The revised contribution election shall be effective in
accordance with the plan administrator's published procedures. Contributions
through employer withholding may be discontinued at any time upon proper notice
in the manner established by the plan administrator.
B-3.4. Rollover/Transfer Account.
   A.   Rollover Contributions.
      (1)   An active participant may contribute to his rollover/transfer
account any amounts that he previously received either as a lump sum
distribution (as defined in IRC section 402(e)(4)(D)) provided that he
transfers such distribution to this plan within sixty (60) days after receipt.
      (2)   Before accepting a rollover contribution, the trustee may require
an employee to furnish satisfactory evidence that the proposed transfer is in
fact a "rollover contribution" that the IRC permits an employee to make to a
qualified plan. If and to the extent the transferring plan is represented to be
a retirement plan qualified under 401(a) that is not sponsored by a church or
governmental agency, the employee shall not be required to furnish such
evidence, except with respect to Roth or other after-tax accounting. Further,
no evidence shall be required when the check is issued by a financial
institution indicating that the distribution is from an individual retirement
account, 403(b) account, or a governmental entity 457(b) account previously
maintained for the benefit of the employee. The acceptable sources for a
rollover contribution shall be as set forth in Section
B-3.4B. Notwithstanding the preceding or the provisions of Section
B-3.4B., this plan will not accept a rollover from a Roth elective deferral
account or an IRC section 408A Roth individual retirement account.
   B.   Transfer Contributions.
      (1)   With the consent of the plan administrator, an active participant
may have funds transferred directly to this plan from another qualified plan.
Consent shall not be given if the optional forms of payment to which the funds
are subject under the prior plan are not properly disclosed by the prior plan
or cannot be accommodated by this plan and trust.
      (2)   Effective for requests received on or after January 1, 2002, with
the consent of the plan administrator, the participant may have the following
transfers made on his behalf directly to this plan (or may make the following
rollover contributions as permitted below):
         (a)   A direct rollover of an eligible rollover distribution from a
qualified plan described in IRC section 401(a) or 403(a), including after-tax
employee contributions.
         (b)   Transfers from a Roth elective deferral account under a
qualified IRC section 401(a) plan shall not be permitted. A direct rollover of
an eligible rollover distribution from an annuity contract described in IRC
section 403(b), including after-tax employee contributions.
         (c)   Transfers from a Roth elective deferral account under a IRC
section 403(b) account shall not be permitted.
         (d)   A direct rollover or a participant contribution of an eligible
rollover distribution from an eligible plan under IRC section 457(b) that is
maintained by a state, political subdivision of a state, or any agency or
instrumentality of a state or political subdivision of a state.
         (e)   A participant rollover contribution of the portion of a
distribution from an individual retirement account or annuity described in IRC
section 408(a) or 403(b) (including an account more specifically described
under IRC section 408(k) or (p)) that is eligible to be rolled over and would
otherwise be includable in gross income.
         (f)   If the plan administrator later determines that the contribution
was an invalid transfer contribution, the plan administrator shall distribute
the amount of the invalid contribution, plus any earnings attributable thereto,
to the employee within a reasonable time after such determination.
   C.   Contributions Before Plan Entry Date - An employee, (who is in the
eligible class of employees) prior to satisfying the plan's eligibility
conditions, may make a rollover or transfer contribution to the plan to the
same extent and in the same manner as a participant. If an employee makes a
rollover or transfer contribution to the plan before satisfying the plan's
eligibility conditions, the plan administrator and trustee will treat the
employee as a participant for all purposes of the plan, except the employee is
not a participant for purposes of sharing in employer contributions or
forfeitures under the plan until he actually becomes a participant in the plan.
If the employee has a separation from service prior to becoming a participant,
the trustee will distribute his rollover/transfer account to him.
   D.   Distribution - The participant's rollover/transfer account shall be
held subject to separate accounting and shall always be 100% vested and
nonforfeitable. The rollover/transfer account shall be subject to distribution
in the same manner as the money purchase account.
B-3.5. Allocation of Investment Results.
   A.   General Allocation Procedure. Investment income and market value
appreciation or depreciation shall be allocated and credited to each account of
each participant who has accrued benefits in proportion to the respective
account balances on each accounting date. For this purpose, each account
balance shall be equal to the average balance for the period commencing on the
day following the prior accounting date and ending on the current accounting
date.
   B.   Investment Elections.
      (1)   A participant may elect to have his employee contribution account
and any rollover/transfer account invested in such investment fund or
combination of investment funds as may be established by the trustee and made
available for the benefit of participants; provided, however, that in no event
may the participant direct that any portion of his account be invested in
collectibles (as defined in IRC section 408(m)). A participant's investment
election shall not apply to any portion of the account that may be invested in
a participant loan sub-account established under Section
B-4.4. The investment results shall be allocated to the participant's account
based upon earnings and losses on the participant's share in such investment
fund or funds.
      (2)   The terms and conditions for investment direction shall be
established by the plan administrator. An election may be revoked only by
another election and will remain in effect until such revocation. If no initial
election is timely received by the plan administrator, the plan administrator
shall invest the account in a fund designated for such purpose.
ARTICLE 4 - PAYMENT OF PARTICIPANT ACCOUNTS
B-4.1. Vesting Service Rules.
   A.   Vesting Year of Service means a vesting computation period during which
the employee completes at least 1,000 hours of service with the employer. All
of an employee's years of service with the employer shall be counted to
determine the nonforfeitable percentage in the employee's account balance
derived from employer contributions, except:
      (1)   Years of service disregarded under the break in service rules in
Section
B-4.1D.
      (2)   Years of service before the employer maintained this plan or a
predecessor plan.
   B.   One Year Break in Service means for the purposes of this Article 4 a
vesting computation period during which the employee or former employee does
not complete more than 500 hours of service with the employer.
   C.   Vesting Computation Period means the 12-consecutive-month period
coinciding with the plan year.
   D.   Break in Service Rules.
      (1)   Vested Participant - A former participant who had a nonforfeitable
right to all or a portion of his account balance derived from employer
contributions at the time of his termination from service shall retain credit
for all vesting years of service prior to a break in service as that term is
defined in Section
B-4.1B.
      (2)   Nonvested Participant or Employee - In the case of a former
participant or employee who did not have any nonforfeitable right to his
account balance derived from employer contributions at the time of his
termination from service, years of vesting service before a period of
consecutive one-year breaks in service shall not be taken into account in
computing service if the number of consecutive one-year breaks in service in
such period equals or exceeds the aggregate number of years of vesting service
before such breaks in service. Such aggregate number of years of service shall
not include any years of service disregarded under the preceding sentence by
reason of prior breaks in service.
B-4.2. Vesting of Participant Accounts.
   A.   Determination of Vesting.
      (1)   Normal Retirement - An employee's right to his accrued benefit
shall be 100% vested and nonforfeitable upon the attainment of age 65, the
normal retirement age. The vesting of an inactive participant who terminates
employment prior to normal retirement age shall remain subject to the
provisions of the vesting schedule following attainment of such specified age.
Distributions shall be administered in accordance with termination from
employment provisions of Section
B-4.3A.(3).
      (2)   Late Retirement - If a participant remains employed after his
normal retirement age, his accrued benefit shall remain 100% vested and
nonforfeitable. Such participant shall continue to receive allocations to his
account as he did before his normal retirement age.
      (3)   Early Retirement - No accelerated vesting based on age shall be
provided prior to the participant's attainment of normal retirement age.
      (4)   Disability - No accelerated vesting shall be provided due to the
participant's disability.
      (5)   (a)   Death - In the event of the death of a participant who has an
accrued benefit under the plan, (whether or not he is an active participant),
100% of the participant's accrued benefit as of the date of death shall be paid
to his designated beneficiary.
         (b)   Beneficiary Designation.
            [1]   The participant shall have the right to designate his
beneficiaries, including a contingent death beneficiary, and shall have the
right at any time to change such beneficiaries. The designation shall be made
in writing, either on a form signed by the participant and supplied by and
filed with the plan administrator or through an electronic procedure
established by the plan administrator. If the participant fails to designate a
beneficiary, or if the designated person or persons predecease the participant,
"beneficiary" shall mean the spouse, children, parents, siblings (by the whole
blood or adoption), or estate of the participant, in the order listed. For this
purpose, the terms children, parents, and siblings shall exclude step
relationships.
            [2]   In the absence of a beneficiary designation duly filed or
otherwise recorded, if a designated beneficiary dies after the participant has
died but before the plan has commenced distribution to the designated
beneficiary, the plan shall be administered as set forth in this paragraph. The
death benefit will be paid to the designated beneficiary's estate in one lump
sum. If the deceased designated beneficiary was not the participant's surviving
spouse, distribution will be completed by December 31 of the fifth year
following the participant's date of death. If the deceased designated
beneficiary was the participant's surviving spouse, distribution will be
completed by December 31 of the fifth year following the beneficiary's date of
death.
            [3]   For purposes of this Section
B-4.2A.(5), if the designated beneficiary of the participant dies
simultaneously with the participant, the participant shall be deemed to be the
survivor and to have died subsequent to such designated beneficiary. Likewise,
if a beneficiary named by a designated beneficiary dies simultaneously with a
designated beneficiary, the designated beneficiary shall be deemed to be the
survivor and to have died subsequent to the beneficiary named by the designated
beneficiary.
            [4]   If a participant designates his spouse as the beneficiary and
the participant and such spouse are legally divorced subsequent to the date of
such designation; then, the designation shall be administered as if such spouse
had predeceased the participant unless the participant, subsequent to the legal
divorce, reaffirms the designation by completing a new beneficiary designation
and duly filing or otherwise recording it with the plan administrator.
      (6)   Termination From Service - If a participant separates from the
service of the employer other than by retirement, disability, or death, his
vested interest in his money purchase account shall be equal to the account
balance multiplied by the applicable vesting percentage based on his vesting
years of service as follows:
 
Years of Service Vesting Percentage
0-2 Years        0%
3 or More Years  100%
 
      (7)   Forfeiture for Malfeasance - Notwithstanding any other provision of
this plan, a participant who is convicted or pleads guilty to engaging in
criminal misconduct which constitutes a "crime related to public office or
public employment," as that phrase is defined in Pennsylvania Pension
Forfeiture Act, 43 P.S. 1311-1314 and interpreted thereunder, shall forfeit his
right to receive a pension benefit under this plan. In such a case, the
participant shall only be entitled to receive the contributions, if any, he
made under Section
B-3.3, without interest.
   B.   Forfeitures.
      (1)   Time of Forfeiture - If a participant terminates employment before
his account balance derived from employer contributions is fully vested, the
nonvested portion of his account shall be forfeited on the earlier of:
         (a)   The last day of the vesting computation period in which the
participant first incurs a one-year breaks in service, or
         (b)   The date the participant receives his entire vested account
balance. If a participant returns to employment with the employer, and if the
forfeited amount is restored pursuant to Section
B-4.2B.(2)(b), then any amount required to restore such forfeitures shall be
deducted from forfeitures occurring in the plan year of restoration. If
forfeitures are insufficient for the restoration, the employer may make a
contribution to the plan for such plan year to satisfy the restoration.
However, by the end of the plan year following the plan year of restoration,
sufficient forfeitures or employer contributions shall be credited to the
account to satisfy the restoration.
      (2)   Cashout Distributions and Restoration.
         (a)   Cashout Distribution.
            [1]   If an employee terminates service and the value of his vested
account balance(s) derived from employer and employee contributions is not
greater than $5,000, the employee shall receive a distribution of the value of
the entire vested portion of such account balance(s) and the nonvested portion
will be treated as a forfeiture. If an employee would have received a
distribution under the preceding sentence but for the fact that the employee's
vested account balance exceeded $5,000 when the employee terminated service and
if at a later time such account balance is reduced such that it is not greater
than $5,000, the employee will receive a distribution of such account balance
and the nonvested portion will be treated as a forfeiture. For purposes of this
section, if the value of an employee's vested account balance is zero, he shall
be deemed to have received a distribution of such vested account balance. For
the purpose of determining the value of a participant's vested account balance,
prior distributions shall be disregarded if distributions have not commenced
under an optional form of payment described in Section
B-4.3.
            [2]   The value of a participant's vested account balance shall be
determined without regard to the account balance that is attributable to
rollover contributions (and earnings allocable thereto) within the meaning of
IRC sections 402(c), 403(a)(4), 403(b)(8), 408(d)(3)(A)(ii), and 457(e)(16).
            [3]   If an employee terminates service and elects, in accordance
with the requirements of Section
B-4.3, to receive the value of his vested account balance, the nonvested
portion shall be treated as a forfeiture as of the date of distribution. If the
employee elects to have distributed less than the entire vested portion of the
account balance derived from employer contributions, the part of the nonvested
portion that will be treated as a forfeiture is the total nonvested portion
multiplied by a fraction, the numerator of which is the amount of the
distribution attributable to employer contributions and the denominator of
which is the total value of the vested employer-derived account balance.
         (b)   Restoration of Account - If an employee receives a cashout
distribution pursuant to this section and resumes employment covered under this
plan before he incurs a break in service, his employer-derived account balance
shall be restored to the amount on the date of distribution, if he repays to
the plan the full amount of the distribution attributable to employer
contributions before the earlier of one year after the first date on which he
is subsequently re-employed by the employer, or the date he incurs a break in
service following the date of the distribution. If an employee is deemed to
receive a distribution pursuant to this Section
B-4.2B.(2), and he resumes employment covered under this plan before he incurs
a break in service, upon the re-employment of such employee his employer-
derived account balance will be restored to the amount on the date of such
deemed distribution.
   C.   Withdrawal of Employee Nondeductible Contributions - No forfeitures
shall occur solely as a result of an employee's withdrawal of employee
nondeductible contributions.
B-4.3. Payment of Participant Accounts.
   A.   Time of Payment.
      (1)   Commencement of Benefits - Subject to the limitations of this plan,
the plan administrator shall have full authority to determine the time of
payment of any benefit.
      (2)   Payment Upon Retirement, Disability, or Death - Subject to the
provisions set forth in the Distribution Requirements of Section
B-5.2, if the participant terminates employment due to retirement, disability,
or death, his account(s) shall be paid as soon as administratively possible
after the occurrence of the event creating the right to a distribution.
      (3)   Payment Upon Other Termination of Employment.
         (a)   Subject to the provisions set forth in the Distribution
Requirements of Section
B-5.2, if the participant terminates employment other than by retirement,
disability, or death, his account(s) shall be paid as soon as administratively
possible after the date of severance of employment.
         (b)   Notwithstanding the preceding, an alternate payee may elect to
have paid the amount determined under the qualified domestic relations order as
soon as administratively possible following the date permitted under Section
B-4.5.
      (4)   Notwithstanding the foregoing, the failure of a participant to
consent to a distribution while a benefit is immediately distributable shall be
deemed to be an election to defer commencement of payment of any benefit
sufficient to satisfy this section. An account balance is immediately
distributable if any part of the account balance could be distributed to the
participant (or surviving spouse) before the participant attains (or would have
attained if not deceased) the later of normal retirement age or age 62.
   B.   Form of Payment.
      (1)   A participant or beneficiary may elect to receive distribution of
his account(s) as a lump sum benefit payment. The participant or beneficiary
shall make a request for benefits through the procedures established by the
plan administrator before payment will be made. The lump sum benefit payment
shall be made in cash from the fund. However, if the vested accrued benefit is
no more than $5,000, benefits shall automatically be paid in a lump sum.
      (2)   If a distribution is required under the Distribution Requirements
of Section
B-5.2, the participant fails to elect payment, and the vested balance of the
account(s) exceeds $5,000, the trustee shall pay the benefit in installment
payments that meet the requirements of Section
B-5.2 over the joint life and last survivor expectancy of the participant and
his designated beneficiary. If the vested balance of the account(s) does not
exceed $5,000, the trustee shall distribute the entire account balance in a
lump sum.
   C.   General Payment Provisions.
      (1)   (a)   All distributions due to be made under this plan shall be
made on the basis of the amount to the credit of the participant as of the
accounting date coincident with or immediately preceding the date of
distribution.
         (b)   If a distributable event occurs after an allocation date and
before allocations have been made to the account of the participant, the
distribution shall also include the amounts allocable to the account as of such
allocation date.
      (2)   (a)   If any person entitled to receive benefits hereunder is
physically or mentally incapable of receiving or acknowledging receipt thereof,
and if a legal guardian or power of attorney has been appointed for him, the
plan administrator may direct the benefit payment to be made to such legal
representative. The plan administrator may cause benefits to be paid to any
other individual recognized by the state law under which the plan trust has
been established.
         (b)   In the event a distribution is to be made to a minor
beneficiary, then the plan administrator may direct that such distribution be
paid to the legal guardian, or if none, to a parent of such beneficiary or a
responsible adult with whom the beneficiary maintains his residence, or to the
custodian for such beneficiary under the Uniform Gift to Minors Act or the Gift
to Minors Act, if such is permitted by the laws of the state in which said
beneficiary resides. Such a payment to the legal guardian, custodian or parent
of a minor beneficiary shall fully discharge the trustee, employer, plan
administrator, and plan from further liability on account thereof.
      (3)   (a)   Any annuity contract distributed herefrom shall be
nontransferable. The terms of any such annuity contract purchased and
distributed by the plan shall comply with the requirements of this plan. The
ownership of the annuity contract shall reside with the participant.
         (b)   Any dividend, refund or recovery on an annuity contract shall be
credited to the participant or beneficiary for whom the annuity contract was
purchased.
      (4)   The participant's election of a form of benefit payment shall be
irrevocable as of the annuity starting date, subject to the notice requirements
contained in Section
B-4.3E.
   D.   Eligible Rollover Distributions. A distributee may elect, at the time
and in the manner prescribed by the plan administrator, to have any portion of
an eligible rollover distribution paid directly to an eligible retirement plan
specified by the distributee in a direct rollover.
      (1)   Eligible Rollover Distribution.
         (a)   An eligible rollover distribution is any distribution of all or
any portion of the balance to the credit of the distributee, except that an
eligible rollover distribution does not include: any distribution that is one
of a series of substantially equal periodic payments (not less frequently than
annually) made for the life (or life expectancy) of the distributee or the
joint lives (or joint life expectancies) of the distributee and the
distributee's designated beneficiary, or for a specified period of ten years or
more; any distribution to the extent such distribution is required under IRC
section 401(a)(9) including any portion of such distribution that is not
includable in gross income (determined without regard to the exclusion for net
unrealized appreciation with respect to employer securities); any hardship
withdrawal; and any other distribution(s) that is reasonably expected to total
less than $200 during a year.
         (b)   A portion of a distribution shall not fail to be an eligible
rollover distribution merely because the portion consists of after-tax employee
contributions that are not includible in gross income. However, such portion
may be transferred only to: (A) a traditional individual retirement account or
annuity described in IRC section 408(a) or (b) (traditional IRA) or a Roth
individual retirement account or annuity described in IRC section 408A (Roth
IRA); or (B) a qualified plan or an annuity contract described in IRC section
401(a) and 403(b), respectively, that agrees to separately account for amounts
so transferred (and earnings thereon), including separately accounting for the
portion of such distribution that is includible in gross income and the portion
of such distribution that is not so includible.
      (2)   Eligible Retirement Plan - An eligible retirement plan is a
traditional IRA, a Roth IRA, an annuity plan described in IRC section 403(a),
an annuity contract described in IRC section 403(b), a qualified plan described
in IRC section 401(a), that accepts the distributee's eligible rollover
distribution, or an eligible plan under IRC section 457(b) that is maintained
by a state, political subdivision of a state, or any agency or instrumentality
of a state or political subdivision of a state and that agrees to separately
account for amounts transferred into such plan from this plan. The definition
of eligible retirement plan shall also apply in the case of a distribution to a
surviving spouse, or to a spouse or former spouse who is the alternate payee
under a qualified domestic relations order, as defined in IRC section 414(p).
      (3)   Distributee - A distributee includes an employee or former
employee. The employee's or former employee's surviving spouse and the
employee's or former employee's spouse or former spouse who is the alternate
payee under a qualified domestic relations order, as defined in IRC section 414
(p), are distributees with regard to the interest of the spouse or former
spouse. Effective for death benefit distributions made on or after January 1,
2007, a distributee shall include a nonspouse beneficiary but only with respect
to a direct transfer to an inherited traditional IRA or Roth IRA established on
his behalf for the purpose of receiving the distribution.
      (4)   Direct Rollover - A direct rollover is a payment by the plan to the
eligible retirement plan specified by the distributee.
      (5)   Automatic Rollovers.
         (a)   In the event of a mandatory distribution greater than $1,000 in
accordance with the provisions of Section
B-4.2B.(2)(a), if the participant does not elect to have such distribution paid
directly to an eligible retirement plan specified by the participant in a
direct rollover or to receive the distribution directly in accordance with
Section
B-4.3E., then the plan administrator shall pay the distribution in a direct
rollover to an individual retirement plan designated by the plan administrator.
For purposes of determining whether a mandatory distribution is greater than
$1,000, the portion of the participant's distribution attributable to any
rollover contribution shall be included.
         (b)   If a distribution of $5,000 or less is made to a participant but
the check remains uncashed for 24 months, the plan administrator shall pay the
distribution in a direct rollover to an individual retirement plan designated
by the plan administrator. If the distribution is $1,000 or less, such
disbursement shall be made only to the extent the financial institution will
accept the amount.
   E.   Payment Election Procedures. An account balance in excess of $5,000
shall not be immediately distributed without the consent of the participant.
For any distribution in excess of $200, the plan administrator shall give the
participant a written notice of his eligible rollover distribution rights as
required under IRC section 402(f) no less than 30 days and no more than 180
days before the proposed distribution date. A participant may elect to waive
any requirement that the written explanation and notice be given at least 30
days before the annuity starting date, provided that:
      (1)   The participant is provided with information that clearly states
that the participant has a right to a period of at least 30 days after
receiving the written explanation and notice to consider the decision of
whether or not to elect a distribution (and, if applicable, a particular
distribution option), and
      (2)   (a)   The participant, after receiving the written explanation and
notice, affirmatively elects a distribution.
         (b)   If and to the extent the participant elects multiple
destinations for his direct rollover distributions, he may designate the
allocation of the pretax amounts. In the event of a mandatory distribution
greater than $1,000 in accordance with the provisions of Section
B-4.2B.(2)(a), if the participant does not elect to have such distribution paid
directly to an eligible retirement plan specified by the participant in a
direct rollover or to receive the distribution directly in accordance with
Section
B-4.3D., then the plan administrator will pay the distribution in a direct
rollover to an individual retirement plan designated by the plan administrator.
B-4.4. In-Service Payments.
   A.   Withdrawals.
      (1)   An employee may not withdraw amounts from his account(s) before his
separation from service, except under the circumstances and only to the extent
provided below.
      (2)   No payments shall be made before separation from service.
   B.   Participant Loans - No participant loans shall be permitted under this
plan.
B-4.5. Distributions Under Domestic Relations Orders.
   A.   Nothing contained in this plan prevents the trustee, in accordance with
the direction of the plan administrator, from complying with the provisions of
a qualified domestic relations order (as defined in IRC section 414(p)).
   B.   This plan specifically permits distribution to an alternate payee under
a qualified domestic relations order at any time, irrespective of whether the
participant has attained his earliest retirement age (as defined under IRC
section 414(p)) under the plan. A distribution to an alternate payee prior to
the participant's attainment of earliest retirement age is available only if
the order specifies distribution at that time or permits an agreement between
the plan and the alternate payee to authorize an earlier distribution. If the
present value of the alternate payee's benefits under the plan exceeds $5,000
and the order requires, the alternate payee must consent to any distribution
occurring prior to the participant's attainment of earliest retirement age.
   C.   Nothing in this Section gives a participant a right to receive
distribution at a time otherwise not permitted under the plan nor does it
permit the alternate payee to receive a form of payment not otherwise permitted
under the plan.
   D.   The plan administrator shall establish reasonable procedures to
determine the qualified status of a domestic relations order. Upon receiving a
domestic relations order, the plan administrator promptly will notify the
participant and any alternate payee named in the order, in writing, of the
receipt of the order and the plan's procedures for determining the qualified
status of the order. Within a reasonable period of time after receiving the
domestic relations order, the plan administrator shall determine the qualified
status of the order and shall notify the participant and each alternate payee,
in writing, of its determination. The plan administrator shall provide notice
under this paragraph by mailing to the individual's address specified in the
domestic relations order.
   E.   If any portion of the participant's nonforfeitable accrued benefit is
payable during the period the plan administrator is making its determination of
the qualified status of the domestic relations order, the plan administrator
shall make a separate accounting of the amounts payable. If the plan
administrator determines the order is a qualified domestic relations order
within 18 months of the date amounts first are payable following receipt of the
order, it shall direct the trustee to distribute the payable amounts in
accordance with the order. If the plan administrator does not make its
determination of the qualified status of the order within the 18-month
determination period, it shall direct the trustee to distribute the payable
amounts in the manner the plan would distribute if the order did not exist and
shall apply the order prospectively if it later determines the order is a
qualified domestic relations order.
ARTICLE 5 - ADDITIONAL QUALIFICATION RULES
B-5.1. Limitations on Allocations Under IRC Section 415.
   A.   Single Plan Limitations.
      (1)   If the participant does not participate in, and has never
participated in another qualified plan maintained by the employer, or a welfare
benefit fund (as defined in IRC section 419(e)) maintained by the employer, or
an individual medical account (as defined in IRC section 415(l)(2)) maintained
by the employer, that provides an annual addition as defined in Section
B-5.1C.(1), the amount of annual additions that may be credited to the
participant's account for any limitation year will not exceed the lesser of the
maximum permissible amount or any other limitation contained in this plan. If
the employer contribution that would otherwise be contributed or allocated to
the participant's account would cause the annual additions for the limitation
year to exceed the maximum permissible amount, the amount contributed or
allocated will be reduced so that the annual additions for the limitation year
will equal the maximum permissible amount.
      (2)   Prior to determining the participant's actual compensation for the
limitation year, the employer may determine the maximum permissible amount for
a participant on the basis of a reasonable estimation of the participant's
compensation for the limitation year, uniformly determined for all participants
similarly situated.
      (3)   As soon as is administratively feasible after the end of the
limitation year, the maximum permissible amount for the limitation year will be
determined on the basis of the participant's actual compensation for the
limitation year.
      (4)   If a participant elects to make employee nondeductible
contributions that together with any contribution the employer is obligated to
make under the terms of this plan would otherwise cause the annual additions
for the limitation year to exceed the maximum permissible amount, the
contribution election of the participant shall be limited before any employer
contribution is reduced so that the annual additions for the limitation year
will equal the maximum permissible amount.
   B.   Combined Limitations - Other Defined Contribution Plan.
      (1)   This Section
B-5.1B. applies if, in addition to this plan, the participant is covered under
another qualified defined contribution plan maintained by the employer, a
welfare benefit fund maintained by the employer, or an individual medical
account maintained by the employer, that provides an annual addition as defined
in Section
B-5.1C.(1), during any limitation year. The annual additions that may be
credited to a participant's account under this plan for any such limitation
year will not exceed the maximum permissible amount reduced by the annual
additions credited to a participant's account under the other plans welfare
benefit funds, and individual medical accounts for the same limitation year. If
the annual additions with respect to the participant under other qualified
defined contribution plans, welfare benefit funds, and individual medical
accounts maintained by the employer are less than the maximum permissible
amount and the employer contribution that would otherwise be contributed or
allocated to the participant's account under this plan would cause the annual
additions for the limitation year to exceed this limitation, the amount
contributed or allocated will be reduced so that the annual additions under all
such plans and funds for the limitation year will equal the maximum permissible
amount. If the annual additions with respect to the participant under such
other qualified defined contribution plans, welfare benefit funds, and
individual medical accounts in the aggregate are equal to or greater than the
maximum permissible amount, no amount will be contributed or allocated to the
participant's account under this plan for the limitation year.
      (2)   Prior to determining the participant's actual compensation for the
limitation year, the employer may determine the maximum permissible amount for
a participant in the manner described in Section
B-5.1A.(2).
      (3)   As soon as is administratively feasible after the end of the
limitation year, the maximum permissible amount for the limitation year will be
determined on the basis of the participant's actual compensation for the
limitation year.
      (4)   If, pursuant to Section
B-5.1B.(3) or as a result of the allocation of forfeitures, a participant's
annual additions under this plan and such other plans would result in an excess
amount for a limitation year, the excess amount will be deemed to consist of
the annual additions last allocated, except that annual additions attributable
to a welfare benefit fund or individual medical account will be deemed to have
been allocated first regardless of the actual allocation date.
      (5)   If an allocation date of this plan coincides with an allocation
date of another plan and the employee or employer contribution that would
otherwise be contributed or allocated to a participant's account under the
plans would cause the annual additions for the limitation year to exceed the
maximum permissible amount. Section
B-3.1C. shall control which contribution or allocation will be reduced so that
the annual additions for the limitation year will equal the maximum permissible
amount.
   C.   Definitions (IRC Section 415 Limitations).
      (1)   Annual Additions.
         (a)   The sum of the following amounts credited to a participant's
account for the limitation year: (A) employer contributions; (B) employee
contributions (excluding catch-up contributions made in accordance with IRC
section 414(v)); (C) forfeitures; and (D) amounts allocated, after March
31,1984, to an individual medical account as defined in IRC section 415(l)(2),
that is part of a pension or annuity plan maintained by the employer are
treated as annual additions to a defined contribution plan. Also, amounts
derived from contributions paid or accrued after December 31,1985 (in taxable
years ending after such date), that are attributable to post retirement medical
benefits allocated to the separate account of a key employee (as defined in IRC
section 419A(d)(3)) under a welfare benefit fund (as defined in IRC section 419
(e)) maintained by the employer are treated as annual additions to a defined
contribution plan. Picked-up contributions under IRC section 414(h)(2) shall
not be included as an annual addition with respect to a participant.
         (b)   Restorative payments allocated to a participant's account
including restorative payments made pursuant to Section
B-4.2B.(2)(b) and payments made to restore losses to the plan resulting from
actions (or a failure to act) by a fiduciary for which there is a reasonable
risk of liability under an applicable federal or state law (where similarly
situated participants are treated similarly) shall not give rise to an annual
addition for any limitation year.
      (2)   Compensation.
         (a)   A participant's earned income and any earnings reportable as W-
2 wages for federal income tax withholding purposes. W-2 wages means wages as
defined in IRC section 3401(a) but determined without regard to any rules that
limit the remuneration included in wages based on the nature or location of the
employment or the services performed (such as the exception for agricultural
labor in IRC section 3401(a)(2)). Picked-up contributions under IRC section 414
(h)(2) shall not be included in the participant's compensation.
         (b)   For purposes of applying the limitations of this Section
B-5.1, compensation for a limitation year is the compensation actually paid or
includable in gross income during such limitation year. Compensation for a
limitation year shall include amounts earned but not paid during the limitation
year solely because of the timing of pay periods and pay dates, provided the
amounts are paid during the first few weeks of the next limitation year, the
amounts are included on a uniform and consistent basis with respect to all
similarly situated employees, and no compensation is included in more than one
limitation year.
         (c)   Back pay, within the meaning of Treasury Regulation section
1.415(c)-2(g)(8), shall be treated as compensation for the limitation year to
which the back pay relates to the extent the back pay represents wages and
compensation that would otherwise be included under this definition.
         (d)   Compensation in excess of the limitations of Section
B-1.2C. shall not be taken into account. In order to be taken into account for
a limitation year, compensation must be paid or treated as paid prior to
severance from employment with the employer. Effective for limitation years
beginning on or after July 1, 2007, an includable payment shall be treated as
paid prior to severance from employment if it is paid by the later of 2.5
months after severance or the last day of the limitation year that includes the
severance date. For this purpose, includable payments are those that absent the
severance would have been paid and are regular compensation for services during
regular working hours or compensation for services outside regular working
hours (such as overtime or shift differentials), commissions, bonuses, or other
similar compensation. Includable payments shall also include unused accrued
sick, vacation, or other leave if such payments would have been included in
compensation as defined in Section
B-1.2 if they were paid prior to the employee's severance from employment. Any
payments not described herein as an includable payment shall not be considered
compensation if paid after severance from employment, even if they are paid by
the later of 2.5 months after the date of severance from employment or the end
of the limitation year that includes the severance date.
         (e)   For limitation years beginning after December 31, 2008,
compensation for a limitation year shall include amounts paid as differential
wages to a participant on qualified military service leave of more than 30 days
and otherwise meeting the requirements of IRC section 3401(h)(2).
         (f)   Compensation shall include elective contributions as defined in
Section
B-1.2A. and elective contributions under a IRC section 501(c)(18) plan.
Elective contribution amounts under a cafeteria plan excludable under IRC
section 125 shall include any amounts not available to a participant in cash in
lieu of group health coverage solely because the participant is unable to
certify that he has other health coverage (deemed section 125 compensation).
Amounts are deemed section 125 compensation only if the employer does not
request or collect information regarding the participant's other health
coverage as part of the enrollment process for the health plan.
         (g)   Notwithstanding the preceding, compensation for a participant
who is permanently and totally disabled (as defined in IRC section 22(e)(3)) is
the compensation such participant would have received for the limitation year
if the participant had been paid at the rate of compensation paid immediately
before becoming permanently and totally disabled; such imputed compensation for
the disabled participant may be taken into account only if contributions made
on behalf of such participant are nonforfeitable when made.
      (3)   Defined Contribution Dollar Limitation - $40,000, as adjusted under
IRC section 415(d).
      (4)   Employer - For purposes of this Section
B-5.1, employer shall mean the employer that adopts this plan and any entity
required to be aggregated with the employer pursuant to regulations.
      (5)   Excess Amount - The excess of the participant's annual additions
for the limitation year over the maximum permissible amount.
      (6)   Limitation Year - The 12-consecutive-month period defined in
Section
B-1.3F.
      (7)   Maximum Permissible Amount - The maximum annual addition that may
be contributed or allocated to a participant's account under the plan for any
limitation year shall not exceed the lesser of:
         (a)   The defined contribution dollar limitation as defined in Section
B-5.1C.(3); or
         (b)   One hundred percent of the participant's compensation for the
limitation year.
            [1]   If a short limitation year is created because of an amendment
changing the limitation year to a different 12-consecutive-month period, the
maximum permissible amount will not exceed the defined contribution dollar
limitation multiplied by the following fraction: Number of months in the short
limitation year/12.
            [2]   If the plan is terminated as of a date other than the last
day of the limitation year, the plan shall be deemed to have been amended to
change its limitation year and the maximum permissible amount shall be
determined by prorating it for the resulting short limitation year.
B-5.2. Distribution Requirements.
Effective for calendar years beginning after December 31, 1984, the
requirements of this Section
B-5.2 shall apply to any distribution of a participant's interest and will take
precedence over any inconsistent provisions of this plan. With respect to
distributions under the plan made on or after August 1, 2002 for calendar years
beginning on or after January 1, 2002, the plan will apply the minimum
distribution requirements of IRC section 401(a)(9) as set forth in this Section
B-5.2. Distributions made prior to August 1, 2002 are subject to the provisions
of the plan as in effect before this amendment and restatement of the plan.
With respect to calendar year 2009, the provisions of Section
B-5.2 shall be applied subject to IRC section 401(a)(9)(H). Although the plan
administrator shall calculate any required minimum distribution under Section
B-5.2 and pay it separately to any participant or beneficiary commencing
distribution during 2009, such recipient shall be eligible to deposit such
amount in a qualified employer plan or individual retirement account. Any
participant receiving or due to commence such distributions shall not receive a
required minimum distribution with respect to 2009 in the absence of an
affirmative election. To the extent that a participant's entire interest is
otherwise required to be distributed to a beneficiary by December 31 of the
calendar year containing the fifth anniversary of the participant's death, such
5-year period shall be determined without regard to calendar year 2009.
   A.   Required Beginning Date - The entire interest of a participant must be
distributed, or begin to be distributed, no later than the participant's
required beginning date.
   B.   Limits on Distribution Periods - As of the first distribution calendar
year, distributions to a participant, if not made in a single sum, may only be
made over one of the following periods (or a combination thereof):
      (1)   The life of the participant;
      (2)   The joint lives of the participant and a designated beneficiary;
      (3)   A period certain not extending beyond the life expectancy of the
participant; or
      (4)   A period certain not extending beyond the joint life and last
survivor expectancy of the participant and a designated beneficiary.
   C.   Death of Participant Before Distributions Begin - If the participant
dies before distributions begin, the participant's entire interest will be
distributed, or begin to be distributed, no later than as follows:
      (1)   If the participant's surviving spouse is the participant's sole
designated beneficiary, then distributions to the surviving spouse will begin
by December 31 of the calendar year immediately following the calendar year in
which the participant died, or by December 31 of the calendar year in which the
participant would have attained age 70 1/2, if later. If the surviving spouse
so elects, the participant's entire interest will be distributed to such
surviving spouse by December 31 of the calendar year containing the fifth
anniversary of the participant's death. If no election is received,
distributions to the surviving spouse will begin by December 31 of the calendar
year in which the participant would have attained age 70 1/2, or the
participant's entire interest will be distributed to such surviving spouse by
December 31 of the calendar year containing the fifth anniversary of the
participant's death, if later.
      (2)   If the participant's surviving spouse is not the participant's sole
designated beneficiary, then distributions to the designated beneficiary will
begin by December 31 of the calendar year immediately following the calendar
year in which the participant died. If the designated beneficiary so elects or
if no election is received, the participant's entire interest will be
distributed to such designated beneficiary by December 31 of the calendar year
containing the fifth anniversary of the participant's death.
      (3)   If there is no designated beneficiary as of September 30 of the
year following the year of the participant's death, the participant's entire
interest will be distributed by December 31 of the calendar year containing the
fifth anniversary of the participant's death.
      (4)   (a)   If the participant's surviving spouse is the participant's
sole designated beneficiary and the surviving spouse dies after the participant
but before distributions to the surviving spouse are required to begin, this
Section
B-5.2C., other than Section
B-5.2C.(1), will apply as if the surviving spouse were the participant.
         (b)   For purposes of this Section
B-5.2C. and Section
B-5.2F., unless Section
B-5.2C.(4) applies, distributions are considered to begin on the participant's
required beginning date. If Section
B-5.2C.(4) applies, distributions are considered to begin on the date
distributions are required to begin to the surviving spouse under Section
B-5.2C.(1). If distributions under an annuity purchased from an insurance
company irrevocably commence to the participant before the participant's
required beginning date (or to the participant's surviving spouse before the
date distributions are required to begin to the surviving spouse under Section
B-5.2C.(1)), the date distributions are considered to begin is the date
distributions actually commence.
   D.   Forms of Distribution.
      (1)   Unless the participant's interest is distributed in the form of an
annuity purchased from an insurance company or in a single sum on or before the
required beginning date, as of the first distribution calendar year
distributions will be made in accordance with Section
B-5.2E. and F. If the participant's interest is distributed in the form of an
annuity purchased from an insurance company, distributions thereunder will be
made in accordance with the requirements of IRC section 401(a)(9) and the
Treasury regulations,
      (2)   To the extent the participant has an employee nondeductible
contribution account or after-tax contributions for which there is separate
accounting under his rollover/transfer account, such funds shall be distributed
first before any taxable distribution is made to satisfy the minimum
distribution requirement. After the exhaustion of such accounts, distributions
shall be debited from a participant's accounts to the extent funded first from
any rollover/transfer account and then from his money purchase pension account.
   E.   Required Minimum Distributions During Participant's Lifetime - If a
participant's benefit is to be distributed over (1) a period not extending
beyond the life expectancy of the participant or the joint life and last
survivor expectancy of the participant and the participant's designated
beneficiary; or (2) a period not extending beyond the life expectancy of the
designated beneficiary, the amount required to be distributed for each calendar
year, beginning with distributions for the first distribution calendar year,
must at least equal the quotient obtained by dividing the participant's benefit
by the applicable life expectancy.
      (1)   Amount of Required Minimum Distribution For Each Distribution
Calendar Year - During the participant's lifetime, the minimum amount that will
be distributed for each distribution calendar year is the lesser of:
         (a)   The quotient obtained by dividing the participant's account
balance by the distribution period in the Uniform Lifetime Table set forth in
Regulation section 1.401(a)(9)-9, using the participant's age as of the
participant's birthday in the distribution calendar year; or
         (b)   If the participant's sole designated beneficiary for the
distribution calendar year is the participant's spouse, the quotient obtained
by dividing the participant's account balance by the number in the Joint and
Last Survivor Table set forth in Regulation section 1.401(a)(9)-9, using the
participant's and spouse's attained ages as of the participant's and spouse's
birthdays in the distribution calendar year.
      (2)   Lifetime Required Minimum Distributions Continue Through Year of
Participant's Death - Required minimum distributions will be determined under
this Section
B-5.2E. beginning with the first distribution calendar year and continuing up
to and including the distribution calendar year that includes the participant's
date of death.
   F.   Required Minimum Distributions After Participant's Death
      (1)   Death On or After Date Distributions Begin - If the participant
dies after distribution of his interest has begun, the remaining portion of
such interest will continue to be distributed at least as rapidly as under the
method of distribution being used prior to the participant's death.
         (a)   Participant Survived by Designated Beneficiary - If the
participant dies on or after the date distributions begin and there is a
designated beneficiary, the minimum amount that will be distributed for each
distribution calendar year after the year of the participant's death is the
quotient obtained by dividing the participant's account balance by the longer
of the remaining life expectancy of the participant or the remaining life
expectancy of the participant's designated beneficiary, determined as follows:
            [1]   The participant's remaining life expectancy is calculated
using the age of the participant in the year of death, reduced by one for each
subsequent year.
            [2]   If the participant's surviving spouse is the participant's
sole designated beneficiary, the remaining life expectancy of the surviving
spouse is calculated for each distribution calendar year after the year of the
participant's death using the surviving spouse's age as of the spouse's
birthday in that year. For distribution calendar years after the year of the
surviving spouse's death, the remaining life expectancy of the surviving spouse
is calculated using the age of the surviving spouse as of the spouse's birthday
in the calendar year of the spouse's death, reduced by one for each subsequent
calendar year.
            [3]   If the participant's surviving spouse is not the
participant's sole designated beneficiary, the designated beneficiary's
remaining life expectancy is calculated using the age of the beneficiary in the
year following the year of the participant's death, reduced by one for each
subsequent year.
         (b)   No Designated Beneficiary - If the participant dies on or after
the date distributions begin and there is no designated beneficiary as of
September 30 of the year after the year of the participant's death, the minimum
amount that will be distributed for each distribution calendar year after the
year of the participant's death is the quotient obtained by dividing the
participant's account balance by the participant's remaining life expectancy
calculated using the age of the participant in the year of death, reduced by
one for each subsequent year.
      (2)   Death Before Date Distributions Begin.
         (a)   Participant Survived by Designated Beneficiary - If the
participant dies before the date distributions begin and there is a designated
beneficiary, the minimum amount that will be distributed for each distribution
calendar year after the year of the participant's death is the quotient
obtained by dividing the participant's account balance by the remaining life
expectancy of the participant's designated beneficiary, determined as provided
in Section
B-5.2F.(1).
         (b)   No Designated Beneficiary - If the participant dies before the
date distributions begin and there is no designated beneficiary as of September
30 of the year following the year of the participant's death, distribution of
the participant's entire interest will be completed by December 31 of the
calendar year containing the fifth anniversary of the participant's death.
         (c)   Death of Surviving Spouse Before Distributions to Surviving
Spouse Are Required to Begin - If the participant dies before the date
distributions begin, the participant's surviving spouse is the participant's
sole designated beneficiary, and the surviving spouse dies before distributions
are required to begin to the surviving spouse under Section
B-5.2C., this Section
B-5.2F.(2) will apply as if the surviving spouse were the participant.
   G.   Definitions (IRC Section 401(a)(9) Requirements).
      (1)   Designated Beneficiary - The individual who is designated as the
beneficiary of the participant's interest under the plan and who is the
designated beneficiary under IRC section 401(a)(9) and Regulation section 1.401
(a)(9)-4.
      (2)   Distribution Calendar Year - A calendar year for which a minimum
distribution is required. For distributions beginning before the participant's
death, the first distribution calendar year is the calendar year immediately
preceding the calendar year that contains the participant's required beginning
date. For distributions beginning after the participant's death, the first
distribution calendar year is the calendar year in which distributions are
required to begin pursuant to Section
B-5.2C. The required minimum distribution for the participant's first
distribution calendar year will be made on or before the participant's required
beginning date. The required minimum distribution for other distribution
calendar years, including the required minimum distribution for the
distribution calendar year in which the participant's required beginning date
occurs, will be made on or before December 31 of that distribution calendar
year.
      (3)   Life Expectancy - Life expectancy as computed by use of the Single
Life Table in Regulation section 1.401(a)(9)-9.
      (4)   Participant's Account Balance.
         (a)   The account balance as of the last valuation date in the
calendar year immediately preceding the distribution calendar year (valuation
calendar year) increased by the amount of any contributions made and allocated
or forfeitures allocated to the account balance as of dates in the valuation
calendar year after the valuation date and decreased by distributions made in
the valuation calendar year after the valuation date. The account balance for
the valuation calendar year includes any amounts rolled over or transferred to
the plan either in the valuation calendar year or in the distribution calendar
year if distributed or transferred in the valuation calendar year.
         (b)   If any portion of the minimum distribution for the first
distribution calendar year is made in the second distribution calendar year on
or before the required beginning date, the amount of the minimum distribution
made in the second distribution calendar year shall be treated as if it had
been made in the immediately preceding distribution calendar year.
      (5)   Required Beginning Date - The required beginning date of a
participant is April 1 of the calendar year following the later of: (i) the
calendar year in which the participant attains age 70 1/2; or (ii) the calendar
year in which the participant retires.
ARTICLE 6 - ADMINISTRATION OF THE PLAN
B-6.1. Fiduciary Responsibility.
   A.   Management and Control of Plan Assets - The governing body of the
employer shall designate the persons responsible for the management and control
of plan assets. Such person shall discharge their duties with respect to the
plan in accordance with the documents and instruments governing the plan
insofar as such documents and instruments are consistent with the applicable
provisions of the Internal Revenue Code.
   B.   A fiduciary of this plan is required to exercise the judgment and care
under the circumstances then prevailing that men of prudence, discretion and
intelligence exercise in the management of their own affairs, not in regard to
speculation but in regard to the permanent disposition of their funds,
considering the probable income as well as the probable safety of their
capital.
   C.   Allocation of Responsibility.
      (1)   When the plan administrator is required to follow the directions of
the trustee or the trustee is required to follow the directions of the plan
administrator, they shall not be deemed to share such responsibility. Instead,
the responsibility of the person giving the directions shall be deemed to be
his sole responsibility and the responsibility of the person receiving
directions shall be to follow those directions insofar as such instructions on
their face are proper under applicable law.
      (2)   The plan administrator or trustee under this plan may employ one or
more persons, including independent accountants, attorneys and actuaries to
render advice with regard to any responsibility such person has under the plan.
   D.   Liability and Indemnification - Subject to Act 205, no past, present,
or future officer of the employer nor of any participating employer shall be
personally liable to any participant, beneficiary, or other person under any
provision of the plan or trust or any insurance policy or contract issue
pursuant thereto. No individual fiduciary shall be liable for any act or
omission of any other fiduciary. Unless resulting from the gross negligence,
willful misconduct or lack of good faith on the part of the fiduciary, the
employer shall indemnify and save harmless such fiduciary from, against, for
and in respect of any and all damages, losses, obligations, liabilities, liens,
deficiencies, costs and expenses, including without limitation, reasonable
attorney's fees and other costs and expenses incident to any suit, action,
investigation, claim or proceedings suffered in connection with his acting as a
fiduciary under the plan.
B-6.2. Plan Administrator.
   A.   Appointment of Plan Administrator. The governing body of the employer
shall be responsible for the administration of the plan. It may appoint one or
more members of itself to be the plan administrator. The employer shall review
at regular intervals the performance of those members appointed to be the plan
administrators) and shall re-evaluate the appointment of such plan
administrator(s).
   B.   Duties and Powers of Plan Administrator. The plan administrator shall
have the following duties and discretionary powers and such other duties and
discretionary powers as relate to the administration of the plan:
      (1)   To determine in a nondiscriminatory manner all questions relating
to the eligibility of employees to become participants.
      (2)   To determine in a nondiscriminatory manner eligibility for benefits
and to determine and certify the amount and kind of benefits payable to
participants.
      (3)   To authorize all disbursements from the fund.
      (4)   To appoint or employ any independent person to perform necessary
plan functions and to assist in the fulfillment of administrative
responsibilities as he deems advisable, including the retention of a third
party administrator, custodian, auditor, accountant, actuary, or attorney.
      (5)   When appropriate, to select an insurance company and annuity
contracts that, in his opinion, will best carry out the purposes of the plan.
      (6)   To construe and interpret any ambiguities in the plan and to make,
publish, interpret, alter, amend or revoke rules for the regulation of the plan
that are consistent with the terms of the plan and with the applicable
provisions of the Internal Revenue Code.
      (7)   To prepare and distribute, in such manner as determined to be
appropriate, information explaining the plan.
   C.   Miscellaneous Provisions.
      (1)   Expenses - The plan administrator shall serve without compensation
for service as such. All reasonable expenses of the plan administrator shall be
paid by the employer.
      (2)   Examination of Records - The plan administrator shall make
available to any participant for examination during business hours such of the
plan records as pertain only to the participant involved.
      (3)   Information to the Plan Administrator - To enable the plan
administrator to perform the administrative functions, the employer shall
supply full and timely information to the plan administrator on all
participants as the plan administrator may require.
B-6.3. Claims Procedure.
   A.   Notification of Claim Determination -The plan administrator shall
notify each participant in writing of its determination of benefits. If the
plan administrator denies any benefit, such written denial shall include:
      (1)   The specific reasons for denial;
      (2)   Reference to provisions on which the denial is based;
      (3)   A description of and reason for any additional information needed
to process the claim; and a description of the plan's review procedures.
   B.   Appeal.
      (1)   The participant or his duly authorized representative may:
         (a)   Make a written request for a review of the participant's case by
the employer;
         (b)   Review pertinent documents;
         (c)   Submit issues and comments in writing.
      (2)   The written request for review must be submitted no later than 60
days after receiving written notification of denial of benefits.
   C.   Review - The (Administration employer/pension board) must render a
decision no later than 60 days after receiving the written request for review,
unless circumstances make it impossible to do so but in no event shall the
decision be rendered later than 120 days after the request for review is
received.
   D.   Limitation on Time Period for Litigation of a Benefit Claim - Following
receipt of the written rendering of the (Administration employer/pension
board's) decision under Section
B-6.3C., the participant shall have 365 days in which to file suit in the
appropriate court. Thereafter, the right to contest the decision shall be
waived.
B-6.4. Trust Fund.
   A.   Creation and Maintenance of the Fund - The trust fund shall be created
and maintained in the following manner:
      (1)   All funds on deposit and held for pension or retirement benefits of
the participants shall continue to be part of the trust fund created and
maintained hereby subject to any liabilities that may exist against such fund.
      (2)   The employer shall allocate to the fund the payments made by the
Treasurer of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania from monies received from taxes
paid upon premiums by foreign casualty insurance companies and foreign fire
insurance companies pursuant to the General Municipal Pension System State Aid
Program.
      (3)   The fund shall accept and maintain any payments made by other
gifts, grants, devises, or bequests to the fund.
      (4)   (a)   The employer shall contribute to the fund the payments that
are authorized to be made from the general revenue of the employer.
         (b)   All such payments received shall be part of the trust fund and
shall not be applied to any other account or disbursed in any manner except as
provided by this plan. Payments required under the plan shall be a charge only
upon the trust fund and not upon other monies or funds of the employer.
   B.   Appointment of Trustee. The employer, or its delegee, shall appoint a
trustee for the proper care and custody of all funds, securities and other
properties in the trust, and for investment of plan assets (or for execution of
such orders as it receives from an investment manager appointed for investment
of plan assets). The duties and powers of the trustee shall be set forth in a
trust agreement executed by the employer, which is incorporated herein by
reference. The employer shall review at regular intervals the performance of
the trustee and shall re-evaluate the appointment of such trustee. After the
employer has appointed the trustee and has received a written notice of
acceptance of its responsibility, the fiduciary responsibility with respect to
the proper care and custody of plan assets shall be considered as the
responsibility of the trustee. Unless otherwise allocated to an investment
manager, the fiduciary responsibility with respect to investment of plan assets
shall likewise be considered as the responsibility of the trustee.
   C.   Appointment of Corporate Custodian. The employer, or its delegee, may
appoint a corporate custodian to hold and invest the fund. The corporate
custodian shall carry out its responsibilities in accordance with the terms of
the custodial agreement and the investment policy and guidance as the employer
shall, from time to time provide. The employer shall review at regular
intervals no less frequently than annually, the performance of such corporate
custodian and shall re-evaluate the appointment of such corporate custodian.
   D.   Appointment of Investment Manager. The employer, or its delegee, may
appoint an investment manager who is other than the trustee, which investment
manager may be a bank or an investment advisor registered with the Securities
and Exchange Commission under the Investment Advisors Act of 1940. Such
investment manager, if appointed, shall have sole discretion in the investment
of plan assets, subject to the funding policy. The employer shall review at
regular intervals no less frequently than annually, the performance of such
investment manager and shall re-evaluate the appointment of such investment
manager. After the employer has appointed an investment manager and has
received a written notice of acceptance of its responsibility, the fiduciary
responsibility with respect to investment of plan assets shall be considered as
the responsibility of the investment manager.
   E.   Funding Policy. The employer, or its delegee, shall determine and
communicate in writing to the person responsible for investment of plan assets
the funding policy for the plan. The funding policy shall set forth the plan's
short-range and long-range financial needs, so that said person may coordinate
the investment of plan assets with the plan's financial needs.
   F.   Valuation of the Fund. The fund shall be valued by the trustee on the
anniversary date of each year and as of any interim allocation date determined
by the plan administrator. The valuation shall be made on the basis of the
current fair market value of all property in the fund.
   G.   Expenses. The trust fund may pay the expenses incurred in the
administration of the plan and the investment of the fund, provided the cost is
reasonable. Such expenses shall include legal fees incurred by the plan
administrator or the trustee, provided such fiduciaries are not proven to have
committed a prohibited transaction. If the trust fund pays the expenses, the
expenses generally shall be allocated against the participant accounts on a pro
rata basis. Certain expenses incurred with respect to a particular participant
or beneficiary shall be allocated against the participant's account on a direct
basis.
ARTICLE 7 - AMENDMENT AND TERMINATION OF PLAN
B-7.1. Right to Discontinue and Amend.
It is the expectation of the employer that it will continue this plan
indefinitely and make the payments of its contributions hereunder, but the
continuance of the plan is not assumed as a contractual obligation of the
employer and the right is reserved by the employer, at any time, to reduce,
suspend or discontinue its contributions hereunder.
B-7.2. Amendments.
Except as herein limited, the employer shall have the right to amend this plan
at any time to any extent that it may deem advisable. Such amendment shall be
stated in writing and shall be by ordinance or resolution of the governing body
of the employer. The employer's right to amend the plan shall be limited as
follows:
   A.   No amendments shall have the effect of vesting in the employer any
interest in or control over any contracts issued pursuant hereto or any other
property in the fund.
   B.   No amendment to the vesting schedule adopted by the employer hereunder
shall deprive a participant of his vested portion of his employer-derived
accrued benefit to the date of such amendment.
B-7.3. Protection of Benefits in Case of Plan Merger.
   A.   In the event of a merger or consolidation with, or transfer of assets
or liabilities to any other plan, each participant will receive a benefit
immediately after such merger, consolidation or transfer (if the plan then
terminated) that is at least equal to the benefit the participant was entitled
to immediately before such merger, consolidation or transfer (if the plan had
terminated).
   B.   The transfer of amounts from this trust to a nonqualified foreign trust
shall be treated as a distribution from this plan. Further, the transfer of
assets and liabilities from this plan to a plan that satisfies Puerto Rico Code
section 1165 shall also be treated as a distribution from this plan.
B-7.4. Termination of Plan.
   A.   When Plan Terminates -This plan shall terminate upon the legal
dissolution of the employer or the termination of the plan by the amendment
action of the employer. Subject to the provisions of the Municipal Pension Plan
Funding Standard and Recovery Act (P.L. 1005, Act 205 of 1984) governing
financial distressed municipalities, the liability of the employer to make
contributions to the plan shall automatically terminate upon liquidation or
dissolution of the employer, upon its adjudication as a bankrupt, or upon the
making of a general assignment for the benefit of its creditors.
   B.   Allocation of Assets - Upon termination or partial termination, the
account balance of each affected participant who is an active participant or
who is not an active participant but has neither received a complete
distribution of his vested accrued benefit nor incurred a one-year break in
service shall be 100% vested and nonforfeitable. The amount of the fund assets
shall be allocated to each participant subject to provisions for expenses of
administration of the liquidation, in the ratio that such participant's account
bears to all accounts.
ARTICLE 8 - MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS
B-8.1. Exclusive Benefit - Non-Reversion.
The plan is created for the exclusive benefit of the employees of the employer
and shall be interpreted in a manner consistent with its being a qualified plan
as defined in IRC section 401(a). The sponsorship of this plan may not be
transferred to an unrelated entity if the transfer is not in connection with a
transfer of business assets or operations from the employer to such entity. The
corpus or income of the trust may not be diverted to or used for other than the
exclusive benefit of the participants or their beneficiaries (except for
defraying reasonable expenses of administering the plan). Notwithstanding the
preceding, any contribution made by the employer because of a mistake of fact
must be returned to the employer within one year of the contribution.
B-8.2. Inalienability of Benefits.
No benefit or interest available hereunder including any annuity contract
distributed herefrom shall be subject to assignment or alienation, either
voluntarily or involuntarily. The preceding sentence shall also apply to the
creation, assignment, or recognition of a right to any benefit payable with
respect to a participant pursuant to a domestic relations order, unless such
order is determined to be a qualified domestic relations order as defined in
IRC section 414(p), or any domestic relations order entered before January 1,
1985.
B-8.3. Employer-Employee Relationship.
This plan is not to be construed as creating or changing any contract of
employment between the employer and its employees, and the employer retains the
right to deal with its employees in the same manner as though this plan had not
been created.
B-8.4. Binding Agreement.
This plan shall be binding on the heirs, executors, administrators, successors
and assigns as such terms may be applicable to any or all parties hereto, and
on any participants, present or future.
B-8.5. Inconsistency or Conflict of Prior Ordinances or Resolutions.
Any ordinance or resolution with an effective date prior to the adoption date
of this amendment and restatement of the plan shall be of no effect.
B-8.6. Separability.
If any provision of this plan shall be held invalid or unenforceable, such
invalidity or unenforceability shall not affect any other provision hereof and
this plan shall be construed and enforced as if such provision had not been
included.
B-8.7. Construction.
The plan shall be construed in accordance with the laws of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania and with the applicable portions of the Internal Revenue Code.
B-8.8. Copies of Plan.
This plan may be executed in any number of counterparts, each of which shall be
deemed as an original, and said counterparts shall constitute but one and the
same instrument that may be sufficiently evidenced by any one counterpart.
B-8.9. Interpretation.
Wherever appropriate, words used in this plan in the singular may include the
plural or the plural may be read as singular, and the masculine may include the
feminine.
Chapter 70
PERSONNEL
Part 1
General Provisions
§
70-101.   Conflict.
§
70-102.   Director of Human Resources Department.
§
70-103.   Coverage and exclusion.
§
70-104.   Equal employment opportunity.
§
70-105.   Nepotism.
§
70-106.   Conflict of interest.
§
70-107.   Reserved.
§
70-108.   Political activity.
§
70-109.   Hostile work environment.
§
70-110.   Charter effect on employees.
§
70-111.   Drug-free workplace.
§
70-112.   Smoking policy.
§
70-113.   Training programs.
§
70-114.   Physical examination/drug testing.
Part 2
Categories of Employment
§
70-201.   Classification categories.
Part 3
Appointment and Evaluations
§
70-301.   Notification of vacancy.
§
70-302.   Recruitment.
§
70-303.   Application for employment.
§
70-304.   Screening.
§
70-305.   Selection.
§
70-306.   Orientation.
§
70-307.   Probation.
§
70-308.   Performance evaluation.
§
70-309.   Personnel records.
Part 4
Benefits
§
70-401.   Insurance, pension, workers' compensation and other benefits.
§
70-402.   Injury on duty.
Part 5
Leave, Vacations and Holidays
§
70-501.   Family medical leave.
§
70-502.   Holidays.
§
70-503.   Annual vacation leave.
§
70-504.   Sick leave.
§
70-505.   Bereavement leave.
§
70-506.   Leave of absence.
§
70-507.   Personal leave.
§
70-508.   Leave of absence for military reserve duty.
§
70-509.   Court appearance and jury duty.
Part 6
Promotions
§
70-601.   Promotion procedure.
Part 7
Rules and Regulations
§
70-701.   Salary administration.
§
70-702.   Payroll administration.
§
70-703.   Payroll time sheet.
§
70-704.   Payroll deductions.
§
70-705.   Overtime.
§
70-706.   Time and attendance of employees.
§
70-707.   Lunch and break periods.
§
70-708.   Temporary reassignment.
§
70-709.   Compensatory time; discretionary time.
§
70-710.   Dress and grooming.
§
70-711.   Conduct and safety regulations.
§
70-712.   Disciplinary action.
§
70-713.   Grievance procedures.
§
70-714.   Separation.
§
70-715.   Disability removal.
§
70-716.   Providing employees legal counsel.
§
70-717.   Employee responses to information requests.
§
70-718.   Management incentive program.
Part 8
Appeals
§
70-801.   Appeal procedure.
[HISTORY: Adopted by the City Council of the City of Reading 6-24-1996 by Ord.
No. 18-1996 (
Ch. 1, Part 2, of the 2001 Code of Ordinances) Amendments noted where
applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Administrative code — See
Ch. 5.
Pensions — See
Ch. 62.
Salaries and compensation — See
Ch. 91.
STATE LAW REFERENCES
Officers and employee provisions - See 11 Pa.C.S. §§10901 et seq.
Power to hire employees - See 11 Pa.C.S. §§12405
Part 1
General Provisions
§ 70-101. Conflict.
In the event any provisions of the Personnel Code shall be inconsistent with or
conflict with any provision of the Charter, the provision of the Charter shall
take precedence over this Personnel Code.
§ 70-102. Director of Human Resources Department.
The Director of the Human Resources Department responsibilities are specified
in the Administrative Code. 1  In addition, he/she is responsible for the
administration and interpretation of this Personnel Code.
§ 70-103. Coverage and exclusion.
   A.   Collective bargaining agreements and civil service regulations take
precedence.
   B.   All nonuniformed employees shall be governed by this Personnel Code
contained herein unless exempted by the Charter or noted herein.
   C.   Section
702(a) and (b) of the Charter stipulate career and exempt service.
Editor's Note: §§ 701(a) and (b) of the Charter provides:
§ 702. Personnel system and personnel code.
Each elected official, officer and employee of the City shall be a member of
either the career or exempt service.
   (a)   The exempt service shall consist of:
      (i)   All elected officials.
      (ii)   The Managing Director and the City Solicitor.
      (iii)   The heads of departments, offices, and agencies immediately under
the direction and supervision of the Managing Director.
      (iv)   One clerk or secretary for each of the full-time elected City
officials and the heads of each City department.
      (v)   The City Clerk.
      (vi)   The members of authorities, boards, and commissions.
      (vii)   Temporary, part-time, or seasonal employees.
   (b)   All other officers and employees shall be members of the career
service.
1.   Editor's Note: See
Ch. 5, Administrative Code.
§ 70-104. Equal employment opportunity.
   A.   The City of Reading is firmly committed to ensuring equal employment
opportunity for all persons regardless of race, color, creed, ancestry, age,
gender, sexual orientation, political opinions or religious affiliations, or
lawful activity in any employee organization, national origin or disability.
   B.   The commitment to equal employment opportunity shall prevail in all
employment practices including recruiting, interviewing, hiring, promoting, and
training. All matters affecting pay, benefits, transfer, furloughs, education,
tuition assistance and social and recreational programs shall be administered
consistent with these principals, as well as with the Affirmative Action Plan,
and with the spirit and intent of state and federal laws governing equal
opportunity.
   C.   Any person believing that he/she is the subject of discrimination and/
or harassment may file a written complaint with the Human Resources Director or
his/her designee, who shall immediately investigate the allegation(s) and
determine the validity of the complaint and take the appropriate measures, if
any, required to resolve the matter.
§ 70-105. Nepotism.
[Amended 8-25-1997 by Ord. No. 19-1997]
No public official or public employee shall appoint, hire, advance or advocate
the same of a member of his/her direct family to a City position. No public
official or public employee's direct family member shall be appointed, hired or
advanced to a position under the direct supervision or control of the official
or employee. "Direct family" is defined as spouse, parent, parent-in-law, son,
son-in-law, daughter, daughter-in-law, sister, sister-in-law, brother, brother-
in-law, grandparents and grandchildren or any step-relatives in any of the
foregoing categories. Relatives working within the same City department prior
to July 1, 1997, shall not be affected by this policy. In the event that a
relationship listed is created between employees within the same department,
one of said employees within 90 calendar days shall move to a position outside
of said department. Failure of such action will result in termination of one of
the employees based upon City policy and seniority. This policy shall not
restrict the bidding rights as contained in any of the City's collective
bargaining agreements.
§ 70-106. Conflict of interest.
[Amended 8-25-1997 by Ord. No. 19-1997]
   A.   No employee shall engage in any business or transactions or shall have
a financial or other personal benefitting interest which is compatible with the
proper discharge of his/her official duties or would tend to impair his/her
independence of judgment or action in the performance of his/her duties.
   B.   Examples of conflicts are enumerated below for guidance; however,
employees are referred to the City of Reading's Code of Ethics for further
verification. 2
   C.   Accepting or soliciting gifts and favors, use of privileged information
for personal or financial gain, any use of official position for personal or
financial gain, participation in transactions as a City representative with a
business entity in which he/she has a direct or indirect financial or other
personal interest and use of City property for personal benefit.
   D.   Outside employment. City employees may accept, have or hold any
employment or contractual relationship with any individual, partnership,
association, corporation (profit or nonprofit), utility or other organizations,
whether public or private, but only if the employment or contractual
relationship does not constitute a conflict of interest or impair their
efficiency.
   E.   Use of City equipment. No personnel, equipment, supplies, facilities,
vehicles or any other property of the City may be used by employees or
officials for private use. It is improper and may be unlawful for supervisors
to use subordinates for personal benefit. The use of the City's communication
system including telephone and computer for personal benefit or the
transmission, display or reception of inappropriate material is a violation of
this policy and subject to disciplinary action.
2.   Editor's Note: See
Ch. 5, Administrative Code, Part 10, Code of Ethics.
§ 70-107. Reserved.
The Residency requirement for the Managing Director and Department Directors
was eliminated by the electorate at the November 10, 2020 General Election.
§ 70-108. Political activity.
Section
706 of the Charter provides:
§ 706. Political activity.
All employees are prohibited from engaging in any form of political activity
during regular work hours and are prohibited from using City facilities or
property for any political activity. Violation of this section will warrant
discharge or other discipline under the provisions of the Personnel Code.
§ 70-109. Hostile work environment.
[Amended 9-9-1996 by Ord. No. 27-1996]
   A.   All employees have the right to work in an environment free from
discrimination and any form of harassment based on race, religion, color, sex,
age, marital status, national origin or disability.
   B.   To ensure that no employee feels that they are subject to harassment,
the City also prohibits any offensive physical written or spoken conduct
regarding any of these subjects. Such conduct may constitute harassment when
engaged in by someone in the City in a position to influence employment
decisions or other employees. A continued action by an employee or supervisor
towards another employee of harassment may result in the creation of a hostile
working environment.
   C.   Ethnic slurs, derogatory remarks about older individuals and sexual
innuendos can interfere with an employee's work performance by creating a
hostile and offensive working environment. These actions of discriminatory
intimidation, ridicule and insult alter the conditions of employment. The
examples of such behavior can also include racial slurs, ethnic jokes, English-
only rules, lewd photographs and disparaging remarks aimed at a protected
group.
   D.   An important value of this Administration is to treat all employees
with respect and dignity on a consistent basis. It is the responsibility of the
management/supervisory team to ensure a safe, productive and positive workplace
exists. The City will not in any way condone or tolerate conditions of
harassment or the creation of a hostile working environment for any employee.
§ 70-110. Charter effect on employees.
See §
1307 of the Charter.
Editor's Note: § 1307 of the Charter provides:
§ 1307. Personnel.
   (a)   Charter effect on employees. Nothing in this Charter, except as
otherwise specifically provided, shall affect or impair the rights or
privileges of individuals who are employees of the City on the effective date
of this Charter as to salary, tenure, residency, retirement, or pension
benefits; employments; leave with pay; or other personal rights. Nothing in
this Charter shall diminish the rights and privileges of any former employees
in their pension or retirement benefits.
   (b)   Exemption from competitive tests. Any employee holding a position with
the City at the time this Charter takes effect who is serving in the same or
comparable position at the time of its adoption shall not be subject to
competitive tests as a condition for continuance in the same position, but in
all respects shall be subject to the personnel system provided for in this
Charter.
   (c)   Personnel action. Until approval by City Council of the Personnel Code
required by § 703, the Mayor, in consultation with the Managing Director, shall
have the power to establish by written directive a personnel system for all
employees. All appointments and promotions, except additions to the exempt
service, shall be made on the basis of merit and fitness. All personnel actions
shall be in accordance with the provisions of a personnel system established by
such written directive. Copies of all such directives shall be forwarded by the
Mayor to City Council within 24 hours after being issued.
§ 70-111. Drug-free workplace.
The City hereby establishes and reiterates the policies contained in the Drug-
Free Workplace Act and the implementation thereof through an employee
assistance provider in order to inform employees about the danger of drug abuse
in the workplace and the City policy of maintaining a drug-free workplace.
§ 70-112. Smoking policy. 3
In compliance with the Clean Indoor Air Act, 35 P.S. § 637.1 et seq., the City
has established that all buildings are to be smoke free. Certain areas outside
buildings may be designated as smoking and non-smoking areas for City
employees. Such areas will be posted accordingly. All employees are required to
comply with the requirements of the posted designation.
3.   Editor's Note: Amended during codification (see
Ch. 1, General Provisions, Part 2).
§ 70-113. Training programs.
   A.   The Human Resources Director or his/her designee shall develop in
consultation with other department directors a comprehensive internal training
program that represents the City’s training needs. The Human Resources
Department designee shall administer the internal training program.
   B.   The Human Resources Department shall make a list of internal training
opportunities available to all employees, including but not being limited to,
supervisors, department directors and any other employees designed by the Mayor
or the Managing Director. Department heads who want training for their
employees should request such training from the Human Resources Department,
identify employees, schedule training time and provide written authorization
for employees for such training. Supervisors should consult with their
department directors who have the responsibility of notifying the Human
Resources Department. Employees should consult with their supervisors.
§ 70-114. Physical examination/drug testing.
   A.   All applicants who have been made an offer of employment by the City
are required to submit to and pass a physical examination, including drug
testing, by the City Health Officer. The purpose of this examination is to
determine if the prospective employee is physically able to perform the job for
which he or she is being considered and to ensure that the applicant's physical
condition will not endanger the health, safety or well-being of existing
employees.
   B.   Additionally, the medical examination will establish that the person is
capable of performing the essential job functions with reasonable accommodation
if necessary. This medical examination and drug testing will be given prior to
the commencement of employment. Failure to submit or complete this medical
examination and drug testing will be viewed as rejection of the offer of
employment.
Part 2
Categories of Employment
§ 70-201. Classification categories.
[Amended 10-26-2009 by Ord. No. 59-2009]
For the purpose of this code, City employees shall be classified according to
the following categories.
   A.   Full-time employees. Those employees filling positions authorized in
the annual Position Ordinance, defined in §
5-212, who work a minimum of 35 hours weekly.
   B.   Part-time employees. Those employees filling positions authorized in
the annual Position Ordinance, defined in §
5-212, who work a maximum of 28 hours weekly.
   C.   Temporary employees. Those employees filling positions authorized in
the annual Position Ordinance, defined in §
5-212, who are hired to work for a specified period of time, including but not
limited to interns who receive financial compensation. [Amended 3-12-2012 by
Ord. No. 24-2012]
   D.   Seasonal employees. Those employees filling positions authorized in the
annual Position Ordinance, defined in §
5-212, who are hired to work for a specified season.
Part 3
Appointment and Evaluations
§ 70-301. Notification of vacancy.
When there is determined to be a vacancy in any City position, the following
shall apply:
   A.   The department director will identify the position to be filled, and
obtain the required budget clearances to hire.
   B.   The Human Resources Director or his/her designee, in consultation with
the department director, will be responsible for the job description, date of
anticipated hire, minimum qualifications and salary range.
   C.   The affected department director and the Human Resources Department or
his/her designee shall discuss recruiting, screening and interviewing schedule.
§ 70-302. Recruitment.
   A.   The Human Resources Director or his/her designee, in consultation with
the department director, shall prepare a position description and recruitment
plan that includes internal and external advertisement plus alternative
strategies should the advertisements fail to produce a viable candidate. Such
position descriptions should include:
      (1)   Position title and description (including duties and
responsibilities).
      (2)   Minimum qualifications.
      (3)   Department location.
      (4)   City residency.
      (5)   Equal Opportunity/Affirmative Action Employer.
      (6)   Application deadline and where applications are directed.
   B.   All positions will be posted internally at all work sites for one week
prior to an external advertisement. The selection can be made at this time.
   C.   External position advertisements shall be through the local newspapers
and any other acceptable and appropriate methods of advertising position
openings such as the notification of minority and women's organizations,
regional and national advertising professional journals, in order to attract
qualified diverse candidates.
   D.   Should Subsections B and C above fail to produce a viable candidate,
the Human Resources Department or his/her designee, in consultation with the
department director, shall activate alternative recruitment methods.
§ 70-303. Application for employment.
   A.   All candidates shall complete and submit an application and/or other
designated material to be considered for employment.
   B.   All general applications for employment shall require the candidate to
provide information about education, related experience, training, prior
employment and references.
   C.   Applicant may be required to take a standardized test for a position.
   D.   All applications for employment, whether as a result of a search or as
a result of a general application, shall be directed to the Human Resources
Director or his/her designee.
   E.   The Human Resources Department shall make general applications
available for employment.
   F.   The Human Resources Department shall maintain an active file of
candidates for employment.
§ 70-304. Screening.
   A.   Initial screening will be completed by the Human Resources Director or
his/her designee to verify that the candidate meets the minimum requirements.
   B.   The Human Resources Director or his/her designee will check references
and complete a background verification check. This background verification
check will vary depending on the job description.
   C.   The Human Resources Director or his/her designee will use accepted
methods in personnel management and follow federal and state regulations to
check and verify the candidates application including a criminal check.
   D.   The Human Resources Director or his/her designee will provide the
department director with verification information.
   E.   The Human Resources Director or his/her designee, in consultation with
the department director, will select the most qualified candidates for an
interview.
   F.   All candidates not selected for an interview will be notified within
seven business days of that decision by the Human Resources Director.
§ 70-305. Selection.
   A.   The Human Resources Director or his/her designee and department
director will establish an interview schedule mutually convenient to the
candidate, Human Resources Director and the department director.
   B.   The Human Resources Director and department director and/or their
designees will interview candidates and make the selection. Selection will be
based on qualifications, test results (if applicable), state and federal
regulations and the Affirmative Action Plan.
   C.   The Human Resources Director or his/her designee will negotiate terms
and conditions of employment.
   D.   The Human Resources Director or his/her designee will make the position
offer to the successful candidate.
   E.   All other candidates will be notified within seven business days after
the position has been filled.
   F.   Should the interviews produce no viable candidate, the Human Resources
Director or his/her designee and the department director should develop a new
recruitment plan.
§ 70-306. Orientation.
   A.   It shall be the responsibility of the Human Resources Director or his/
her designee to provide written and oral information to the new employee about
benefits, policies and departmental procedures.
   B.   It shall be the responsibility of the department director or his/her
designee to provide the new employee information about department operating
procedures, duties and training.
   C.   Specific training for new employees shall be arranged by the Human
Resources Director or his/her designee and the department director.
§ 70-307. Probation.
   A.   All new employees shall be placed on probation for 180 days. An
employee on probation may be dismissed at the discretion of the department
director or his/her designee. No employee on probation shall receive a salary/
wage increase, promotion, or be eligible to use sick leave, a personal holiday
or annual leave, although annual and sick leave is accumulated during the
probational period.
   B.   All new employees on probation shall have a performance evaluation at
the end of a ninety- day period and at the end of a one-hundred-fifty-day
period and prior to 180 days, such performance evaluation to be conducted by
the immediate supervisor and the department director.
   C.   An unsatisfactory evaluation may be a basis for termination of an
employee on probation.
This is not to be construed that a probationary employee may not be dismissed
prior to the first ninety-day evaluation or any time during the probationary
period as set forth herein. This evaluation becomes a part of the employee's
personnel record.
§ 70-308. Performance evaluation.
All employees shall have an annual written performance evaluation conducted by
the immediate supervisor and the department director. Said evaluation shall be
reviewed with the Human Resources Department prior to discussing the evaluation
with the employee. The following procedure shall be used for performance
evaluations:
   A.   Evaluations shall be completed on forms provided by the Human Resources
Department.
   B.   Evaluations shall be performed by the employee's immediate supervisor.
   C.   Evaluations shall be based on an employee's job description.
   D.   Evaluation criteria shall be based on:
      (1)   Performance effectiveness.
      (2)   Goals of the Department.
   E.   The employee shall prepare a written self-assessment of his/her
performance.
   F.   The Supervisor and employee shall agree on others to be consulted for
evaluation.
   G.   The Supervisor and employee shall meet during working hours to conduct
evaluation.
   H.   The employee shall sign the evaluation verifying that he/she has
reviewed the evaluation and had an opportunity to respond.
   I.   The evaluation shall be signed by the department director and the Human
Resources Director or his/her designee.s
§ 70-309. Personnel records.
   A.   A personnel file will be established for every employee and maintained
in the custody of the Human Resources Department. No information will be placed
in the file without the employee’s knowledge.
   B.   The following information will be a permanent part of the file and will
be maintained following termination until the year following the year of the
employee's 75th birthday:
      (1)   Employee's most recent employment application.
      (2)   Employee notifications regarding hiring, promotion, demotion,
suspension, dismissal or other substantial change in employment or pay status
other than general increases.
      (3)   Authorizations for deductions from pay such as but not limited to
insurance, retirement, taxes, union dues or other voluntary contributions.
These are permanent so long as they are not canceled or superseded with a more
recent authorization.
      (4)   Letters of commendation or other awards or recognitions.
      (5)   For employees hired after November 7, 1986, verification of the
employee's citizenship or right to work in the United States (Immigration and
Naturalization Service Form I-9).
      (6)   Most recent job description, performance standards and objectives.
      (7)   Routine and emergency information as required such as phone
numbers, home address, persons to contact, physical or medical limitations
related to the job.
      (8)   Job-related training, qualification or license records.
      (9)   Any other information with significant bearing on the employee's
work behavior, qualifications or fitness for employment.
      (10)   In addition, any information the employee considers to be
important to their employment which is not offensive, prejudicial or
discriminatory may be placed in the file at the employee's request.
      (11)   Record of exit interview.
      (12)   Records of preemployment reference checks.
   C.   The following information will be a permanent part of the file;
however, it will not be referred to after two years old so long as no
discipline for similar offenses has occurred since their issuance.
      (1)   Letters of warning or reprimand, or confirmations or oral
reprimands. The person issuing such a letter may direct that it be removed
earlier if in the issuing person's opinion, the letter has served its purpose
and is no longer required.
   D.   The following information will be temporary and will be removed from
the file and destroyed as indicated:
      (1)   Performance evaluation reports when five years old.
      (2)   Records of any arrests, charges, investigation of wrongdoing, or
similar actions involving the employee which later resulted in the employee's
acquittal or in the charges being dropped.
   E.   The following information will not be kept in the employee's personnel
file:
      (1)   Racial, ethic, religious or political identifications or
affiliation.
      (2)   Any listing or records of grievances filed by the employee.
   F.   The personnel file will be in the custody of the Human Resources
Department, and except for public information, will be available only to any of
the following persons, under supervision, in the Human Resources Department:
      (1)   Office and legal personnel as officially required.
      (2)   The individual employee, at a reasonable time, and when accompanied
by the employees written authorization, his/her legal representative or
bargaining unit representative.
      (3)   Legal authorities only when required by subpoena in which case the
employee will be notified of the information provided.
   G.   Public information will include the employee's name, job title, salary,
and fringe benefits provided.
   H.   Regular examination of the personnel file to purge temporary documents
shall be done annually.
Part 4
Benefits
§ 70-401. Insurance, pension, workers' compensation and other benefits.
[Amended 11-26-2018 by Ord. No. 57- 2018; 7-22-2019 by Ord. No. 23-2019]
A.   Employees shall be entitled to the leave and holiday benefits and to life
insurance, health insurance, pension and workers' compensation, as per current
collective bargaining agreements and applicable law. There are three individual
pension boards: the Officers and Employees Retirement System, the Police
Pension Fund and the Firemen's Pension Fund, who administer the funds and
determine benefits. The Administrative Services Department shall make
accessible a pension plan summary to all employees detailing these benefits.
B.   The elected mayor and elected auditor, and those who may replace them if
those positions become vacant during their term of service, shall be eligible
for the same City provided benefits listed in § 70-401 A herein (for Pension
benefit also see Bill 79-1987).
C.   Part-time employees, temporary employees and seasonal employees shall only
be entitled to workers' compensation.
D.   Authorizing the creation of an OPEB (other post-employment benefits) trust
agreement to provide for certain post- employment benefits for employees hired
prior to January 1, 2011, as set out below.
OTHER POST EMPLOYMENT BENEFITS TRUST AGREEMENT
      This OTHER POST EMPLOYMENT BENEFITS TRUST AGREEMENT (hereinafter the
"Trust Agreement") is entered into this 26th day of November, 2018 by and
between the City of Reading, (the "City") and the City of Reading OPEB Board of
Trustees (hereinafter, the "OPEB Board").
   RECITALS
      WHEREAS, the City of Reading is a Third Class City operating under a Home
Rule Charter pursuant to the laws of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania; and
      WHEREAS, the City of Reading has employees and former employees who have
since retired; and
      WHEREAS, the City is contractually obligated to provide certain post-
employment benefits other than pensions (hereinafter "OPEB") to certain
employees (hereinafter "Covered Individuals" or "Plan Participants") hired
prior to January 1, 2011 who are eligible participants, eligible employees,
eligible retirees, their spouses, dependents and beneficiaries; and
      WHEREAS, the City, has established and maintained a plan in order to
provide such post-employment benefits; and
      WHEREAS, the City funds the plan in accordance with collective bargaining
agreements that have been entered into between the City and unions representing
uniformed and non-uniformed employees; and
      WHEREAS, the City also funds the plan with respect to some of the City's
non-unionized employees; and
      WHEREAS, pursuant to Government Accounting Standards Board Statements No.
74 & 75 ("GASB 74" and "GASB 75," respectively), the City must report the
City's liability for the City's OPEB on the City's financial statements to the
extent that such liability is not fully funded; and
      WHEREAS, pursuant to GASB 74 and GASB 75, the City's liability for the
City's OPEB will be considered funded if appropriate amounts are contributed
and irrevocably set aside and held in a trust established, maintained, and
administered for the purpose of satisfying such liability; and
      WHEREAS, the City has determined that it should enter into this Trust
Agreement in order to hold contributions from the City for the irrevocable
funding of the City's OPEB; and
      WHEREAS, the City is exempt from federal income tax pursuant to Section
115 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as amended (the "Code") and is exempt
from taxation by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania; and
      WHEREAS, the City intends that the income accruing on contributions made
by the City to the Trust be exempt from both federal income tax and
Pennsylvania taxes pursuant to Section 115 of the Code and Pennsylvania law,
respectively; and
      WHEREAS, the City intends that contributions to the Trust on behalf of
Plan Participants be irrevocably made and excludable from the income of such
individuals to the extent permitted under the Code and permitted under the laws
of Pennsylvania; and
      WHEREAS, City intends that benefit payments from the Trust on behalf of
Plan Participants be excludable from the income of such individuals to the
extent permitted under the Code and permitted under the laws of Pennsylvania;
      NOW, THEREFORE, in consideration of the foregoing, the parties agree as
follows:
Article I
Definitions
   1.1   Definitions. For the purposes of this Trust Agreement, the following
terms shall have the meanings set forth below, unless otherwise expressly
provided.
      (a)   "OPEB Board" or "OPEB Board of Trustees" means the body established
by Article 10 of this Trust Agreement, the membership of which, as so
constituted from time to time, comprises the OPEB Board of Trustees.
      (b)   "Code" has the meaning provided in the Recitals.
      (c)   "City" has the meaning provided in the Preamble.
      (d)   "City's OPEB" has the meaning provided in the Recitals.
      (e)   "Covered Individual" or "Covered Individuals" has the meaning
provided in the Recitals.
      (f)   "Dependent" means an individual who is considered a dependent
eligible for benefits under the terms of the Plan as approved by resolution or
policy of the City, or as required by law.
      (g)   "Effective Date" means the date on which the Trust is funded.
      (h)   "Eligible" means, with respect to any individual, meeting the
requirements for eligibility pursuant to resolution or policy of the City and
the terms of the Plan.
      (i)   "Employee" means an individual who is employed full time by the
City and who is in a classification of employees who are eligible or who may
become eligible to be Retirees.
      (j)   "GASB "74" and "GASB "75" have the meaning provided in the
Recitals.
      (k)   "Investment Manager" means the individual or entity appointed by
the Trustees who is empowered to manage all or a portion of the investments of
the Trust Fund. This Manager has no control or authority over the benefits
provided.
      (l)   "OPEB" means "other postemployment benefits".
      (m)   "Participant" means an Eligible Employee, Eligible Retiree,
Eligible Spouse or other Eligible Dependent for whom coverage is or will be
provided under the terms of the Plan.
      (n)   "Plan" means the methods by which the City of Reading has
historically paid such post-employment health benefits which might include any
of the following: sickness, accident, medical, disability, or similar welfare
benefits, through insurance or otherwise, in existence as of the Effective Date
or later adopted by the City for the benefit of its Eligible Employees,
Eligible Retirees, and their Eligible Spouses and Eligible Dependents. The
right to such benefits derives either from a collective bargaining agreement
(in the case of union employees, spouses, or dependents) or from a City issued
policy statement as regards certain non-union management retirees.
      (o)   "Political Subdivision" means a unit of government within the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, including a county, municipality, city, town,
township, village, local public authority, school district, special district,
council of governments, or any other regional or intrastate governmental entity
or instrumentality of a local government exclusive of institutions of higher
learning and hospitals.
      (p)   "Retiree" means an individual who is a retired Employee of the City
who is eligible for benefits under the terms of the Plan.
      (q)   "Spouse" means the lawful spouse of an Eligible Employee or
Eligible Retiree, as determined under the laws of the state in which the
Eligible Employee or Eligible Retiree has his or her primary place of residence
and the terms of the Plan. Where required by law, Spouse shall include a civil
union partner.
      (r)   "State" means the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
      (s)   "Trust" or "Trust Fund" means those assets, described in Section
2.1 of this Trust Agreement, held by the OPEB Board at any time pursuant to
this Trust Agreement.
      (t)   "Trust Agreement" has the meaning provided in the Preamble.
      (u)   "Trustee" or "Trustees" has the meaning provided in the Preamble.
Article II
Establishment of the Trust
   2.1   Trust Established. The Trust is hereby established as of the Effective
Date, separate and apart from the general assets of the City for the exclusive
benefit of Participants. The Trust Fund shall consist of the investments made
pursuant to this Trust Agreement, any cash received by the OPEB Board, any
other assets held pursuant to the terms of this Trust Agreement, and any
increments, proceeds, earnings, and income to the above assets.
   2.2   Purpose. This Trust is intended to be a separate trust to accommodate
funding of the City's OPEB. Accordingly, as provided in this Trust Agreement,
the assets of the Trust are dedicated to providing benefits to Participants in
accordance with the Plan and are legally protected from the creditors of the
City, the City, and the OPEB Board.
   2.3   Trust's Compliance. The Trust is intended to comply with and be a tax-
exempt governmental trust under Section 115 of the Code. This Trust Agreement
shall be interpreted in a manner consistent with that intent and with the
intention of the City that the Trust hereunder satisfies those requirements of
GASB 74 (if applicable) and GASB 75.
   2.4   Exclusive Benefit. Except as provided under applicable law, no part of
the corpus or income of the Trust Fund may be used for, or diverted to, any
purpose other than for the exclusive benefit of Participants under any Plan
prior to the satisfaction of all liabilities of the Plan with respect to such
Participants and payment of expenses of administering the Trust.
   2.5   Spendthrift Provision. All assets, income and distributions of the
Trust shall be protected against the claims of creditors of the City, the City,
and Plan Participants, and shall not be subject to execution, attachment,
garnishment, the operation of bankruptcy, the insolvency laws or other process
whatsoever, nor shall any assignment thereof be enforceable in any court.
   2.6   Named Fiduciary. The Trustees of the OPEB Board shall be the
fiduciaries for the Trust Fund and shall have the power to delegate
responsibilities under this Trust Agreement. Such delegations may be to
officers and employees of the City, the City, or to other individuals or
organizations, including an actuary or a third-party administrator or record
keeper, all of whom shall hold those delegations at the pleasure of the OPEB
Board. Any employee of the City who already receives full-time pay, and who is
delegated such fiduciary responsibilities, shall serve without additional
compensation except for reimbursement for expenses properly and actually
incurred. Whenever the OPEB Board delegates a fiduciary duty in writing, the
Trustees of the OPEB Board shall be free from liability for breach of such duty
to the fullest extent permitted by law.
   2.7   Segregation of Assets. Assets under the Trust may be segregated only
for investment purposes. No individual account for any Participant will be
maintained at any time under the Trust, and no Participant will have any right
or title with respect to any specific assets of the Trust. Accordingly, no
Participant will have a preferred claim, lien on, security interest in, or any
beneficial interest in, any particular assets of the Trust. Participants will
be entitled to receive payments of assets of the Trust (or have such assets
paid on behalf of such Participants) only when, as, and if determined by the
OPEB Board in accordance with this Trust Agreement.
   2.8   Annual Audit. The City of Reading engages an outside accounting firm
to conduct an annual audit and to produce an Independent Auditor's Report. Each
year, the OPEB Board will engage the services of the same accounting firm that
the City of Reading uses for the purpose of conducting an annual audit of the
Trust. The outside accounting firm will not be paid out of the Trust. Rather,
the City of Reading shall pay for this annual audit. The results of such audit
shall be provided to all of the Trustees of the OPEB Board.
   2.9   Trust Fund Subject to Investment Risk. The Trust Fund is not insured
by the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation or any other federal agency. The
value of the Trust Fund is subject to investment risks, including possible loss
of principal.
Article III
Construction
   3.1   Situs of Trust. The Trust will be administered in the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania, and its validity, construction, and all rights hereunder shall be
governed by the laws of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania. All contributions to
the Trust Fund shall be deemed to occur in Pennsylvania.
   3.2   Gender, Number. Pronouns and other similar words used herein in the
masculine gender shall be read as the feminine gender where appropriate, and
the singular form of words shall be read as the plural where appropriate.
   3.3   Benefits Governed by Terms of Plan. The Plan shall govern eligibility
for benefits and the terms and conditions of payment for benefits out of assets
held in the Trust.
Article IV
Contributions
   4.1   Contributions by the City. The City may, but is not required to,
contribute to this Trust such funds that are necessary to fund the trust
sufficiently. Should the City decide to contribute to this Trust, then the City
shall have sole discretion to determine the amount (or amounts) that it decides
to contribute.
   4.2   Contributions Are Irrevocable; Exception for Mistake of Fact. Each
contribution to the Trust by the City shall be an irrevocable and indefeasible
transfer to the Trust. Except as provided in subsection (a) hereof, neither the
City, the OPEB Board of Trustees, Plan Participant, Covered Individual, nor any
Trustee shall have any right, title, interest, claim, or demand whatsoever in
or to the funds held by the Trust, other than the right to a proper application
thereof and accounting therefore by the OPEB Board of Trustees as provided
herein, nor shall any funds revert to the City, the OPEB Board of Trustees, a
Plan Participant, a Covered Individual, or any Trustee.
      (a)   Return of Contributions. Notwithstanding any other provisions of
this Trust Agreement, if and to the extent permitted by the Code and other
applicable laws and regulations thereunder and by GASB 74, if applicable, and
GASB 75, upon a Political Subdivision's request with the approval of the City,
a contribution that is deposited into the Trust by a mistake in fact shall be
returned by the OPEB Board to the Political Subdivision that contributed it
within a reasonable period of time.
   4.3   Discontinuance of Contributions. The discontinuance of contributions
to the Trust shall not automatically terminate the Trust. The Trustees shall
continue to administer the Trust in accordance with this Trust Agreement until
its obligations are discharged and satisfied.
Article V
Benefits
   5.1   Payment of Benefits. Benefits shall be paid to Participants pursuant
to the terms of the Plan and any applicable collective bargaining agreement.
The OPEB Board shall make distributions from the Trust as directed, in writing,
by the City for the purpose of reimbursing the City or its agent for the
payment of benefits under the Plan. Pursuant to the City's direction, the OPEB
Board may directly pay such amounts to a vendor or service provider designated
by the City, or may reimburse the City for insurance premiums or other payments
expended or to be expended for permissible benefits under the Plan. OPEB Board
shall have no duty to determine the rights or benefits of any person having or
claiming OPEB benefits or an interest under the Plan or this Trust Agreement.
Article VI
Duties of the Trustees
   6.1   Management of Trust Fund. The OPEB Board shall manage the assets of
the Trust Fund for investment purposes, as would a prudent person under like
circumstances who is familiar with such matters. The OPEB Board shall have no
authority over the payment of benefits or bills from the Trust assets absent
the approval of the City as stated above. The OPEB Board shall have no duty to
determine the rights or benefits of any person having or claiming an interest
under the Plan or this Trust Agreement.
   6.2   Receipt of Contributions. The OPEB Board agrees to accept
contributions to the Trust that are paid to the OPEB Board by the City in
accordance with the terms of this Trust Agreement. The OPEB Board shall receive
all contributions in cash or in such other form as permitted under the laws of
the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania and acceptable to the OPEB Board. The OPEB
Board shall be accountable to the City for the funds remitted to it by the City
and shall have a duty to see that such contributions comply with the provisions
of the Plan and with any statute, regulation or rule applicable to
contribution.
   6.3   Disbursements. Subject to Sections 2.1 and 2.4 of this Trust
Agreement, the OPEB Board shall from time to time make payments or
disbursements out of the Trust Fund to persons or other entities in such
amounts as are necessary for the payment of OPEB pursuant to and in accordance
with the terms of the Plan and for the payment of reasonable and proper
expenses of the Plan and this Trust. In addition, the OPEB Board shall from
time to time make payments or disbursements out of the Trust Fund to such
persons or other entities, including the City, for the reimbursement of the
Plan's OPEB obligations or expenses previously satisfied by such persons or
other entities. The OPEB Board shall pay all fees and expenses reasonably
incurred by them in the administration of OPEB under the Plan and the Trust
Fund unless the City directly pays such fees and expenses. Nothing contained in
this Trust Agreement or the Plan shall constitute a guarantee that Trust assets
will be sufficient to pay any OPEB to any particular Participant. The OPEB
Board shall have no duty to determine the rights or benefits of any person
having or claiming OPEB benefits or an interest under the Plan or this Trust
Agreement.
      (b)   Expenses. The reasonable and proper expenses of the OPEB of the
Plan and the Trust shall include, but not be limited to:
         (1)   The fees of any third-party record keeper and actuary's fee as
agreed upon by the OPEB Board from time to time;
         (2)   Expenses incurred by the OPEB Board in the operation and
administration of the OPEB under the Plan and this Trust Fund;
         (3)   The fees and other charges against the Trust Fund by any
Investment Manager or other person or firm that provides services for the OPEB
provided under the Plan or the Trust Fund, including attorney's fees; and
         (4)   Any income or other taxes properly levied or assessed against
the Trust Fund.
   6.4   Other Duties.
      (c)   Records. The OPEB Board shall keep such accounts and records and
make such reports and disclosures as shall be required by law and by the
Governmental Accounting Standards Board under this Trust Agreement and under
the Plan. The records of the Trust pertaining to the City shall be open to
inspection by the City at all reasonable times and will be audited on an annual
basis by such persons as the City may specify.
      (d)   Statements. The OPEB Board shall furnish the City with an annual
statement of account showing the condition of the Trust Fund and all
investments, receipts, disbursements and other transactions effected by the
OPEB Board.
      (e)   Compliance. The OPEB Board shall take such action (or refrain from
taking such action, as the case may be) as shall be necessary to comply with
the Trust, other agreements between the OPEB Board and the City or applicable
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania and federal laws.
      (f)   Authority to Delegate Duties. The OPEB Board is authorized to
delegate any of the duties assigned to them in this Trust Agreement, other than
those duties relating to the investment or management of the assets of the
Trust Fund, to any individual or organization it deems qualified to perform
such duties. The OPEB Board is only authorized to delegate investment and asset
management duties to an Investment Manager pursuant to the provisions of
Article VII. When delegating duties, the OPEB Board shall document the
delegation in either (i) a written amendment to this Trust, (ii) OPEB Board
minutes or resolutions, or (iii) a separate written agreement with the
delegate.
      (g)   Liability Limitations. The OPEB Board and its Trustees shall not be
liable for the acts or omissions of parties to whom they have specifically
delegated duties, except with respect to any acts or omissions in which the
Trustee participates knowingly or which the Trustee knowingly undertakes to
conceal, and which the Trustee knows constitutes a breach of fiduciary
responsibility. Each Trustee shall be held harmless, to the extent provided for
in the laws of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, by the City and Participants,
together with their heirs, successors and assignees, from any and all liability
hereunder for acts or omissions performed in good faith and with prudence.
Except as otherwise provided by contract or applicable law, no person acting in
a fiduciary capacity with respect to the Trust shall be liable for any action
taken or not taken with respect to the Trust except for actions that constitute
breach of fiduciary duty or willful misconduct.
Article VII
Investment of Trust Assets
   7.1   General Investment Power. The assets of the Trust shall be invested by
the OPEB Board in accordance with Pennsylvania law and the investment policy
developed by the City or, to the extent so delegated, the OPEB Board. Except to
the extent such duties are specifically delegated to one or more Investment
Managers under this Article, the OPEB Board shall manage and control assets of
the Trust Fund, including selecting and retaining or disposing of any
investment of such assets.
   7.2   Investment and Funding Policies. The City or, if the City so delegates
such authority, the OPEB Board, shall establish funding policies for
contributions under the Trust as may be appropriate from time to time,
consistent with the requirements of applicable law. The OPEB Board shall also
establish and comply with investment policies for Trust investments. The OPEB
Board shall coordinate its investment and funding policies with the Trust's
financial needs.
   7.3   Full Investment Powers. The OPEB Board shall have full discretion and
authority with regard to the investment of the Trust Fund, except to the extent
they have delegated such discretion to a properly appointed Investment Manager
with respect to Trust assets under such Investment Manager's control or
direction. The OPEB Board is authorized and empowered with all investment
powers conferred on trustees by the laws of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
   7.4   Investment Managers. The provisions in this subsection shall control
the appointment and use of Investment Managers, as follows:
      (h)   Appointment. The OPEB Board may appoint one or more Investment
Managers to manage the assets of all or any part of the Trust Fund. Each such
Investment Manager shall be duly qualified to act in such capacity under
applicable Federal and Pennsylvania law. The OPEB Board shall obtain from any
Investment Manager a written statement:
         (1)    acknowledging that it is a fiduciary with respect to the Trust
assets under its management; and
         (2)   certifying that it is qualified under applicable Federal and
Pennsylvania law to be appointed as an Investment Manager under this Trust
Agreement.
      The OPEB Board shall enter into a written contract or agreement with each
such Investment Manager in connection with its appointment as such, and such
contract shall be subject to such terms and conditions and shall grant to the
Investment Manager such authority and responsibilities as the OPEB Board deems
appropriate under the circumstances. The OPEB Board shall not be responsible
for any investment decision made by an Investment Manager unless the OPEB Board
actually makes that decision.
      (i)   OPEB Board Duties. Any investment directions or notifications from
an Investment Manager to the OPEB Board may be made orally or in writing, or in
such manner as shall be agreed upon between the Investment Manager and the OPEB
Board, provided, in the event the Investment Manager gives the OPEB Board oral
recommendations, directions or notifications, the Investment Manager shall
confirm such directions or notifications in writing immediately thereafter.
      (j)   Violation of Trustees' Fiduciary Duties. Notwithstanding the
foregoing, if, in the OPEB Board's sole discretion, the execution of any
instruction with respect to, or the continued holding of any assets in, an
investment managed by an Investment Manager would be in violation of the OPEB
Board's fiduciary responsibilities, the OPEB Board may refuse to execute such
instruction or may dispose of such asset or assets, respectively; provided, the
OPEB Board shall not be responsible for the acts or omissions of such
Investment Manager. In any such case, the OPEB Board shall promptly notify the
Investment Manager of such situation.
      (k)   Failure to Direct. In the event that an appointed Investment
Manager shall fail to invest all or any portion of the assets under its
management, the OPEB Board shall be responsible for the investment of such
assets. If an appointed Investment Manager shall fail to give the OPEB Board
instructions or directions relating to the voting of shares held pursuant to an
investment directed by the Investment Manager or the execution and delivery of
proxies, or relating to the purchase and sale of fractional shares or the
exercise of any other ownership right, the OPEB Board shall take such action as
they deem to be in the best interest of the Trust, provided such action is
consistent with the then existing investment policies established by the OPEB
Board.
      (l)   Termination of Appointment. Upon termination of the appointment of
an Investment Manager, the OPEB Board may appoint a successor Investment
Manager with respect to the investments formerly under the management of the
terminated Investment Manager or may merge or combine such investments with
other investments or Trust assets within the guidelines of the investment
policies established by the OPEB Board.
      (m)   Asset Transfer. If the OPEB Board directs an Investment Manager to
hold a portion of the assets of the Trust as well as make the investment
decisions for such funds, the OPEB Board shall enter into such contractual or
other arrangements as are necessary for the transfer and custody of such assets
of the Trust Fund. If the OPEB Board terminates such Investment Manager, it
shall take such action to recapture and take directly into the Trust Fund any
assets so transferred.
      (n)   Reports and Valuations. An Investment Manager who has custody of
any portion of the assets of the Trust shall keep accurate and detailed books
and records on all investments, receipts, disbursements and other transactions
for such account and shall determine the fair market value of the assets of
such account as of each reporting date determined by the OPEB Board, and,
further, shall file a copy of such books and records and valuations with the
OPEB Board on or before such deadlines as the OPEB Board shall reasonably set.
The OPEB Board also shall have the right to request that any person who is
responsible for making the investment decisions for an investment account
determine the fair market value of any asset, or all of the assets, held for
that account and file a copy of such valuation with the OPEB Board before such
deadlines as the OPEB Board reasonably shall set, and each such person shall
comply with any such request.
   7.5   Assets. No assets from the Trust shall be withdrawn for the first five
(5) years of the existence of the Trust. Thereafter, no more than five percent
(5%) of the total assets of the Trust as shall be used as a contribution from
the Trust against the annual OPEB expenses of the City in the following year.
Article VIII
Powers of the Trustees
   8.1   General Authority. Except to the extent such powers are specifically
delegated to an Investment Manager under Article VII of this Trust Agreement,
the OPEB Board shall receive, hold, manage, convert, sell, exchange, invest,
reinvest, disburse and otherwise deal with the assets of the Trust, including
contributions to the Trust and the income and profits therefrom, without
distinction between principal and income and in the manner and for the uses and
purposes set forth in this Trust Agreement.
   8.2   Specific Powers. In the management of the Trust, the OPEB Board or
their delegates, as the case may be, shall have the following powers in
addition to the powers customarily vested in trustees by the laws of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania but in no way in derogation thereof, and such
powers shall be exercised in accordance with proper directions and the
investment policy established by the OPEB Board and without order of, and
report to, any court:
      (o)   Sales. To sell, exchange, convey, transfer, or otherwise dispose of
any property held in the Trust, by private contract or at public auction. No
person dealing with the OPEB Board shall be bound to see the application of the
purchase money or other property delivered to the OPEB Board or to inquire into
the validity, expediency, or propriety of any such sale or other disposition;
      (p)   Purchase of Property. The OPEB Board and the Investment Manager
shall not purchase or acquire any ownership interest in any real property, nor
shall the OPEB Board sell, mortgage or lease real property related to the
operation of the Trust. Likewise, the OPEB Board and Investment Manager shall
not purchase or acquire any interest in any investment whose primary purpose is
the ownership of real property;
      (q)   Retention of Cash. To hold cash without interest in such amounts as
may be in their opinion reasonable for the proper operation of the Trust;
      (r)   Exercise of Owner's Rights. To give general or special proxies or
powers of attorney with or without power of substitution with respect to any
corporate stock or other security; to exercise any conversion privileges,
subscription rights or other options, and to make any payments incidental
thereto; to oppose, consent to, or otherwise participate in reorganizations or
other changes affecting any stock, bond, note or other property, and to
delegate discretionary powers and pay any assessments or charges in connection
therewith, and generally to exercise any of the powers of an owner, including
voting rights, with respect to any stock, bond, note or other property held as
part of the Trust;
      (s)   Registration of Investment. To cause any stock, bond, other
security or other property held as part of the Trust to be registered in its
own name or in the name of one or more of its nominees; provided, the books and
records of the OPEB Board shall at all times show that all such investments are
part of the Trust;
      (t)   Disbursement. To make disbursements for the payment of the City's
OPEB under the Plan and for the payment of reasonable and proper expenses of
this Trust or of the Plan as related to the City's OPEB;
      (u)   Retention of Disputed Funds. To retain any funds or property
subject to any dispute without liability for the payment of interest; and to
decline to make payment or delivery of the funds or property until final
adjudication is made by a court of competent jurisdiction;
      (v)   Execution of Instruments. To make, execute, acknowledge and deliver
any and all documents of transfer and conveyance and any and all other
instruments, which may be necessary or appropriate to carry out the powers
herein granted;
      (w)   Settlement of Claims and Debts. To settle, compromise or submit to
arbitration any claims, debts or damages due or owing to or from the Trust, to
commence or defend legal or administrative proceedings and to represent the
Trust in all legal and administrative proceedings;
      (x)   Employment of Agents, Advisors and Counsel. To employ and to act or
refrain from acting on the advice or opinion of suitable agents, actuaries,
accountants, investment advisers, brokers and counsel, and to pay their
reasonable expenses and compensation;
      (y)   Power to do any Necessary Act. To do all acts which it may deem
necessary or proper and to exercise any and all powers of the OPEB Board under
the Plan and this Trust Agreement upon such terms and conditions as it may deem
in the best interests of the Trust;
      (z)   Loans. To borrow money only for such periods of time and upon such
terms and conditions as the OPEB Board deems necessary and proper to cover any
temporary, short-term overdrafts, and to secure such loans by mortgaging,
pledging or conveying any property of the Trust; and
      (aa)   Appointment of Custodian. To appoint a custodian to safeguard the
assets of the Trust. The City hereby authorizes and directs the OPEB Board to
enter into such agreements with any such custodian as may be necessary to
establish an account with the custodian. For administrative purposes,
contributions deposited to the appointed custodian shall be deemed as
contributions deposited with the OPEB Board on behalf of the Trust.
   8.3   Standard of Care. The OPEB Board Trustees shall discharge their duties
under this Trust Agreement with the care and skill required with respect to
such duties. The Trustees shall not be responsible for the title, validity, or
genuineness of any property or evidence of title thereto received by them or
delivered by them pursuant to this Trust Agreement and shall be held harmless
in acting upon any notice, request, direction, instruction, consent,
certification, or other instrument believed by them to be genuine and delivered
by the proper party or parties.
Article IX
Administration
   9.1   Bonds and Reports to Court. Each Trustee shall be bonded to the extent
required by law, except that, to the extent the requirement of any such bond
may be waived, such waiver shall be deemed to have been exercised, and no such
bond shall be required. Neither the OPEB Board nor its Trustees shall be
required to make any inventory or appraisal or report to any court or to secure
any order of any court for the exercise of any power herein contained.
   9.2   Accounting. The OPEB Board shall maintain accurate records and
detailed accounts of all investments, receipts, disbursements, earnings, and
other transactions related to the Trust, and those records shall be available
at all reasonable times to the City and its independent auditor. The OPEB Board
shall provide such reports to the City at mutually agreeable times.
   9.3   Right to Audit. The City may conduct an independent audit of the Trust
Fund at least annually. The City may engage an independent auditor of its own
choosing to assist in or conduct the audit. The City shall have the right at
all reasonable times during the terms of the Trust and for three (3) years
after the termination of the Trust to examine documents of the OPEB Board
relating to the Trust and the OPEB Board's performance hereunder.
   9.4   Action of the OPEB Board. A majority of the Trustees of the OPEB Board
shall constitute a quorum and acts of a majority of the Trustees present at any
meeting at which a quorum is present or acts approved by all Trustees in
writing shall be deemed to be valid acts. Notwithstanding the above, the duly
elected chairperson of the OPEB Board as designated by the Trustees to perform
ministerial acts, may execute any documents relating to the Trust, including
contracts relating to the investment or reinvestment of the assets of the
Trust, documents necessary for the exercise of any ownership rights thereunder,
service agreements or other related documents, and may perform other such
ministerial acts. The OPEB Board shall keep minutes of its proceedings and
complete and accurate records which may be examined at any reasonable time on
behalf of the City by any officer or employee designated in writing by the
City.
Article X
Selection and Term of Board of Trustees
   10.1   Membership. The OPEB Board shall be made up of the following
Trustees: (a) a currently employed City of Reading employee who must be a
Certified Public Accountant, unless there are not currently employed CP As.
This person shall be appointed to the OPEB Board by the Mayor; (b) the Managing
Director the City of Reading; (c) the Director of Administrative Services; (d)
a member of City Council who shall be appointed by a majority vote of City
Council; and (e) a retired employee who shall be appointed by the Mayor. For
purposes of this paragraph, in the event that the position of Managing Director
or Director of Administrative Services is vacant, then the Mayor may appoint
any city employee as an interim Trustee of the OPEB Board until the vacancy is
filled. The OPEB Board shall, by majority vote, designate a Chair. The OPEB
Board shall meet at least twice a year with dates to be determined by the OPEB
Board or shall meet as often as reasonably necessary as determined by a
majority of the OPEB Board.
   10.2   Term. Each Trustee shall serve as Trustee until such time as the
Trustee resigns or is removed by the City, as the case may be.
   10.3   Compensation. Trustees shall not receive any compensation for their
services rendered as Trustees.
Article XI
Miscellaneous Provisions
   11.1   Taxes.
      (bb)   Until advised to the contrary by the City, the OPEB Board shall
consider the Trust to be exempt from federal, state, local and foreign income
taxes. However, if the OPEB Board has reason to believe that such exemption
does not or ceases to apply, the OPEB Board shall notify the City of its
belief, in writing. The OPEB Board shall not be responsible for filing any
federal, state, local or foreign tax or information returns relating to the
Plan or the Trust other than information returns required as a result of any
distribution from the Trust.
      (cc)   The OPEB Board shall promptly notify the City of any taxes levied
upon or assessed against the Trust. If the City wishes to contest the tax
assessment, it must give appropriate written instructions to the OPEB Board
within thirty (30) days of notification. If the OPEB Board does not receive
written instructions within thirty (30) days of notification, the OPEB Board
will pay the tax from the Trust.
   11.2   No Third Party Beneficiaries. The provisions of this Trust Agreement
are intended to benefit only the parties hereto, their respective successors
and assigns, and Participants under each Plan. There are no other third party
beneficiaries.
   11.3   Waiver. No waiver by either party of any failure or refusal to comply
with an obligation hereunder shall be deemed a waiver of any other or
subsequent failure or refusal to so comply.
   11.4   Partial Invalidity. If any term or provision of this Trust Agreement
or the application thereof to any person or circumstances shall, to any extent,
be invalid or unenforceable, the remainder of this Trust Agreement, or the
application of such term or provision to persons or circumstances other than
those as to which it is held invalid or unenforceable, shall not be affected
thereby, and each term and provision of this Trust Agreement shall be valid and
enforceable to the fullest extent permitted by law.
   11.5   Execution in Counterparts. This Trust Agreement may be executed in
any number of counterparts, each of which shall be deemed an original, and said
counterparts shall constitute one and the same instrument and may be
sufficiently evidenced by one counterpart.
   11.6   References to Statutes, etc. Unless the context clearly indicates to
the contrary, a reference to a statute, regulation, document, or provision
shall be construed as referring to any subsequently enacted, adopted, or re-
designated statute or regulation or executed counterpart.
Article XII
Amendment and Termination
   12.1   Amendment. This Trust Agreement may be amended at any time by written
agreement signed by the City and the OPEB Board, provided that such amendment
shall not operate to violate any applicable law or regulation.
   12.2   Termination of Trust. The City reserves the right at any time to
terminate this Trust; provided, however, that under no circumstance shall any
portion of the Trust revert to or become property of the City or a Political
Subdivision, except as provided in this Trust Agreement. Upon termination, the
OPEB Board shall continue to administer the Trust in accordance with the
provisions contained herein until all obligations under the Plan have been
discharged and satisfied or all funds have been paid out. Upon termination of
the Trust, and after the satisfaction of outstanding liabilities under the Plan
to provide benefits and pay reasonable expenses, the assets of the Trust shall
not be returned to the City, but instead shall solely be applied toward the
provision of sickness, accident, medical, disability or similar welfare
benefits through another trust, as the City appropriately directs, with the
intent that all income on such assets be exempt from tax under Section 115 or
other applicable section of the Code.
   12.3   Termination of Plan. The City reserves the right to terminate any
Plan at any time. Upon such termination, the applicable part of the Trust shall
be distributed by the Trustees in accordance with directions from the City for
the purpose of providing permissible benefits. The OPEB Board is under no
obligation to review written instructions from the City for compliance with the
Plan. From the date of termination of the Plan until the final distribution of
the Trust Fund, the OPEB Board shall continue to have all the powers provided
under this Trust Agreement with respect to the assets of the Plan held in the
Trust, and if not directly paid by the City, Trustee shall be entitled to debit
the Trust for its out of pocket expenses (including counsel fees) incurred
during this period.
Article XIII
Limited Effect of Plan and Trust
   14.1   Rights Limited to Terms of Plan and Trust Agreement. Subject to
applicable law, neither the establishment of the Plan nor the Trust, nor any
modification thereof, the creation of any fund or account, nor the payment of
any benefits, shall be construed as giving to any person covered under the Plan
or other person any legal or equitable right against the OPEB Board or the City
or any right to benefits under the Plan, except as may otherwise be expressly
provided in the Plan or in this Trust Agreement.
Article XIV
Protective Clause
   15.1   Insured Benefits. Neither the City nor the OPEB Board shall be
responsible for the validity of any contract of insurance or other arrangement
maintained in connection with the Plan, or for the failure on the part of the
insurer or provider to make payments provided by such contract, or for the
action of any person which may delay payment or render a contract void or
unenforceable in whole or in part.
§ 70-402. Injury on duty.
   A.   The City of Reading has a comprehensive safety and training program
independent of this code. In the event any employee suffers an accident on
duty, he/she shall immediately notify his/her supervisor, who shall in turn
file a full report with the Human Resources Department within 48 hours of the
accident.
   B.   An employee who sustains a work-related injury, as a result of which
he/she is disabled, shall be paid the difference between the money to which he/
she may be entitled under workers' compensation, social security or other
applicable disability benefits and his/her full salary, which difference shall
be charged to his/her sick leave, and shall be paid only to the extent of his/
her accrued sick leave.
Part 5
Leave, Vacations and Holidays
§ 70-501. Family medical leave.
   A.   Under the Family and Medical Leave Act, an eligible employee may
request up to a total of 12 work weeks of unpaid leave during any twelve-month
period at the time of the birth or adoption of a child or at the time of a
serious health condition affecting the employee or a family member (as defined
by the Act).
   B.   An eligible employee (as defined by the Act) is one who has been
employed by the City for at least 12 months and for at least 1,250 hours of
service with the City during the previous 12 months prior to the leave
requested.
   C.   Employees are entitled to unpaid leave of absence in compliance with
the Family and Medical Leave Act as outlined in the employee handbook. The
following provisions shall apply to full-time employees only:
      (1)   At the discretion of the Human Resources Director and Managing
Director, emergency leave may be granted to an employee who has an
extraordinary personal emergency that is not covered by any of the forms of
leave detailed herein.4
4.   Editor's Note: Amended during codification (see
Ch. 1, General Provisions, Part 2).
§ 70-502. Holidays.
[Amended 5-29-2001 by Ord. No. 14-2001; 2-14-2022 by Ord. No. 12-2022]
   A.   The following days shall be recognized by the City as paid holidays:5
 
New Year’s Day       Labor Day
Martin Luther King Day Veterans Day
Presidents’ Day      Thanksgiving Day
Memorial Day           Day after Thanksgiving
Juneteenth             Christmas Eve
Independence Day       Christmas Day
 
   B.   Monday shall be recognized as the holiday for all holidays that occur
on Sunday, and Friday for all holidays that occur on Saturday.
   C.   If an employee is called upon to and does work on any of the holidays
set forth in this section, he/she shall be paid as provided in §
70-705, Overtime.
   D.   Any employee who is absent without paid leave or reasonable excuse,
either the workday before or after a holiday, will forfeit the holiday pay.
   E.   Each employee shall be granted two personal days in addition to the
above mentioned holidays which shall be taken with the approval of the
department director. 6
F.   Personal days must be used in the year in which they are earned.7
5.   Editor's Note: Amended during codification (see
Ch. 1, General Provisions, Part 2).
6.   Editor's Note: Amended during codification (see
Ch. 1, General Provisions, Part 2).
7.   Editor's Note: Added during codification (see
Ch. 1, General Provisions, Part 2).
   G.   Upon separation from the City of Reading, unused personal days are
forfeited. Personal days will not be paid out. 8
8.   Editor's Note: Added during codification (see
Ch. 1, General Provisions, Part 2).
§ 70-503. Annual vacation leave.
   A.   Full-time employees shall accrue vacation leave according to the
following schedule:
      (1)   If hired by June 1 of any calendar year, employees will be entitled
to five work days for the first year of service. 9
      (2)   For the second year to the eighth year of service, two weeks or 10
workdays.
      (3)   After eight years of service, three weeks or 15 workdays.
      (4)   After 14 years of service, four weeks or 20 workdays.
      (5)   After 20 years of service, five weeks or 25 workdays.
   B.   "Years of service" shall be defined to mean the anniversary year in
which the individual shall have completed the specified number of continuous
years of service.
   C.   Full-time employees are entitled to carry over a maximum of two weeks
of vacation time into the next calendar year. 10
   D.   Upon separation from the City of Reading, any accrued unused vacation
time will be paid out on a prorated basis. 11
9.   Editor's Note: Amended during codification (see
Ch. 1, General Provisions, Part 2).
10. Editor's Note: Added during codification (see
Ch. 1, General Provisions, Part 2).
11. Editor's Note: Added during codification (see
Ch. 1, General Provisions, Part 2).
§ 70-504. Sick leave.
[Amended 6-25-2001 by Ord. No. 21-2001]
   A.   Full-time employees shall be allowed 12 sick leave days per year, which
shall be accumulated at the rate of one day per working month. However, no sick
leave shall be accumulated unless an employee works at least half the days
during the pay period when an employee is on sick leave. 12
   B.   Employees shall accrue unused sick leave from year to year with a
maximum accumulation of 45 days. However, employees who have previously
accumulated an amount of sick leave in excess of 45 days shall retain their
current accumulated total. Any employee who has accumulated sick leave in
excess of the forty-five-day maximum shall be red-lined at his/ her level of
accumulation. No employee who has accumulated an excess of 45 days of sick
leave shall be allowed to accumulate any other sick leave until and unless such
person goes below the forty-five day maximum. Said person shall only be able to
accumulate sick leave once they have initially gone below the forty-five-day
limit.
   C.   At the end of each calendar year, an employee shall become entitled to
compensatory time off or pay at his regular daily rate of base pay in an amount
equal to one day for each calendar quarter in which the employee used none of
his allowable sick leave during the year just ended. The employee shall have
the option to choose either time off with pay or just pay.
   D.   Upon separation from the City of Reading, all sick leave is forfeited.
Remaining balances cannot be transferred to another employee. 13
      (1)   An employee with five years' seniority who has accumulated a
minimum of 30 sick leave days or more who then experiences an illness of 16
working days or more will be eligible to accrue sick leave at the rate of 2 1/
2 days per month for the total number of months it would take them to reach a
thirty-day accumulation. The total number of months during which the employee
may accumulate at the rate of 2 1/2 days per month rate shall be as set forth
in the schedule below. During the number of months that the employee would be
entitled to accumulate at the two-and-one-half-day rate, any absences shall be
subtracted from the days being accumulated. At the end of the period of months
during which the employee is entitled to accumulate at the rate of 2 1/2 days
per month, the employee would then revert back to the one day a month.
Schedule
Number of Months Eligible to Accumulate 2 1/2
Balance of Sick Days Remaining 2 Days Per Month
29                             1
28                             1
27                             1
26                             2
25                             2
24                             2
23                             3
22                             3
21                             4
20                             4
19                             4
18                             5
17                             5
16                             5
15                             6
14                             6
13                             7
12                             7
11                             8
10                             8
9                              8
 
12. Editor's Note: Original Subsection B, regarding accumulation of sick days,
which immediately followed this subsection, was repealed during codification
(see
Ch. 1, General Provisions, Part 2).
13. Editor's Note: Amended during codification (see
Ch. 1, General Provisions, Part 2).
Schedule
Balance of Sick Days Remaining Number of Months Eligible to Accumulate 2 1/
                               2 Days Per Month
Balance of Sick Days Remaining Number of Months Eligible to Accumulate 2 1/
                               2 Days Per Month
8                              9
7                              9
6                              10
5                              10
4                              10
3                              11
2                              11
1                              12
0                              12
§ 70-505. Bereavement leave. 14
Full-time employees shall receive leave with pay in the event of a death in the
family as follows:
   A.   In the case of spouse, parents, children, brother, sister,
grandparents, grandchild or stepchild, for a maximum of four days.
   B.   In the case of the death of father-in-law, mother-in-law, brother-in-
law, sister-in-law, aunt or uncle for the day of the funeral.
§ 70-506. Leave of absence.
The City will permit employees an unpaid leave of absence in cases where
required by disability and other circumstances and in accordance with the
Family and Medical Leave Act, as stipulated in the employee handbook.
14. Editor's Note: Amended during codification (see
Ch. 1, General Provisions, Part 2).
§ 70-507. Personal leave.15
   A.   Full-time employees that have been employed with the City for at least
six months of service and are not eligible for FMLA shall be entitled to take
personal leave up to a maximum of six months and shall have the right to return
to the same or an equivalent position. When possible, the request for personal
leave should be submitted to the Human Resources Department and certification
from a attending physician must be provided to support and substantiate the
need for the requested leave.
   B.   Personal leave shall be granted if related to a serious health
condition as defined under FMLA (illness, injury, impairment, or physical or
mental condition that involves one of the following):
      (1)   Hospital care. Inpatient care.
      (2)   Absence plus treatment. A period of incapacity for more than three
consecutive calendar days.
      (3)   Pregnancy or childbirth. Any period of incapacity due to pregnancy,
or for prenatal care
      (4)   Chronic serious health condition. Any period of incapacity or
treatment for such incapacity due to a serious health condition.
      (5)   Permanent/long-term conditions requiring supervision. A period of
incapacity that is permanent or long-term due to a contention for which
treatment may not be effective.
      (6)   Multiple treatments. Any period of absence to receive multiple
treatments (including any period of recovery therefrom).
   C.   Accrued pension and seniority rights as outlined in the employee
handbook, shall remain in place.
   D.   While personal leave is an unpaid leave (as is FMLA), an employee is
entitled to use accrued sick leave as well as accrued vacation leave for the
period that he/she is unable to work as certified by a physician. Upon the
exhaustion of all accrued paid leave, the balance of the personal leave period
will be considered as leave without pay.
   E.   Said provisions shall be consistent with the Pennsylvania Human
Relations Act of 1969, P.L. 133. No. 56, 43 P.S. § 951 et seq., and the Family
and Medical Leave Act of 1963.
15. Editor's Note: Amended during codification (see
Ch. 1, General Provisions, Part 2).
§ 70-508. Leave of absence for military reserve duty.
[Amended 6-25-2001 by Ord. No. 21-2001]
   A.   All City employees who are members, either enlisted or commissions of
any reserve component of any of the Armed Forces of the United States or of the
National Guard of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, shall be entitled to leave
of absence from their regular duties for a maximum of 15 days per year during
which time they shall, as members of such reserve, be engaged in active service
or field training ordered or authorized by federal or state forces. 16
   B.   Employee shall present his/her military orders to their immediate
supervisor immediately upon receipt. A copy of said orders shall be forwarded
to the Human Resources Department for the employee file.
16. Editor's Note: Amended during codification (see
Ch. 1, General Provisions, Part 2).
§ 70-509. Court appearance and jury duty.
   A.   Any employee who is called for jury duty or subpoenaed to appear as a
witness in any case other than one in which he/she is a party shall be entitled
to the difference between his/her regular compensation and the sum that he/she
shall receive for such duty.
   B.   This policy shall apply only to full-time employees and not to any
part-time, temporary or seasonal employees. Any employee making a court
appearance, other than as a subpoenaed witness, shall arrange some other type
of leave (e.g., annual leave, leave without pay) for the duration of his/her
absence.
   C.   In cases in which an employee needs to be excused from jury duty due to
their employment with the City of Reading, the department director shall refer
the request and/or need for excuse to the Director of the Human Resources
Department or his/her designee for correspondence with the court.17
17. Editor's Note: Amended during codification (see
Ch. 1, General Provisions, Part 2).
Part 6
Promotions
§ 70-601. Promotion procedure.
[Amended 6-25-2001 by Ord. No. 20-200118]
   A.   The City of Reading is committed to selecting the best available
applicant for the position in compliance with our Affirmative Action and Equal
Employment Opportunity Programs.
   B.   All full-time exempt (nonunion) positions shall be filled as follows:
      (1)   A notice of vacancy form shall be posted for a period of seven
calendar days at all work sites. This posting shall include:
         (a)   Department.
         (b)   Classification.
         (c)   Salary.
         (d)   Availability.
         (e)   Description of responsibilities and requirements.
         (f)   Statement of applicant procedure and deadline date.
      (2)   Applications will be reviewed and the most qualified applicant(s)
will be interviewed by the Human Resources Director or his/her designee and an
appropriate department representative. Not all candidates will be interviewed.
      (3)   An offer may be made to the most qualified applicant and, if
accepted, such transfer will be effective on a mutually agreeable date with the
affected department director(s).
      (4)   When required by federal mandates, or should this process fail to
produce a viable candidate, the Human Resources Department shall activate
recruitment methods in accordance with §
70-302 of this chapter.
      (5)   The Human Resources Director shall notify all applicants in writing
regarding their applicant status.
18. Editor's Note: Amended during codification (see
Ch. 1, General Provisions, Part 2).
Part 7
Rules and Regulations
§ 70-701. Salary administration.
[Amended 5-28-2002 by Ord. No. 20-2002; 6-24-2002 by Ord. No. 21-2002; 9-10-
2002 by Ord. No. 46-2002; 9-23-2002 by Ord. No. 49-2002; 1-13-2003 by Ord. No.
3-2003; 2-10-2003 by Ord. No. 4-2003; 6-17-2003 by Ord. No. 23-2003; 4-26-2004
by Ord. No. 17-2004; 7-26-2004 by Ord. No. 36-2004; 6-13-2005 by Ord. No. 39-
2005; 8-22-2005 by Ord. No. 52-2005; 9-26-2005 by Ord. No. 59-2005; 1-23-2006
by Ord. No. 7-2006; 2-6-2006, by Ord. No. 9-2006; 8-14-2006 by Ord. No. 55-
2006; 8-28-2006 by Ord. No. 59-2006; 12-11-2006 by Ord. No. 90-2006; 5-26-2007
by Ord. No. 20-2007; 7-9-2007 by Ord. No. 56-2007; 10-27-2008 by Ord. No. 69-
2008; 4-27-2009 by Ord. No. 24-2009; 10-26-2009 by Ord. No. 59-2009]
   A.   Only employees filling positions, as defined in §
70-201, and authorized in the annual Position Ordinance, as defined in §
5-212, shall be paid wages and earn benefits, including, but not limited to,
sick time, vacation time, participation in the pension program, etc. Employees
shall be paid for each semimonthly pay period on the 15th and last of each
month. If the 15th or last of the month falls on Saturday or Sunday, employees
shall be paid on the preceding working day. For payroll purposes, a work week
begins on a Saturday and ends on a Friday, regardless of whether an individual
employee is assigned weekend work.
   B.   Payment for overtime shall be made on the first pay period following
the pay period in which overtime is worked.
   C.   Any and all exceptions for leave without pay, disciplinary action,
etc., shall be deducted within the pay period or on the first pay period
following the pay period in which the charges are incurred.
   D.   Overtime or duplicate pay of any kind shall not be pyramided.
   E.   Employees attending conferences/seminars shall be reimbursed as per the
Fair Labor Standards Act and appropriate City ordinances.
   F.   Compensation of any City employee suspended from work for alleged
improper conduct or behavior shall be frozen. Upon resolution of the pending
allegations in the City employee's favor and his/her return to work, the
employee shall be paid retroactive to the date of suspension through payroll
during the next coming pay cycle. [Amended 8-26-2013 by Ord. No. 35-2013]
   G.   Salary increases.
      (1)   Annual employee salary increases which are not governed by union
labor contracts or mandated by other state statutes shall be limited to 3%
without City Council approval. The amount of the annual salary increase shall
be determined by a recommendation made by the employee’s direct supervisor and/
or department director in conjunction with consultation from the Human
Resources Department. If the Human Resources Department and the employee’s
department director believe that an employee is entitled to an annual salary
increase in excess of 3%, they shall obtain approval from both the Mayor and
Managing Director followed by a scheduled executive session with City Council
to discuss the reasons for providing a salary increase in excess of 3% of the
employee’s annual salary. If City Council agrees to increase an employee’s
salary after meeting with the department director and/or a representative of
the Human Resources Department, City Council shall pass a resolution
authorizing an annual salary increase in excess of 3% for the named employee.
[Amended 6-22-2015 by Ord. No. 34-2015]
      (2)   Annual salary increases for City of Reading department directors
are not covered by this section and are governed by §
705 of the City of Reading Home Rule Charter and Ord. No. 22-2002, passed on
June 24, 2002 (see Ch. A613 of the City Code).
      (3)   The provisions of Subsection G(1) of this section shall apply to
all employee salary increases effective January 1, 2003, and thereafter. Any
salary increases granted in 2003 in excess of 3% are hereby reduced to 3% and
any monies paid to an employee (as salary) in excess of 3% of their year 2002
salary shall be returned to the City of Reading from the proceeds of said
employee's pay for the pay period immediately following the effective date of
this provision. 19
   H.   Salary ranges. The following are the salary ranges for the starting
salary for each Department Director and the Managing Director. These ranges
shall apply regardless of whether the individual appointed to each position is
already a City employee. Directors that have served in their position for at
least 6 months may exceed the salary range if that salary is approved by City
Council through the adoption of an ordinance. [Amended 2-13-2023 by Ord. No.
12-2023]
      (1)   Managing Director. The Managing Director of the City of Reading
shall be compensated at an annual salary of no less than $90,000 and no more
than $150,000. [Amended 1-27-2020 by Ord. No. 12-2020]
      (2)   Chief of Fire and Rescue Services. The Chief of the Department of
Fire and Rescue Services for the City of Reading shall be compensated at an
annual salary of no less than $60,000 and no more than$110,000. [Amended 2-28-
2011 by Ord. No. 12-2011; 11-23-2020 by Ord. No. 78-2020]
   (3)   Chief of Police. The Chief of Police for the City of Reading shall be
compensated at an annual salary of no less than $120,000 and no more than
$175,000. [Amended 2-28-2011 by Ord. No. 12-2011; 3-9-2015 by Ord. No. 11-2015;
3- -2022 by Ord. No. 22-2022; 1-22-2024 by Ord. No. 4-2024]
      (4)   Public Works Director. The Director of the Department of Public
Works of the City of Reading shall be compensated at an annual salary of no
less than$118,000 and no more than $150,000. [Amended 8-11-2014 by Ord. No. 61-
2014; 11-23-2020 by Ord. No. 78-2020; 1-23-2023 by Ord. No. 8-2023]
      (5)   Director of Finance. The Director of Finance of the City of Reading
shall be compensated at an annual salary of no less than $75,000 and no more
than $110,000. [Added 2-28-2011 by Ord. No. 12-201120; Amended 11-23-2020 by
Ord. No. 78-2020]
      (6)   City Solicitor. The Director of the Legal Department for the City
of Reading shall be compensated at an annual salary of no less than $85,000 and
no more than $110,000. [Amended 1-27-2020 by Ord. No. 12-2020; 11-23-2020 by
Ord. No. 78-2020]
      (7)   Community Development Director. The Director of the Department of
Community and Economic Development for the City of Reading shall be compensated
at a salary of no less than $75,000 and no more than $130,000. [Amended 11-23-
2020 by Ord. No. 78-2020; 3- -2022 by Ord. No. 22-2022; 6-23-2025 by Ord. No.
42-2025]
      (8)   Human Resources Director. The Director of the Department of Human
Resources for the City of Reading shall be compensated at a salary of no less
than $75,000 and no more than $110,000. [Added 11-23-2020 by Ord. No. 78-2020]
19.   Editor's Note: Original Subsection G, regarding compensation for
suspended employees, which immediately followed this subsection, was repealed
8-26-2013 by Ord. No. 35-2013.
20.   Editor's Note: This ordinance also repealed original § 1-271, Subsection
8E, Finance Director, and Subsection 8F, Administrative Services Director,
previously included in this section.
§ 70-702. Payroll administration.
[Amended 10-26-2009 by Ord. No. 59-2009]
Every department director shall be responsible for implementing payroll
procedures as stipulated in the employee handbook. Only employees filling
positions defined in §
70-201 and authorized in the annual Position Ordinance, as defined in §
5-212, shall be paid wages and earn benefits including, but not limited to,
sick time, vacation time, participation in the pension program, etc.
§ 70-703. Payroll time sheet.
[Amended 8-26-2013 by Ord. No. 35-2013; 10-27-2014 by Ord. No. 79-2014]
   A.   A payroll time sheet shall be completed for every employee for every
pay period by the Supervisor or his/her designee.
   B.   The time sheet is to be submitted by the Supervisor or his/her
designee.
   C.   All time sheets are submitted to the Payroll Division after they are
verified for accuracy.
   D.   The Human Resources Department will provide fiscal analysis for cost
centers.
§ 70-704. Payroll deductions.
   A.   The following deductions shall be made from each employee's paycheck:
      (1)   Federal, state and local income tax.
      (2)   Public unemployment compensation law tax.
      (3)   Reading occupation tax, collected once yearly.
      (4)   Social security (FICA) tax.
      (5)   Officers and Employees Retirement Fund.
      (6)   Such other taxes as shall be mandated from time to time by federal,
state and/or local laws, rules or regulations.
   B.   AFSCME bargaining unit employees shall have their union dues on Fair
Share deduction made from their paycheck.
   C.   Other deductions can be made from each employee's paycheck as
stipulated in the handbook.
§ 70-705. Overtime.
[Amended 8-26-2013 by Ord. No. 35-2013]
No employee shall work overtime except at the request of or with the express
permission of the department director or his/her designee.
§ 70-706. Time and attendance of employees.
   A.   All full-time employees shall be granted an unpaid lunch period during
their work day.
[Amended 8-26-2013 by Ord. No. 35-2013]
   B.   All full-time employees shall be entitled to a rest period during each
1/2 work shift.
[Amended 8-26-2013 by Ord. No. 35-2013]
   C.   Tardiness, unauthorized absences and lunch breaks in excess of one hour
shall be considered leave without pay and may be further subject to the
disciplinary procedures.
§ 70-707. Lunch and break periods.
Each employee shall have a scheduled lunch break. Employees are not permitted
to eat their lunch at their work station unless specifically authorized.
§ 70-708. Temporary reassignment.
[Amended 11-27-2000 by Ord. No. 24-2000]
   A.   In the event of a vacancy, absence or disability of a department
director, the managing director or some other officer or employee shall be
assigned to perform in an acting or temporary capacity. The duties of any
office or position in the administrative service under the supervision of the
managing director, as stated in §
5-401F of the City Code. This temporary or acting reassignment is for
management positions only. A person reassigned to a temporary or acting
management position may request a temporary salary adjustment from the Managing
Director, who shall have the responsibility for making that decision as stated
in this section.
   B.   No appointed person shall serve in an acting or temporary capacity
unless already employed by the City of Reading prior to such appointment or
approved by City Council resolution. Council shall, within 30 days, approve or
deny all temporary or acting department director and/or management
appointments. If Council fails to act within this thirty-day period, the
appointment shall be deemed approved.
   C.   Acting or temporary department directors appointed may serve no more
than 180 days. Council may agree to extend said term for an additional ninety-
day period upon request and upon satisfactory proof that a diligent effort to
recruit and hire a department director.
   D.   An acting or temporary department director who has been appointed to
serve as a department director but who fails to be confirmed by a vote of
Council shall continue to serve as the acting or temporary director for no
longer than a period of 30 days from the date of the negative vote by Council,
unless Council agrees to extend for ninety-day period(s) as set forth in the
preceding subsections.
§ 70-709. Compensatory time; discretionary time.
[Amended 9-9-1996 by Ord. No. 27-1996]
   A.   All full-time nonexempt employees, except elected officials, shall
receive compensatory time as per the provisions of the Fair Labor Standards Act
or as per union contract. Compensatory time must be approved prior to being
earned or used except in emergency situations.
   B.   Exempt employees (not covered by the Fair Labor Standards Act or any
union contract provision) will be eligible for discretionary time.
Discretionary time will not be on an hour- for-hour basis or reimbursed at time
and 1/2 under any condition. Discretionary time off will be allowed only with
the approval of the Mayor or Managing Director. Under no circumstances will
there be any accrued hours that will be compensated for in any way.
§ 70-710. Dress and grooming.
   A.   Employees shall report to work in attire in such a manner as is
compatible with their duties and acceptable healthy grooming and cleanliness
standards.
   B.   Dress and grooming shall be dictated by provisions requiring the
wearing of safety clothing or equipment necessary to be worn in order to
protect the employee's health and safety.
§ 70-711. Conduct and safety regulations.
Employees are required to report to work as stipulated in the employee
handbook.
§ 70-712. Disciplinary action.
   A.   The City reserves the right to discipline for just cause.
   B.   Supervisors shall notify the department director who in turn shall
notify theHuman Resources Department of all infractions of these policies.
   C.   The Human Resources Department shall investigate the allegations and
determine appropriate action to be taken.
   D.   Disciplinary offenses/procedures are contained in the employee
handbook.
§ 70-713. Grievance procedures.
   A.   Bargaining unit members. These procedures are contained in the
applicable collective bargaining agreement and in the employee handbook.
   B.   Nonbargaining unit members. These procedures are contained in the
employee handbook.
§ 70-714. Separation.
   A.   An employee may be separated or dismissed whenever his/her performance,
as a result of an unfavorable performance evaluation, or conduct fall below the
required job standards for City employees. The dismissal of a union employee
shall be in accordance with the appropriate provisions of the City union
agreement. See §
70-712, Disciplinary action, and §
70-308, Performance evaluation.
   B.   The executive branch shall have the right to lay off employees as may
be deemed necessary by the executive branch in accordance with the applicable
collective bargaining agreements. 21
   C.   Employees tendering a resignation shall be required to provide written
notice of resignation at least 10 working days prior to the intended date of
employment termination.
   D.   Death separation shall become effective as of the day following death.
All compensation due the employee shall be paid to the estate of the employee,
unless otherwise provided by law. There shall be no proration of vacation leave
and in no event shall unused sick leave, compensatory time or other paid leave
be considered.
   E.   Retirement of an eligible employee shall be subject to the same
policies and procedures as outlined for resignation. However, should an
employee wish to retire because of a sudden or extreme change in health, the
notice requirement may be waived by the Managing Director. Upon retirement, an
employee shall receive all unused vacation for the appropriate years of service
with no prorating.
   F.   Upon resignation, one copy of the employee’s notice of resignation
shall be sent to the department head and one copy shall be sent directly to the
Human Resources Department.
   G.   All unused eligible vacation time shall be considered for prorated
compensation. In no event shall unused sick leave be considered. Full-time
employees shall be compensated for accumulated compensatory time to the extent
of the lessor of:
      (1)   The hours accrued; or
      (2)   240 hours.
   H.   An exit interview may be conducted, and, if requested by an employee,
shall be conducted. Said interview may be used as a management tool to gain
insight into the effectiveness of the City personnel and managerial practices
and to determine when and if such practices need improvement. The Human
Resources Director or his/her designee, when conducting such an interview,
shall place a brief record of the interview in the permanent record of the
employee.
   I.   At his/her discretion, the Human Resources Director or his/her designee
may call an exit interview with an employee prior to separation.
   J.   Upon separation, all City property shall be returned.
21. Editor's Note: Amended during codification (see
Ch. 1, General Provisions, Part 2).
§ 70-715. Disability removal.
   A.   An employee who cannot perform his/her job duties because of
disability, non-work- connected injury or illness shall be removed upon
expiration of all such sick leave, vacation and unpaid leave of absence.
   B.   The removal shall state that it is removal for disability and that if
within a two-year period from removal, the employee is fit to return to his/her
job duties, he/she will be given preference in hiring when a vacancy occurs.
   C.   The fact that he/she is physically fit shall be certified by physician
statement.
   D.   When the employee is rehired, there shall be no loss of seniority other
than the period between removal and rehiring.
§ 70-716. Providing employees legal counsel.
When a legal action is brought against an employee, the Mayor, Managing
Director, City Solicitor and Human Resources Director shall determine whether
or not the City shall be required to provide legal counsel to the employee.
§ 70-717. Employee responses to information requests.
Any requests for information with respect to an employee shall be made to the
Managing Director for review with the City Solicitor to determine if response
is appropriate.
§ 70-718. Management incentive program.
Administration has the right to establish a management incentive program, which
shall include sick leave upon retirement.
Part 8
Appeals
§ 70-801. Appeal procedure.
Any employee who has filed a complaint and has either received a denial of the
complaint and/or no action with respect to the complaint within 20 days after
the filing of such written complaint with the Human Resources Department shall
have the right to appeal such denial and/or nonaction as follows:
   A.   The employee shall file with the Human Resources Department an appeal
stating that the appeal was denied and/or no action was taken, the appeal shall
provide the date upon which the original complaint was filed and the date the
action or nonaction was taken by the Human Resources Department.
   B.   The appeal shall contain the basis upon which the employee feels his or
her complaint is justified, including any exhibits and/or other evidence which
the employee deems relevant to sustaining the allegations contained in his or
her complaint.
   C.   The Human Resources Director, together with the employee’s department
head, shall promptly upon receipt review the appeal and within a reasonable
time after the filing of such appeal, but no longer than 10 days thereafter,
set a date for hearing the appeal of the employee before the Human Resources
Director and the department head, which date shall be not more than 30 days
after the date of filing the appeal. The Human Resources Director and
department head shall, following the hearing held with the employee, render a
decision within 10 days of such hearing date and provide employee with written
notice of their decision with respect to the appeal. In the event the employee
is not satisfied with the decision of the Human Resources Director and the
department head, the employee shall have the further right to within 10 days of
the receipt of the denial of such employee’s appeal, appeal to the Managing
Director in writing. The Managing Director shall meet with the employee within
20 days of the filing of such written appeal and at a date set by the Managing
Director. Following the meeting with the employee with the Managing Director,
the Managing Director shall render his decision within 10 days of such hearing
and the decision of the Managing Director shall be final with respect to the
employee’s complaint.
   D.   An employee who has filed a complaint shall have no right to have legal
counsel present at the initial appeal meeting before the department head and
the Human Resources Director. The employee shall have the right to have legal
counsel or another representative present at the appeal before the Managing
Director if the Managing Director, upon request, so permits.
Chapter 77
POLICE DEPARTMENT
Part 1
Employment in the Police Department
§
77-101.   Employment.
§
77-102.   Additional authorization for employment in Police Department;
authorization to fill without competition.
§
77-103.   Qualifications.
§
77-104.   Recruitment.
§
77-105.   Selection.
§
77-106.   Probation.
Part 2
Promotions
§
77-201.   Promotions according to eligibility.
§
77-202.   Sergeant.
§
77-203.   Lieutenant.
§
77-204.   Captain.
§
77-205.   Inspector.
§
77-206.   Service time.
§
77-207.   Probationary period.
§
77-208.   Score determination.
§
77-209.   Eligibility lists.
§
77-210.   College credits.
[HISTORY: Adopted by the City Council of the City of Reading as indicated in
part histories. Amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fire and rescue services — See
Ch. 36.
Law enforcement — See
Ch. 325.
STATE LAW REFERENCES
Police Department - See 11 Pa.C.S. §§ 12001
Power to establish and maintain police force - See 11 Pa.C.S. § 12419.
Part 1
Employment in the Police Department
[Added 8-26-2024 by Ord. No. 46-2024]
§ 77-101. Employment.
Entry-level positions in the Police Department shall be filled through the
civil service examination and grading requirements contained in the Third-Class
City Code and Civil Service Rules for Police.
§ 77-102. Additional authorization for employment in Police Department;
authorization to fill without competition.
   A.   Entry-level positions in the competitive class in the Police Department
can be filled without regard to the civil service examination and grading
requirements contained in the Third-Class City Code and Civil Service Rules for
police when in the determination of the Chief of Police conditions affecting
public safety exist which require the appointment of certified police officers
without competition.
   B.   The Police Civil Service Board shall then certify individuals to fill
such positions without competition, regardless of whether or not a current
competitive eligibility list police officers is in existence. The
qualifications for such positions shall be established by the Police Civil
Service Board. Such positions shall be included in the competitive class upon
hiring notwithstanding that the position is filled without competition.
   C.   This provision shall be in addition to the current rules and
regulations for hiring of entry-level police officers.
§ 77-103. Qualifications.
The Police Civil Service Board shall establish the qualifications for police
officer positions to be filled without competition that shall include, at
minimum:
   A.   The applicant must hold current certification as a police officer by
the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania under the Municipal Police Officer Education
and Training Commission (MPOETC) pursuant to 53 Pa.C.S.S § 2161 et seq., out-
of-state applicants must contact the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania Municipal
Police Officers' Education and Training Commission and obtain the full waiver
form, complete the assessment test, and obtain MPOETC certification prior to
appointment.
§ 77-104. Recruitment.
In the event that the Chief of Police determines that there exist conditions
affecting public safety which require the appointment of certified police
officers without competition, the Chief of Police shall request, in writing,
that the Police Civil Service Board, in accordance with these rules, conduct
recruitment for the purpose of filling the requested number of police officer
positions. The process for the appointment of certified police officers without
competition in the rules shall be in addition to, and not in lieu of, the
process for appointment of police officers in accordance with the civil service
examination and grading requirements in these rules.
§ 77-105. Selection.
Upon receipt of the certified list, the Chief of Police may fill any number of
vacancies in the certified positions by selecting from among the certified
applicants on the list. The Chief of Police should rely upon the background
investigation of the applicant including prior employment, relevant education,
prior experience and character, with consideration given to the specific
requirements of the Police Department. The Chief of Police may also rely on the
other relevant information or examination data which the Police Civil Service
Board may supply. However, applicants are subject to Automatic Disqualification
as set forth by the Chief of Police.
§ 77-106. Probation.
All original appointments to the position police officer which are filled
without competition shall be subject to a probationary period as determined by
the current Fraternal Order of Police Lodge #9 (FOP) Collective Bargaining
Agreement.
Part 2
Promotions
[Adopted 11-24-1982 by Ord. No. 49-1982 (Ch. 1, Part 8, of the 2001 Code of
Ordinances)]
§ 77-201. Promotions according to eligibility.
[Amended 5-29-2001 by Ord. No. 14-2001]
The Mayor of the City of Reading shall promote members of the Police Department
to the positions of sergeant, lieutenant, captain and inspector only from among
the three highest on eligibility lists for each such position certified by the
Civil Service Board who meet the following qualifications with respect to each
position.
§ 77-202. Sergeant.
[Amended 5-23-1990 by Ord. No. 52-1990; 5-29-2001 by Ord. No. 14-2001; 2-8-2010
by Ord. No. 3-2010; 2-27-2017 by Ord. No. 15-2017]
   A.   An applicant desiring to take the test for the position of sergeant in
the Reading Department of Police must be a sworn member of the Reading
Department of Police with five years’ experience, who shall have attained the
required five years’ experience prior to the closing date fixed by the Civil
Service Board. [Amended 11-28-2011 by Ord. No. 63-2011; 2-27-2017 by Ord. No.
15-2017]
   B.   Where more than one member of the Department is qualified by virtue of
this section to submit application to take the test for the position of
sergeant, the Civil Service Board shall select the type of testing, set the
weights of all parts of the testing process and conduct an examination process.
The respective final scores of the candidates for the position of sergeant
shall include points acquired for years of experience, as provided for in § 77-
206 hereof, and points acquired for college credits as provided for in § 77-
210, hereof, shall be added to the composite score to determine the final
score.
   C.   Where more than one member qualifies for an appointment to the position
of sergeant as a result of the sergeants examination, the Civil Service Board
shall enter the names of such persons on a list of eligibles in the order of
their respective total scores, the highest coming first. The Mayor shall choose
from the three names at the top of the list for appointment to the rank of
sergeant. Whenever any name is removed from the list, in accordance with this
Part, all names on the list lower than that removed shall be moved up in
position on the list accordingly.
§ 77-203. Lieutenant.
[Amended 5-23-1990 by Ord. No. 52-1990; 10-3-1990 by Ord. No. 121-1990; 2-11-
1992 by Ord. No. 13-1992; 5-29-2001 by Ord. No. 14-2001; 2-8-2010 by Ord. No.
3-2010; 2-27-2017 by Ord. No. 15-2017]
   A.   An applicant desiring to take the test for the position of lieutenant
shall be a sergeant who has held that position for at least three years prior
to the closing date fixed by the Civil Service Board for the receipt of
applications or one who held the position of detective on June 11, 1978, and
who obtained such rank pursuant to Ord. No. 31-1968, as amended. [Amended 11-
28-2011 by Ord. No. 63-2011; 2-27-2017 by Ord. No. 15-2017]
   B.   Where more than three members of the Department are qualified by virtue
of this section to submit an application to take the test for the position of
lieutenant, the Civil Service Board shall select the type of testing, set the
weights of all parts of the testing process and conduct an examination process.
In determining the respective final scores of the candidates for the position
of lieutenant, points acquired for years of experience as provided for in § 77-
206 hereof, and points acquired for college credits as provided in § 77-210
hereof, shall be added to the composite scores to determine the final score.
   C.   Where more than three members qualify for an appointment to the
position of lieutenant as a result of the examination, the Civil Service Board
shall enter the names of such persons on a list of eligibles in the order of
their respective total scores, the highest coming first. The Mayor shall choose
from the three names at the top of the list for appointment to the rank of
lieutenant. Whenever any name is removed from the list, in accordance with this
Part, all names on the list lower than that removed shall be moved up in
position on the list accordingly.
§ 77-204. Captain.
[Amended 5-23-1990 by Ord. No. 52-1990; 3-11-1932 by Ord. No. 13-1992; 5-29-
2001 by Ord. No. 14-2001; 2-8-2010 by Ord. No. 3-2010; 5-10-2021 by Ord. No.
31-2021]
   A.   An applicant desiring to take the test for the position of captain
shall be a lieutenant who has held that position for at least five years prior
to the closing date fixed by the Civil Service Board for the receipt of
applications or a lieutenant who has a combination of at least five years of
experience between the rank of sergeant and lieutenant with at least two years
in patrol as a sergeant or lieutenant prior to the closing date fixed by the
Civil Service Board for the receipt of applications.
   B.   Where more than one member of the Department is qualified by virtue of
this section to submit an application to take the test for the position of
captain, the Civil Service Board shall select the type of testing, set the
weights of all parts of the testing process and conduct an examination process
consisting of a written and oral examination. In determining the respective
final scores of the candidates for the position of captain, points acquired for
years of experience as provided for in § 77-206, hereof, and points for college
credits as provided for in § 77-210 hereof, shall be added to the composite
scores to determine the final score.
   C.   Where more than one member qualifies for an appointment to the position
of captain as a result of the examination, the Civil Service Board shall enter
the names of such persons on a list of eligibles in order of their respective
total scores, the highest coming first. The Mayor shall choose from the three
names at the top of the list for appointment to the rank of captain. Whenever
any name is removed from the list, in accordance with this Part, all names on
the list lower than that removed shall be moved up in position on the list
accordingly.
§ 77-205. Inspector.
[Amended 5-13-1990 by Ord. No. 52-1990; 10-3-1990 by Ord. No. 121-1990]
An applicant for the position of inspector shall be a lieutenant who has held
that position for at least three years or a captain who has held that position
for at least one year or the position of lieutenant for at least three years.
Applicant names shall be reviewed by the police executive staff with
recommendations forwarded to the Chief of Police, who shall then either approve
oi disapprove such recommendations and submit his recommendations along with
the staffs to the Mayor who shall appoint from those submitted.
§ 77-206. Service time.
[Amended 5-29-2001 by Ord. No. 14-2001]
Those candidates for positions covered under this Part who shall have completed
20 years of service from the time of appointment to the Department of Police to
the closing date fixed by the Civil Service Board for the receipt of
applications for the respective examinations, shall receive the maximum of five
points allowed for service. Those who have not completed 20 years of service as
aforesaid shall receive 1/4 point for each whole year of service completed as
aforesaid.
§ 77-207. Probationary period.
[Amended 5-23-1990 by Ord. No. 52-1990; 5-29-2001 by Ord. No. 14-2001]
Each member of the Police Department receiving a promotion to the
aforementioned ranks, at the successful conclusion of a probationary period of
one year from the date of the promotion, shall be subject to demotion by the
Mayor only for cause, i.e., misconduct, failure to competently perform required
duties, violation of Department-written directives or laws of the commonwealth
or City ordinances. Reasons for demotions shall be set forth in writing and
served on the member. In the event of a demotion, the member may appeal to
Council by written notice to the Mayor within 15 days of the demotion. Council
shall set a hearing date on such appeal which shall be held within a reasonable
time in accordance with the local agency law.
§ 77-208. Score determination.
[Amended 5-23-1990 by Ord. No. 52-1990; 5-29-2001 by Ord. No. 14-2001]
The Civil Service Board shall determine passing scores for all tests and
examinations in conference with the administrators of such authorized tests or
examinations and Police Department representatives. Passing scores shall be
determined by Police Department personnel needs for each particular position
being tested for and/or test criteria for adequate knowledge to perform in the
tested position. Such determination shall be known, in writing, to all
candidates before each portion of a testing or examination process occurs.
§ 77-209. Eligibility lists.
[Amended 5-29-2001 by Ord. No. 14-2001; 2-12-2007 by Ord. No. 11-2007]
Members of the Department whose names appear on the eligibility list as
certified by the Civil Service Board shall, if passed over in the appointment,
remain on the eligibility list in the position as indicated by their total
score for a period of two years after the date the list is officially
certified. If a member of the Department is passed over three times, his or her
name shall be removed from the list. A member is considered to be passed over
on each separate occasion when a person(s) whose name(s) appear(s) below him or
her on the eligibility list is appointed before he or she is appointed. If at
any time three or fewer names appear on the eligibility list in effect under
this Part, the Mayor may terminate the list and require the Civil Service Board
to conduct retesting.
§ 77-210. College credits.
[Amended 3-11-1992 by Ord. No. 13-1992]
   A.   Those candidates for positions covered under this Part who have at
least 30 or more college credit hours, shall receive ½ point for each 15
completed hours to a maximum total of five points for 150 credit hours in
accordance with the following scale:
Credit Hours Points
Credit Hours Points
30 to 44     1.0
45 to 59     1.5
60 to 74     2.0
75 to 89     2.5
90 to 104    3.0
105 to 119   3.5
120 to 134   4.0
135 to 149   4.5
150 and over 5.0
 
   B.   College credit hours shall be earned at an accredited college or
university. Only those credits earned before the closing date fixed by the
Civil Service Board for the receipt of applications shall be considered.
Chapter 91
SALARIES AND COMPENSATION
Part 1
Elected Officials
§
91-101.   Compensation.
§
91-102.   Payment of salary.
§
91-103.   Salary increases.
[HISTORY: Adopted by the City Council of the City of Reading as indicated in
article histories. Amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Pensions — See
Ch. 62.
Personnel — See
Ch. 70.
Part 1
Elected Officials
[Adopted 6-28-1989 by Ord. No. 74-1989 (
Ch. 1, Part 3, of the 2001 Code of Ordinances)]
§ 91-101. Compensation.
[Amended 5-29-2001 by Ord. No. 14-2001; 4-14-2003 by Ord. No. 9-2003; 4-24-2007
by Ord. No. 29-2007; 12-19-2022 by Ord. No. 141-2022; 12-19-2022 by Ord. No.
142-2022; 12-19-2022 by Ord. No. 145-2022]
From and after the first Monday of January 2008, the following salaries shall
be paid to each of the hereinafter designated elected officials of the City in
accordance with the following schedule; provided, however, that such salaries
shall apply only to such elected officials assuming office on or after the
first Monday of January 2008:
   A.   Mayor. The Mayor of the City of Reading shall be compensated at an
annual salary of:
      (1)   For the period beginning the first Monday in January 2008, and
ending the first Sunday in January 2009: $68,100.
      (2)   For the period beginning the first Monday in January 2009, and
ending the first Sunday in January 2010: $69,600.
      (3)   For the period beginning on the first Monday in January 2010, and
ending the first Sunday in January 2011: $71,100.
      (4)   For the period beginning the first Monday in January 2011, and
ending the first Monday in January 2024: $72,600.
      (5)   For the period beginning the first Tuesday in January 2024, and
capping the salary for each year thereafter at $90,750.
   B.   President of Council. The City Council President for the City of
Reading shall be compensated for the period beginning the first Tuesday in
January 2024, and capping the salary annually for each year thereafter at
$6,875.00.
   C.   Councilperson. The District Councilpersons for the City of Reading
shall be compensated for the period beginning the first Tuesday in January
2024, and capping the salary annually for each year thereafter at $6,250.00.
   D.   City Auditor. Unless otherwise adjusted by the annual Position
Ordinance, the City Auditor of the City of Reading shall be compensated at an
annual salary of:
      (1)   For the period beginning the first Monday in January 2008, and
ending the first Sunday in January 2009: $53,100.
      (2)   For the period beginning the first Monday in January 2009, and
ending the first Sunday in January 2010: $54,600.
      (3)   For the period beginning on the first Monday in January 2010, and
ending the first Sunday in January 2011: $56,100.
      (4)   For the period beginning the first Monday in January 2011, and
ending on the first Sunday in January, 2020: $57,600.
      (5)   For the period beginning the first Monday in January 2020 and
ending on the first Sunday in January 2024: $63,000.
      (6)   For the period beginning the first Monday in January 2024, and
annually for each year thereafter: $78,750.
§ 91-102. Payment of salary.
The salaries fixed by the foregoing schedule in §
91-101 shall be payable bimonthly as the salaries of other officials and
employees are paid.
§ 91-103. Salary increases.1
Any subsequent salary increases shall be approved by Council.
Chapter 120
ALARM SYSTEMS
§
120-101.   Short title.
§
120-102.   Intent and purpose.
§
120-103.   Definitions.
§
120-104.   Alarm business permits.
§
120-105.   Alarm business permit fee.
§
120-106.   Alarm business responsibilities.
§
120-107.   Alarm system regulations and standards.
§
120-108.   Automatic dialing devices.
§
120-109.   Intermediary monitoring service standards.
§
120-110.   Inspection of alarm systems.
§
120-111.   Statistical data.
§
120-112.   Alarm user permits.
§
120-113.   Alarm user permit fee; exemptions.
§
120-114.   Alarm user responsibilities.
§
120-115.   False alarms; service fees.
§
120-116.   Collections.
§
120-117.   Administrative rules.
§
120-118.   Confidentiality.
§
120-119.   Violations and penalties.
§
120-120.   Appeals.
[HISTORY: Adopted by the City Council of the City of Reading 12-13-1995 by Ord.
No. 126-1995 (Ch. 13, Part 1, of the 2001 Code of Ordinances). Amendments noted
where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Construction codes — See
Ch. 180.
Fire prevention and protection — See
Ch. 237.
STATE LAW REFERENCES
False alarms — See 18 Pa.C.S.A. § 4905.
§ 120-101. Short title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "City of Reading,
Pennsylvania, Burglary and Robbery Alarm Systems Ordinance."
§ 120-102. Intent and purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to encourage alarm users and alarm businesses to
maintain operational reliability and properly use alarm systems and to reduce
false alarms by providing minimum standards and regulations applicable to
burglary, robbery, and police emergency alarm systems, alarm businesses, alarm
agents and alarm users as defined in this chapter.
§ 120-103. Definitions.
[Amended 5-29-2001 by Ord. No. 14-2001]
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have
the meanings ascribed to them in this section except where the context clearly
indicates a different meaning:
   ALARM AGENT —
   A.   Any person who is self-employed in or employed by an alarm business
whose duties include any of the following: altering, installing, maintaining,
moving, repairing, replacing, selling, servicing, or responding to an alarm
system.
   B.   Exemptions: This definition shall not include a person who engages in
the manufacture or sale of an alarm system from a fixed location and who
neither visits the location where the alarm system is to be installed, nor
designs the scheme for physical location and installation of the alarm system
in a specific location. Further, new construction personnel not in the employ
of an alarm business may be involved under contracts or subcontracts in the use
or installation of alarm systems.
   ALARM BUSINESS —
   A.   Any business operated by any individual, including a person self-
employed, partnership, corporation, or other entity which engages in the
activity of altering, installing, leasing, maintaining, repairing, replacing,
selling, servicing, or responding to an alarm system.
   B.   Exemptions. This definition shall not include any business that engages
in the manufacture or sale of an alarm system from a fixed location and who
neither visits the location where the alarm system is to be installed, nor
designs the scheme for physical location and installation of the alarm system
in a specific location.
   ALARM COORDINATOR — The individual designated by the Chief of Police to
issue permits and enforce the provisions of this chapter.
   ALARM SYSTEM —
   A.   Any single device or assembly of equipment, mechanical, electrical, or
battery operated arranged to detect and signal an unauthorized intrusion into a
premises or to signal an attempted or actual robbery or police emergency at a
protected premises, and with respect to such signal public police and/or
private guards are expected to respond.
   B.   Devices maintained and operated by the Reading Department of Police
used for the detection of unlawful acts and known as "Antiburglary/Antirobbery"
(ABAR) systems shall not be included under this definition. Devices which are
designed for and installed upon motorized vehicles and trailers shall not be
included under this definition.
   ALARM USER — Any person on whose premises an alarm system is maintained
within the City except for an alarm system on motor vehicles or proprietary
systems. If, however, an alarm system on a motor vehicle is connected with an
alarm system at a premises (other than a proprietary system), the person using
such system is an alarm user.
   ANSWERING SERVICE — A telephone answering service providing among its
services the service of receiving on a continuous basis through trained
employees, emergency signals from alarm systems, and thereafter immediately
relaying the message by live voice to the complaint office of the Department of
Police.
   AUDIBLE ALARM — Any device, bell, horn, or siren which is attached to the
interior or exterior of a building, structure, or facility and emits a warning
signal audible outside the building, structure, or facility and is designed to
attract attention when activated by a criminal act or other emergency requiring
police response.
   AUTOMATIC DIALING DEVICE — Any device which is interconnected to a telephone
line and is programmed to transmit by prerecorded voice message or coded signal
an emergency message indicating a need for emergency response.
   BILLING AGENT — The company that the City has contracted with to collect all
fees payable under this chapter. [Added 7-9-2012 by Ord. No. 76-2012]
   CENTRAL STATION — A protective system or group of such systems operated
privately for customers by a person, firm or corporation which accepts recorded
or coded messages from automatic dialing devices at a central station having
operators and guards in attendance at all times who have the duty to take
appropriate action upon receipt of a signal or message, including the relaying
of messages to the Reading Department of Police.
   CHIEF OF POLICE — The Chief of the Department of Police of the City of
Reading, Pennsylvania, or his designated representative.
   CITY — The City of Reading, Pennsylvania.
   DEPARTMENT OF POLICE or POLICE — The publicly supported Department of Police
of the City of Reading, Pennsylvania or any authorized agent thereof.
   FALSE ALARM —
   A.   An alarm activated in the absence of an emergency, whether willfully or
by inadvertence, negligence, or unintentional act, including the malfunction of
the alarm system, to which the Department of Police responds. The definition
excludes testing or repairing of telephone or electrical lines or equipment
outside the premises; acts of God, such as earthquake, flood, windstorm,
thunder, or lightning; an attempted illegal entry of which there is visible
evidence; or a crime in progress. If doubt exists as to cause of the alarm, the
Chief of Police or his designee shall make a decision regarding the
circumstances of the activation.
   B.   Multiple alarms received by the Department of Police before the system
can be deactivated within a reasonable period of time shall be considered a
single alarm.
   C.   A false alarm shall also mean the intentional activation of a robbery
alarm for other than a robbery in progress, the intentional activation of a
burglary alarm for other than a burglary in progress and the intentional
activation of a police emergency alarm for other than a police emergency in
progress.
   INTERCONNECT — To connect an alarm system including an automatic dialing
device to a telephone line, either directly or through a mechanical device that
utilizes the telephone line to transmit a message upon the activation of the
alarm system.
   LOCAL ALARM SYSTEM — A system which is attached to the interior or exterior
of a building, structure, or facility which when activated causes an audible
and/or visual warning signal which can be heard and/or seen outside the
building, structure, or facility and designed to attract attention when
activated by a criminal act or other emergency requiring police response.
   PERMIT — Written permission duly granted to an applicant by the City of
Reading upon payment of the required fee.
   POLICE EMERGENCY — An incident requiring prompt response by the Department
of Police.
   PRIMARY TRUNKLINE — A telephone line leading into the complaint office of
the Department of Police that is for the purpose of handling emergency calls on
a person-to-person basis, and which is identified as such by a specific number
included among the emergency numbers listed in the telephone directory issued
by the telephone company and covering the service area within the City of
Reading.
   PROPRIETARY ALARM — Any alarm system which sounds within the protected
premises or control center under the supervision of the proprietor of the
protected building, structure, or facility. If police response is expected or
is a result of this proprietary alarm signal or message, it thereby becomes an
alarm system as defined by this chapter.
   SUBSCRIBER — A person who buys and/or leases, or otherwise obtains an alarm
system and thereafter contracts with or hires an alarm business to monitor and/
or service the alarm.
§ 120-104. Alarm business permits.
[Amended 9-13-1996 by Ord. No. 29-1996; 5-29-2001 by Ord. No. 14-2001]
   A.   Any person engaging in an alarm business in the City of Reading shall,
within 30 days after the effective date of this chapter, file an application
for an alarm business permit with the Alarm Coordinator. The application shall
contain such information as is reasonably required by the Chief of Police to
administer and enforce this chapter.
   B.   Applicants for alarm business permits shall agree in writing and as a
condition for receiving permits to do the following:
      (1)   Notify the Alarm Coordinator within 14 days of any substantial
change affecting the status or validity of this permit.
      (2)   Agree to issue to all alarm agents connected with or in the employ
of the business, identification cards containing, as a minimum:
         (a)   The name of the business.
         (b)   The alarm business permit number.
         (c)   Name of the agent.
         (d)   Signature of an official of the business and agent named.
      (3)   Applicants shall possess and maintain an electrical installer
(dealer) license, as defined in as the Electrical Code, §
180-702. The qualifications are listed under §
180-702. All persons are employed by the electrical installer (dealer) who will
be engaged in the actual installation of security alarm systems must obtain an
electrical installer "B" license as defined under §
180-702.
   C.   Applicants shall furnish an insurance certificate annually confirming
that the applicant has in force general liability insurance coverage in an
amount of not less than $300,000 each occurrence. An applicant who self-insures
such coverage shall furnish evidence of financial ability.
   D.   Following the completion of the application and payment of the
appropriate fee as indicated in §
120-105, the Department of Police shall have 15 working days to investigate the
applicant, process the application, and to grant or deny a permit.
   E.   Permits to any applicant shall be denied if:
      (1)   The applicant does not agree to comply or fails to comply with the
requirements of this chapter and rules and regulations adopted pursuant to this
chapter.
      (2)   The applicant has knowingly made any false, misleading, or
fraudulent statements of material fact in the application or in any report or
record required to be filed with the City of Reading.
      (3)   A corporation, sole proprietor, partner, joint venture, trustee,
executor, administrator, employee, fiduciary, or stockholder with a 5% or
greater interest in a corporation (except a corporation whose stock is publicly
traded and registered with the Securities and Exchange Commission or with a
state securities commission) applying for a permit has ever been convicted of a
felony charge or pleaded nolo contendere to a felony charge or indictment.
   F.   When an application for a permit is denied, the applicant shall be
notified in writing of the denial with the basis thereof. If reason(s) for
denial are correctable, the applicant will be so advised with suggestions on
how these corrections can be made and what time limit has been set for making
said corrections.
   G.   Permit applications shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable fee as
provided in
Chapter 212, Fees, to cover the costs to the City of processing the application
and investigating the applicant. No prorating is permitted of the initial fee.
[Amended 8-26-2013 by Ord. No. 35-2013]
   H.   The Alarm Coordinator shall, after investigation, issue an alarm
business permit to an alarm business meeting the requirements of this section.
Each permit shall bear the signature of the Coordinator and be for a one-
calendar-year period. A copy of the permit shall be physically upon each of the
premises using the alarm business' systems and shall be available for
inspection by the Chief of Police, the Alarm Coordinator or his representative.
§ 120-105. Alarm business permit fee.
[Amended 7-9-2012 by Ord. No. 76-2012; 8-26-2013 by Ord. No. 35-2013]
Alarm businesses shall pay an annual permit fee as provided in
Chapter 212, Fees, due and payable to the Billing Agent by January 31 of each
year. Applications for renewal shall be processed in the same manner as initial
applications.
§ 120-106. Alarm business responsibilities.
   A.   It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in or conduct business or
operate as an alarm agent at any time within the limits of the City of Reading
unless connected with and carrying identification from a business issued an
alarm business permit in accordance with this chapter. Agent identification
must be carried at all times while engaged in alarm business activities and
must be displayed to any police officer upon request.
   B.   Alarm businesses which have installed alarm systems in the City of
Reading shall supply to the Alarm Coordinator within 90 days after the
effective date of this chapter or upon notice of approval of a permit
application, whichever occurs later, a current list of such installations which
shall include the following information:
      (1)   The name, residence, and telephone number of the owner or user.
      (2)   The address where the system is installed and the telephone number
at that address.
      (3)   The name, address, and telephone number of any other persons or
firm who is authorized to respond to an emergency and gain access to the
address where the system is installed.
      (4)   The name and telephone number of any person, firm or corporation,
if any, other than the alarm business, who is responsible for maintenance and
repair of the system.
      (5)   The type of system, i.e., burglary, robbery or police emergency.
   C.   By the fifth working day of each month following submission of the
initial list, every alarm business shall furnish the Alarm Coordinator with a
supplemental list of any additional installations, along with any corrections
or deletions from the list previously furnished.
   D.   All information furnished pursuant to this section shall be kept
confidential and shall be for authorized use of the Department of Police.
   E.   Every alarm business selling, leasing, or furnishing to any user an
alarm system which is installed on premises located in the City of Reading
shall furnish the user with written instructions that provide information to
enable the user to operate the alarm system properly and obtain service for the
alarm system at any time.
   F.   Every alarm business that installs one or more alarm systems in the
City shall make service available directly or through an agent on a twenty-
four-hour-a-day basis seven days a week, to repair such systems and to correct
malfunctions as they occur.
   G.   Every alarm business shall furnish at their own expense, at or prior to
the time of contracting, a copy of this chapter to owners, lessees or users of
the systems or services to be supplied.
§ 120-107. Alarm system regulations and standards.
   A.   Audible alarm systems shall be equipped with a timing mechanism that
will disengage the alarm annunciator after a maximum period of 20 minutes.
Audible alarms without such timing mechanisms shall be unlawful in the City and
must be disconnected by the user within 90 days from the effective date of this
chapter.
   B.   Every alarm system installed shall consist only of equipment that is
listed by Underwriter's Laboratories, Inc., as being electronically safe and
meeting the City's requirements for the alarm system. Wiring for the alarm
system must conform with all applicable City codes.
   C.   Every system installed shall be provided with standby battery power
which shall automatically and immediately take over in the event of a power
failure.
   D.   Every system installed shall be done with equipment in such a way as to
neutralize electrical surges on the alarm system.
§ 120-108. Automatic dialing devices.
   A.   No automatic dialing device shall be interconnected to a primary
trunkline after the effective date of this chapter.
   B.   Within 90 days after the effective date of this chapter, all automatic
dialing devices interconnected to a primary trunkline shall be disconnected
therefrom. The user of such device shall be responsible for having the device
disconnected within the ninety-day time period.
   C.   Users of an automatic dialing device may have the device interconnected
to a telephone line transmitting directly to intermediary monitoring services
such as:
      (1)   A central station.
      (2)   A modified central station.
      (3)   An answering service.
   D.   The relaying of messages by intermediary services to the police may be
over a primary trunkline or over a direct line paid for by the intermediary
service.
   E.   Automatic dialing devices may also be interconnected to one or more
telephone numbers available to the user of the devices, or their designated
representative, at another location.
§ 120-109. Intermediary monitoring service standards.
[Amended 5-29-2001 by Ord. No. 14-2001]
   A.   Emergency messages from alarm systems shall be given priority over all
other messages received by the intermediary service, except that fire alarm
signals may have equal priority.
   B.   All operators shall be trained to handle emergency messages.
   C.   As soon as possible after notifying the police, the operator concerned
shall notify the subscriber involved of such action and the nature of the
emergency message received.
   D.   All subscribers of an intermediary service shall be required by the
service to cooperate in a test of its alarm devices at least once a year to
determine if the system is working properly. The intermediary service shall
certify that the test requirements have been fulfilled. Unsatisfactory test
results shall be reported promptly in writing, to the subscriber and the Alarm
Coordinator. Until the system in question is again working properly, the
Department of Police may require that its use be discontinued.
§ 120-110. Inspection of alarm systems.
   A.   For the purpose of enforcing the provisions of this chapter, the Chief
of Police or Alarm Coordinator shall have the authority to enter any premises
in the City of Reading in or upon which alarm systems are located, to inspect
the installation and/or operation of such alarm systems.
   B.   Application for a permit for the installation of such a system and
subsequent installation of such a system pursuant to a permit issued or the
continuance of the use of any alarm system already installed at the effective
date of this chapter shall constitute consent by the owner or lessee thereof
and authorization for the inspection of any such installation and/or operation
by the Chief of Police or Alarm Coordinator.
   C.   All such entries upon the premises where an alarm system is installed
and all such inspection of the installation and operation of alarm systems
shall be at reasonable times and upon reasonable notice, except in emergency
situations.
§ 120-111. Statistical data.
In addition to any other information that may be required to be supplied by the
provisions of this chapter, the Chief of Police may require an alarm business
to furnish him with certain statistical data which may be reasonably available
relative to specified periods of operation after the effective date of this
chapter.
§ 120-112. Alarm user permits.
[Amended 5-29-2001 by Ord. No. 14-2001]
   A.   Any person desiring to use an alarm system in the City of Reading
shall, within 60 days after of the effective date of this chapter, file an
application for an alarm user permit, for each system, with the Alarm
Coordinator. The application shall contain such information as is reasonably
required by the Chief of Police to administer and enforce this chapter.
   B.   Applicants for alarm user permits shall agree in writing and as a
condition for receiving and keeping permits to notify the Alarm Coordinator
within 14 days of any substantial change affecting the validity of the permit.
   C.   Following the completion of the application and payment of the
appropriate fee as indicated in §
120-113, the Department of Police shall have 15 working days to investigate the
applicant, process the application, and to grant or deny a permit.
   D.   Alarm user permits to any applicant shall be denied if:
      (1)   The applicant does not agree to comply or fails to comply with the
requirements of this chapter and rules and regulations adopted pursuant to this
chapter;
      (2)   The applicant has knowingly made false, misleading, or fraudulent
statements of a material fact in the application or in any report or record
required to be filed with the City of Reading; or
      (3)   The applicant has had a similar type permit previously revoked for
good cause in the past unless the applicant can show a material change in the
circumstances since the date of revocation.
   E.   When an application for a permit is denied, the applicant shall be
notified in writing of the denial with the basis thereof. If the reason(s) for
denial are correctable, the applicant will be so advised with suggestions on
how these corrections can be made and what time limit has been set for making
said corrections.
   F.   The Alarm Coordinator shall, after investigation, issue an alarm user
permit to an applicant meeting the requirements of this section. Each permit
shall bear the signature of the Coordinator and be valid for the period that
the owner or tenant owns or leases the premises upon which the alarm system is
installed. The permit shall be physically present upon the premises upon which
the alarm system is installed and shall be available for inspection by the
Chief of Police, the Alarm Coordinator or his representative.
   G.   Applicants already using alarm systems in the City of Reading may
continue to use the alarm systems while their permit applications are being
processed. All alarm systems installed after the effective date of this chapter
shall not commence use until their alarm user permit application is approved.
   H.   By submitting an application for permit for the installation of an
alarm system and the subsequent installation of such a system or by the
continuation of the use of an alarm system already installed at the effective
date of this chapter, the owner, lessee or user thereof shall agree that such
permit application constitutes a waiver of the right to bring or file action,
claim or complaint whatsoever against any police officer or other agent of the
City who makes a forced entry in response to such an alarm into the premises on
which such an alarm is installed as a result of entry into the protected
premises.
   I.   In the event the owner of such a premises is a person other than the
alarm user permit applicant, as in the instance of a lessee or other use not
the owner of the premises on which the alarm is installed, such permit
application shall constitute an indemnification agreement by the applicant to
hold harmless any police officer, the City of Reading, the Police Department,
or other agent, as appropriate, from any all damages whatsoever claimed by the
lessor or owner of the premises on which the alarm is installed.
§ 120-113. Alarm user permit fee; exemptions.
[Amended 5-29-2001 by Ord. No. 14-2001]
   A.   Alarm users shall pay a permit fee as provided in
Chapter 212, Fees, to the Billing Agent.
This fee shall be for the period that the owner or tenant owns or leases the
premises upon which the alarm system is installed. [Amended 7-9-2012 by Ord.
No. 76-2012; 8-26-2013 by Ord. No. 35-2013]
   B.   An alarm user permit will automatically terminate upon the change in
occupancy or usage of the premises for which originally issued.
   C.   The following are exemptions to the alarm user permit fees:
      (1)   The United States Government, the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania,
counties, municipal corporations, departments thereof and other governmental
entities are exempt from the fees required in this chapter.
      (2)   A residential alarm user who is over the age of 65 and is the
primary resident of the residence may obtain an alarm user's permit from the
Department of Police according to this chapter without payment of a fee.
   D.   Alarm users who are not required to pay a fee or who are exempt from
obtaining an alarm user's permit as above shall, nevertheless, be subject to
the penalty provisions of this chapter.
§ 120-114. Alarm user responsibilities.
[Amended 5-29-2001 by Ord. No. 14-2001]
   A.   No person shall conduct any test or demonstration of any alarm system
without first notifying the complaint desk of the Department of Police.
   B.   Alarm users shall supply to the Alarm Coordinator within 90 days after
the effective date of this chapter or upon notice of approval of a permit
application, whichever occurs later, the following information:
      (1)   The name of the owner, tenant, or agent responsible for the
property and name of the business (if applicable).
      (2)   The address of the property and telephone number.
      (3)   The alarm business or other entity responsible for maintaining the
system.
      (4)   The type of alarm and how the alarm signal will be received by the
Department of Police.
      (5)   The names and telephone numbers of at least two persons to be
contacted to secure the property.
   C.   Alarm users shall notify the Alarm Coordinator within 14 days of any
change in the information required by this section.
   D.   Any person using an alarm system shall be required to deactivate any
alarm system within a reasonable period of time when multiple false alarms are
received. The system shall remain deactivated until it has been repaired and
functioning in accordance with the standards of this chapter.
§ 120-115. False alarms; service fees.
[Amended 5-29-2001 by Ord. No. 14-2001; 7-26-2010 by Ord. No. 41-2010; 7-9-2012
by Ord. No. 76-2012]
   A.   The City of Reading Police Department will keep written record of all
false alarms and will share such information with the billing agent. The
Billing Agent shall, within 10 business days, notify the person in whose name
the alarm is registered of such false alarm.
   B.   The alarm user permit holder shall be assessed a fee for service for
each false alarm in a calendar year to be payable to the Billing Agent in such
amounts as provided in
Chapter 212, Fees. [Amended 8-26-2013 by Ord. No. 35-2013]
§ 120-116. Collections.
[Added 8-12-2013 by Ord. No. 38-20131]
Delinquent permit and false alarm fees will be turned over to a collections
agency and subject to collection costs after 90 days of delinquency.
1.   Editor's Note: This ordinance also redesignated former §§
120-116 through 120-119 as §§
120-117 through 120-120, respectively.
§ 120-117. Administrative rules.
The Chief of Police shall promulgate such rules as may be necessary for the
implementation, administration, and enforcement of this chapter. Any such rules
shall be approved by the Council of the City of Reading and shall be available
for public inspection.
§ 120-118. Confidentiality.
The information furnished and secured pursuant to this chapter shall be
confidential in character and shall not be subject to public inspection and
shall be kept so that the contents thereof shall not be known except to persons
charged with the administration of this chapter.
§ 120-119. Violations and penalties.
[Amended 5-29-2001 by Ord. No. 14-2001]
   A.   A violation of any provision in this Part may result in the revocation
of any permit issued and/or can constitute a summary offense punishable by a
fine, plus costs of prosecution. Such fines and costs shall be collectible
before any Magisterial District Judge as like fines and costs are now by law
collectible. Each twenty-four-hour period during which failure to comply
continues shall constitute a separate offense. Violation of any provisions of
this chapter shall be subject to the following penalties: [Amended 8-12-2013 by
Ord. No. 38-2013]
      (1)   First violation: a fine of $100, or 30 days' imprisonment, or both.
      (2)   Second violation: a fine of $200, or 30 days' imprisonment, or
both.
      (3)   Third violation: a fine of $300, or 30 days' imprisonment, or both.
   B.   Any person found guilty of willful misuse or willful false activation
of an alarm system shall be, upon conviction thereof, sentenced to pay a fine
not more than $600 plus costs and, in default of payment of said fine and
costs, to a term of imprisonment not to exceed 30 days for each and every such
activation. Such fines and costs shall be collectible before any Magisterial
District Judge as like fines and costs are now by law collectible. The same
shall constitute a summary offense.
   C.   The payment of any fees required shall not be a bar against prosecution
for any violations under this chapter.
§ 120-120. Appeals.
[Added 7-12-2012 by Ord. No. 76-2012]
   A.   Administrative appeal.
      (1)   A person in receipt of a fine/fee related to false alarms may
appeal to the Chief of Police by filing a request with the Police
Administration in writing within 15 calendar days of the date of the fine/fee.
      (2)   Payment of the fine/fee must be paid in full at the time of filing
of the appeal. Such payment will be refunded within 30 calendar days should the
alleged violator win the appeal.
      (3)   The appeal hearing will be held before the Police Chief or his/her
designee. The Police Chief or his/her designee may uphold the appeal, deny the
appeal, or may modify the fine/fee as he/she sees appropriate.
   B.   Subsequent appeals. Any subsequent appeal shall be filed to the Berks
County Court of Common Pleas pursuant to 2 Pa.C.S.A. §§ 751 and 752.
Chapter 127
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
Part 1
Consumption or Storage on Business Premises During Certain Hours
§
127-101.   Consumption or storage prohibited on business premises not licensed
by Liquor Control Board.
§
127-102.   Presence prohibited on premises not licensed by Liquor Control
Board.
§
127-103.   Violations by officers and agents additional to violations by
persons.
§
127-104.   Violations and penalties.
Part 2
Consumption Without Consent of Owner
§
127-201.   Definitions.
§
127-202.   Prohibiting consumption of alcoholic beverages without consent of
owner.
§
127-203.   Violations and penalties.
Part 3
Bottle Clubs
§
127-301.   Application.
§
127-302.   Purpose.
§
127-303.   Definitions.
§
127-304.   Unlawful activities.
§
127-305.   Club requirements.
§
127-306.   Club permit; fee.
§
127-307.   Authority of police officer.
§
127-308.   Violations and penalties.
[HISTORY: Adopted by the City Council of the City of Reading as indicated in
part histories. Amendments noted where applicable.]
STATE LAW REFERENCES
Misrepresentation of age to obtain liquor — See 18 Pa.C.S.A. §§ 6307 and 6309.
Purchase, consumption, possession or transportation of alcoholic beverages —
See 18 Pa.C.S.A. § 6308.
Inducement of minors to buy liquor — See 18 Pa.C.S.A. § 6310.
Part 1
Consumption or Storage on Business Premises During Certain Hours
[Adopted 2-24-1988 by Ord. No. 17-1988 (Ch. 6, Part 1B, of the 2001 Code of
Ordinances)]
§ 127-101. Consumption or storage prohibited on business premises not licensed
by Liquor Control Board.
No person shall allow on business premises the storage by others of alcoholic
beverages, as defined in the Pennsylvania Liquor Code, owned, operated, leased
or controlled by him, her or them, which is not licensed by the Pennsylvania
Liquor Control Board, for consumption by anyone of such alcoholic beverages on
such premises between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 8:00 a.m., prevailing time, of
each day or to allow on such business premises any persons to consume alcoholic
beverages on such premises, whether or not stored on such premises, between the
hours of 2:00 a.m. and 8:00 a.m., prevailing time, of each day.
§ 127-102. Presence prohibited on premises not licensed by Liquor Control
Board.
No person shall be present on business premises in which alcoholic beverages
are stored or consumed in violation of §
127-101, between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 8:00 a.m., prevailing time, each
day.
§ 127-103. Violations by officers and agents additional to violations by
persons.
In the event any of the aforesaid activity is conducted by or in the name of a
corporation, partnership, joint venture, trust, firm or association and/or the
premises in which the activities are conducted are owned or leased by a
corporation, partnership, joint venture, trust, firm or association, the
officers or agents of the corporation, partnership, joint venture, trust, firm
or association shall be deemed in violation of this Part, as well as the person
or persons engaged in the prohibited activity set forth in §§
127-101 and 127-102.
§ 127-104. Violations and penalties.
[Amended 5-29-2001 by Ord. No. 14-2001]
Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any provision of this Part
shall be, upon conviction thereof, sentenced to pay a fine of not more than
$1,000 plus costs and, in default of payment of said fine and costs, to a term
of imprisonment not to exceed 30 days. Each day that a violation continues
shall constitute a separate offense.
Part 2
Consumption Without Consent of Owner
[Adopted 8-30-1989 by Ord. No. 89-1989 (Ch. 6, Part 1C, of the 2001 Code of
Ordinances)]
§ 127-201. Definitions.
As used in this Part, certain words are defined as follows:
   ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES — Both brewed and malt beverages and liquor as defined
in the Pennsylvania Liquor Code.
   OWNER — Includes the fee title holder, lessee or other person lawfully
entitled to control of the property and with respect to public property, the
City or other governmental entity holding title to such property.
   PUBLIC PLACE — Any street, alley, sidewalk, park, playground or place to
which the general public has access.
§ 127-202. Prohibiting consumption of alcoholic beverages without consent of
owner.
[Amended 5-29-2007 by Ord. No. 37-2007]
No person within the City shall consume alcoholic beverages on public places
unless permitted by law or on private property without the consent of the
owner. With respect to governmentally owned property, the consent of duly
authorized representatives of the governmental entity shall be required.
§ 127-203. Violations and penalties.
[Amended 5-29-2001 by Ord. No. 14-2001]
Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any provision of this Part
shall be, upon conviction thereof, sentenced to pay a fine of not more than
$1,000 plus costs and, in default of payment of said fine and costs, to a term
of imprisonment not to exceed 30 days.
Part 3
Bottle Clubs
[Adopted 5-14-2007 by Ord. No. 35-2007 (Ch. 6, Part 1A, of the 2001 Code of
Ordinances)]
§ 127-301. Application.
This Part shall apply to bottle clubs within the City of Reading that are not
licensed by the Pennsylvania Liquor Control Board.
§ 127-302. Purpose.
The Council of the City of Reading hereby declares that the purpose of the
within rules and regulations is to regulate bottle clubs to preserve the
health, safety and character of neighborhoods and to protect the rights of its
citizens to the quiet enjoyment of the same.
§ 127-303. Definitions.
As used in this Part, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
   ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES — Any and all beverages, including malt beverages, which
contain alcohol, liquor or such other intoxicating substances as are further
defined in the Pennsylvania Liquor Code, 47 P.S. §
1-101 et seq.
   BOTTLE CLUB — A place of assembly or any other use defined in this Part,
other than a dwelling unit, including, but not limited to, taverns, clubs, and
social buildings, that is not licensed by the Pennsylvania Liquor Control
Board, in which no alcoholic beverages are sold, but which permits the
consumption of such beverages by patrons or guests when such beverages are
either provided by the operator or agents or employees of the operator for
consumption on the premises or are brought into or kept at the establishment by
the patrons or guests assembling there. This term includes, but is not limited
to, those organizations commonly known as "social clubs."
   OPERATE — Any person, entity or establishment that:
   A.   Controls or causes to be controlled through agents or employees any
bottle club.
   B.   Conducts or manages a bottle club.
   C.   Owns, leases or subleases any area used as a bottle club.
   RESIDENCE — A building or structure wholly or partially used for living,
sleeping, eating, cooking and sanitation by human occupants.
   RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT — Those classes of residential districts as specified
in
Chapter 600, Zoning.
§ 127-304. Unlawful activities.
In any district in which bottle clubs are otherwise permitted, it shall be
unlawful for any person or persons who own, operate, lease, manage or control a
bottle club to:
   A.   Remain open and/or to transact business between the hours of 12:00
midnight and 11:00 a.m., prevailing time. In all cases, the premises must be
vacated within 15 minutes after the required closing time.
   B.   Allow members to rent or occupy the club unrestricted. Bottle and
social clubs will adhere to the following restrictions when allowing members to
hold functions in the club. No event shall exceed six hours in length, nor to
exceed one rental in a twenty-four-hour period, nor to occur between the hours
of 12:00 midnight and 11:00 a.m. by individuals or an organization for the
purpose of a private party in which alcoholic beverages are carried onto the
premises.
   C.   Conduct activities to which this Part applies without possessing a
valid club permit as specified herein.
   D.   Any structure of a bottle club shall be located in compliance with §
600-1203C of
Chapter 600, Zoning. Bottle clubs operating under the City's existing laws will
be exempted from § 127-305D until the property or club is sold or transferred
to another party or legal entity.1
1.   Editor's Note: Amended during codification (see
Ch. 1, General Provisions, Part 2).
§ 127-305. Club requirements.
Any and all bottle clubs, as that term is defined, shall comply with the
following requirements:
   A.   Obtain and carry general liability coverage in the minimum amount of
$1,000,000 per occurrence, proof of which shall be filed with the Codes
Enforcement Office of the City of Reading, proof of which shall be filed
annually when the permit is renewed with the Codes Enforcement Office.
   B.   Possess a valid certificate of occupancy issued by the Pennsylvania
Department of Labor and Industry and the City of Reading and prominently
display said certificate as required, proof of which shall be filed annually
when the permit is renewed with the Codes Enforcement Office.
   C.   Obtain a valid business privilege and mercantile tax license from the
City of Reading and prominently display said license as required, proof of
which shall be filed annually when the permit is renewed with the Codes
Enforcement Office.
   D.   Obtain a City of Reading zoning permit and all other valid City of
Reading permits and prominently display said permit as required, proof of which
shall be filed annually when the permit is renewed with the Codes Enforcement
Office.
   E.   Obtain a valid bottle club permit pursuant to this Part and prominently
display said permit as required.
   F.   Conspicuously post the hours of operation at the business premises such
that patrons are sufficiently apprised of same.
   G.   Clubs may not store any alcohol of any type on their premises between
the hours of 12:00 a.m. and 11:00 a.m.
   H.   The owner and/or operator of the bottle club must provide proof that
they are a resident of Berks County. If the owner and/or operator is not a
Berks County resident, they must a primary residence in Berks County and who
has the oversight of the building's operations and is authorized to accept
service on behalf of said property owner.
   I.   The owner and/or operator of the bottle club may not have been
convicted of a crime classified as a felony offense under the laws of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania or the United States, or be convicted of any
comparable crime under the laws of any other state in the United States.
   J.   Have a valid and current trash collection contract with a licensed
hauler, proof of which shall be filed annually when the permit is renewed with
the Codes Enforcement Office.
§ 127-306. Club permit; fee.
   A.   Any person or persons desiring to operate or continue to operate a
bottle club shall file with the Codes Enforcement Office of the City of Reading
an application for a bottle club permit, which application shall include the
following information: the name and address of the bottle club, a statement
whether the business premises is leased or owned by the bottle club, the name
and address of the lessor of the business premises, if applicable, the nature
of the ownership of the bottle club, i.e., corporation, partnership, joint
venture, association, the names and addresses of the officers and/or financial
interest in the bottle club. Also supply the name, addresses and phone number
of any and all managers and club officer who will be responsible for the
operation of the club during any time that it is open or at special events and
rentals. Failure to keep the City informed of current information will be cause
to revoke the permit.
   B.   The Codes Enforcement Office shall determine whether the bottle club
fully and completely complies with the provisions and requirements of this Part
within 20 days following the date on which application is received. If the
Codes Enforcement Office determines that the applicant fully and completely
complies with the provisions hereof, the office shall issue a bottle club
permit; if the Codes Enforcement Office determines that the applicant does not
fully and completely comply with the provisions hereof, the office shall deny
the issuance of a bottle club permit and shall furnish written evidence of the
same to the applicant together with the reason(s) for denial.
   C.   The club shall pay an administrative fee as set by ordinance for a
bottle club permit and a fee for each renewal thereof on a yearly basis. 2
Said bottle club permit shall be effective for a period of one year following
the date of issuance; provided, in the event the bottle club fails to fully and
completely comply with the provisions hereof or is convicted of any unlawful
activities during the term of the bottle club permit so issued, the City of
Reading shall have the authority to revoke the bottle club permit due to bottle
club's lack of compliance.
2.   Editor's Note: See
Ch. 212, Fees.
§ 127-307. Authority of police officer.
Any police officer is authorized to arrest, with or without warrant, any person
or persons violating any provision of this Part.
§ 127-308. Violations and penalties.
   A.   Any person, persons, or entity violating the provisions of this Part
shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject to a fine of $300 to $1,000 plus
costs for each day of such violation and, in default of payment of said fine
and costs, to a term of imprisonment not to exceed 30 days, and any and all
other remedies available in accordance with the Code of the City of Reading and
the laws of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
   B.   The unlawful activities specified herein shall constitute separate and
distinct offenses for each and every day in which said activities are
conducted.
   C.   In addition to any monetary penalties involved, the City of Reading
shall revoke the club permit required upon conviction of any unlawful
activities and any building, occupancy, zoning or other similar permits
previously issued by the City for the premises on which such bottle club has
been operated.
   D.   In the event of any of the unlawful activities specified herein are
conducted by or in the name of a corporation, partnership, joint venture,
trust, firm or association, in addition to entity liability, the officers,
agents or principals of said corporation, partnership, joint venture, trust,
firm or association shall be deemed in violation, as well as the person or
persons engaged in the unlawful activity.
Chapter 141
ANIMALS
Part 1
Pigeons
§
141-101.   Coop size and number of pigeons.
§
141-102.   Sanitary maintenance; loud noises prohibited.
§
141-103.   Feeding prohibited.
§
141-104.   Humane disposition of pigeons at large.
§
141-105.   Violations and penalties.
Part 2
Animal Control
§
141-201.   Purpose.
§
141-202.   Definitions.
§
141-203.   Animal bites and attacks.
§
141-204.   Nuisances.
§
141-205.   Sanitation.
§
141-206.   Caring for animals.
§
141-207.   Code Blue/Code Red.
§
141-208.   Tethering prohibited.
§
141-209.   Restraining and confinement generally.
§
141-210.   Restraint of guard dogs.
§
141-211.   Restraining of aggressive dogs and vicious animals.
§
141-212.   Property owners may impound.
§
141-213.   Disposition of large animals.
§
141-214.   Limited number of dogs/cats allowed without registration, permit
required.
§
141-215.   Keeping of exotic animal, domestic agricultural animal, or native
wildlife animal, permit required.
§
141-216.   Aggressive dog, vicious animal determination/permit required.
§
141-217.   Impoundment.
§
141-218.   Impoundment notice to owner and redemption.
§
141-219.   Animal Control Board established.
§
141-220.   Animal Control Board; powers and duties.
§
141-221.   Sanctions and remedies.
§
141-222.   Appeals.
§
141-223.   Severability.
§
141-224.   Enforcement.
§
141-225.   Violations and penalties.
[HISTORY: Adopted by the City Council of the City of Reading as indicated in
part histories. Amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Health code — See
Chapter 288, Part 1.
Noise — See
Ch. 387.
Parks and recreation — See
Ch. 396.
STATE LAW REFERENCES
Dog Law of 1982 — See 3 P.S. 459-101 et seq.
Domestic Animal Law — See 3 Pa.C.S.A. § 2301 et seq.
Rabies Prevention and Control in Domestic Animals and Wildlife Act — See 3 P.S.
§ 455.1 et seq.
Dangerous dogs — See 3 P.S. § 459-502-A et seq.
Cruelty to animals — See 18 Pa.C.S.A. § 5511.
Carrier and racing pigeons — See 53 P.S. § 3951 et seq.
Part 1
Pigeons
[Adopted 7-7-1965 by Ord. No. 31-1965 (Ch. 2, Part 2, of the 2001 Code of
Ordinances)]
§ 141-101. Coop size and number of pigeons.
No person, firm or corporation shall keep, maintain or harbor any pigeons
within the City in a suitable house or coop which is more than 800 cubic feet
in size and not more than 100 pigeons shall be kept by any one person, firm or
corporation at any time. Pigeon houses or coops may also have an attached
enclosed runway, but all structures for keeping the pigeons shall be
constructed so as to keep the pigeons properly confined and prevent their
flying abound.
§ 141-102. Sanitary maintenance; loud noises prohibited.
Any pigeon houses, coops or runways shall be maintained in such proper sanitary
conditions as to avoid offensive odors, and no pigeons shall be kept which
create any loud and excessive noises.
§ 141-103. Feeding prohibited.
No person shall intentionally feed pigeons at large.
§ 141-104. Humane disposition of pigeons at large.
[Amended 5-29-2001 by Ord. No. 14-2001; 12-28-2009 by Ord. No. 57-2009]
Pigeons at large and not branded may be captured and destroyed by any humane
means by any representative of the Property Improvement Division of the Police
Department, by the City's animal control authority or by any property owner of
the City upon whose property may such pigeon shall be found at large.
§ 141-105. Violations and penalties.
[Amended 5-29-2001 by Ord. No. 14-2001]
Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate this Part shall be, upon
conviction thereof, sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $1,000 plus costs
and, in default of payment of said fine and costs, to a term of imprisonment
not to exceed 30 days.
Part 2
Animal Control
[Adopted 11-15-2005 by Ord. No. 72-2005 (Ch. 2, Part 1, of the 2001 Code of
Ordinances); repealed and replaced 10-12-2020 by Ord. No. 64-2020]
§ 141-201. Purpose.
The purpose of this Part is to promote the public health, safety and general
welfare of the citizens of the City of Reading and to ensure the humane
treatment of animals by regulating the care and control of animals within the
City.
§ 141-202. Definitions.
[Amended 12-28-2009 by Ord. No. 57-2009]
When used in this Part, the following words, terms, and phrases, and their
derivations, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except
where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
   AGGRESSIVE OR DANGEROUS ANIMAL - Any animal, including wild animals but not
including dogs, that attacks, bites, or physically injures human beings,
domestic animals, or livestock without provocation or which, because of
temperament or training, has a known propensity to attack, bite, or physically
injure human beings, domestic animals, or livestock.
   ANIMAL — Construed in a broad sense to include not only mammals, but also
birds, reptiles and insects.
   ANIMAL CONTROL OFFICER — A City employee or agent authorized to enforce the
City of Reading Code, an employee of the designated animal control authority or
agent of the City, designated by the Mayor to administer and enforce the
licensing/permit, inspection and enforcement requirements contained within this
Part.
   ANIMAL HOSPITAL — Any establishment maintained and operated by a licensed
veterinarian for surgery, diagnosis, and treatment of animal diseases and
injuries.
   ANIMAL NUISANCE — Any nuisance arising out of the keeping, maintaining or
owning of, or failure to exercise sufficient control of, an animal.
   ANIMAL SHELTER — Any facility operated by the City or designated animal
control authority for the temporary care, confinement and detention of animals
and for the humane euthanization and other disposition of animals. The term
shall also include any private facility authorized by the Mayor or his designee
to impound, confine, detain, care for or destroy any animal.
   AT LARGE — An animal is off the premises of the owner, and not on a leash or
otherwise under the immediate control of a person physically capable of
restraining the animal.
   ATTACK — The deliberate action of a dog, whether or not in response to a
command by its owner, to bite, to seize with its teeth or to pursue any human,
or animate object, with obvious intent to destroy, kill, wound, injure, or
otherwise harm the object of its action. All attacks shall be reported to the
City of Reading Codes Official within 48 hours (see
Chapter 288, Part 1, Health Code, §
288-109, Animal bite incidents, of the Code of the City of Reading). [Amended
6-23-2014 by Ord. No. 48-2014]
   CODE OFFICIAL (PROPERTY MAINTENANCE INSPECTOR) - A City of Reading employee
or authorized agent sworn to enforce the City of Reading Codes and Codified
Ordinances. This term is used interchangeably with Property Maintenance
Inspector (PMI).
   CRUELTY — A person commits an offense if he wantonly or cruelly ill treats,
overloads, beats, otherwise abuses any animal, or neglects any animal as to
which he has a duty of care, whether belonging to himself or otherwise, or
abandons any animal, or deprives any animal of necessary sustenance, drink,
shelter or veterinary care, or access to clean and sanitary shelter which will
protect the animal against inclement weather and preserve the animal's body
heat and keep it dry. This shall not apply to activity undertaken in normal
agricultural operation [See 18 Pa.C.S.A. § 5511(c)]. [Amended 6-23-2014 by Ord.
No. 48-2014]
   DESIGNATED ANIMAL CONTROL AUTHORITY — Agency that has a contract with the
City of Reading for animal control.
   DISPOSITION — Adoption, quarantine, voluntary or involuntary custodianship
or placement, or euthanasia humanely administered to an animal. "Disposition"
includes placement or sale of an animal to the general public, or removal of an
animal from any pet shop to any other location.
   DOG, AGGRESSIVE -    Includes any or all of the following, except police
dogs or guard dogs acting under the supervision of a police officer or
certified trained dog handler, or certified service dogs:
   (1)   Any dog which bites, inflicts injury, assaults or otherwise attacks a
human being or a domestic animal without provocation.
   (2)   Any dog which, without provocation, attacks any person or domestic
animal upon the streets, sidewalks or any public grounds or places.
   (3)   Any dog which is trained to attack or cause injury or to otherwise
endanger the safety of human beings or domestic animals, or any dog which has a
history of attacking or propensity to attack people or domestic animals without
provocation. [Amended 9-8-2025 by Ord. No. 55-2025]
   DOG, DANGEROUS (DANGEROUS DOG) - Any dog as defined in 3 P.S. § 459- 102.
   DOMESTIC AGRICULTURAL ANIMAL — Any nonwildlife or nonexotic species altered
through controlled breeding for the primary purpose of agricultural use or
farming purposes. [Amended 6-23-2014 by Ord. No. 48-2014]
   DOMESTIC COMPANION ANIMAL — Any nonwildlife or nonexotic species altered
through controlled breeding for the primary purpose of human companionship and
serving no widely recognized agricultural, farming use or working purposes.
   EXEMPT EXOTIC ANIMAL — Any nondomestic animal not native to Pennsylvania
routinely offered for sale by pet stores with in Pennsylvania, nonpoisonous
reptiles not exceeding a maximum length of 60 inches at maturity, nonpoisonous
fish, and nonpoisonous amphibians not requiring state, federal, or City
permitting. [Amended 6-23-2014 by Ord. No. 48-2014]
   EXOTIC ANIMAL — Any rare or unusual animal pet or an animal kept as a pet
which is not commonly thought of as a pet may also be a species which is not
indigenous to the locale including, but not limited to, alligators, crocodiles,
foxes, tortoises, skunks, raccoons, chinchillas, wild felines as defined
herein, snakes, lizards, scorpions, and nonhuman primates. [Amended 6-23-2014
by Ord. No. 48-2014]
   GUARD OR ATTACK DOG — A dog trained to attack on command or to protect
persons or property, and who will cease to attack upon command.
   HARBORING — An animal shall be deemed to be harbored if it is fed or
sheltered for three or more consecutive days. [Added 6-23-2014 by Ord. No. 48-
2014]
   HEEL — The animal is directly behind or next to a person and obedient to
that person's command.
   IMPOUNDMENT — The taking into custody of an animal by any police officer,
animal control officer, or any authorized representative thereof.
   KENNEL — Any premises wherein any person engages in the business of
boarding, breeding, buying, letting for hire, training for a fee or selling
dogs or cats.
   MUZZLE — A device constructed of strong, soft material or of metal, designed
to fasten over the mouth of an animal to prevent the animal from biting any
person or other animal.
   NATIVE WILDLIFE ANIMAL — All nondomestic animals naturally occurring in the
wild within the borders of Pennsylvania.
   OFFICER — Police officer, Codes Official, Property Maintenance Inspector
and/or duly appointed animal control officer.
   OWNER — Any person having temporary or permanent custody of, sheltering or
having charge of, harboring, exercising control over, or having property rights
to, any animal covered by this Part. [Amended 6-23-2014 by Ord. No. 48-2014]
   PERSON — Any individual, partnership, association, corporation, company,
firm, institution, trustee, estate, trust, any private entity or public entity
as well as all officers, agents, servants, employees or others acting for any
of the same, and shall be taken as applying in the singular or plural as the
case may require.
   PROPERTY MAINTENANCE INSPECTOR - See Codes Official.
   PROVOCATION -Any action which incites, instigates, angers, irritates,
enrages or stimulates an animal to kill in passion and without deliberation.
   PUBLIC NUISANCE ANIMAL — Any animal that unreasonably annoys humans,
endangers the health of people or other animals, or substantially interferes
with the rights of citizens, other than their owners, to the enjoyment of life
or property. The term "public nuisance animal" shall include, but not be
limited to: [Amended 6-23-2014 by Ord. No. 48-2014]
   A.   Any animal that is found running at large.
   B.   Any dog or cat in any section of a park or public recreation area
unless the dog or cat is controlled by a leash or similar physical restraint.
   C.   Any animal that damages any property other than that of its owner.
   D.   Any animal that makes disturbing noises, including, but not limited to,
continued and repeated howling, barking, whining, or other utterances causing
unreasonable annoyance, disturbance or discomfort to neighbors or others in
close proximity to the premises where the animal is kept or harbored shall be
governed by
Chapter 387, Noise, §
387-104, Specific prohibited acts, of the Code of the City of Reading.
   E.   Any animal that causes fouling of the air by noxious or offensive odors
and thereby creates unreasonable annoyance or discomfort to neighbors or others
in close proximity to the premises where the animal is kept or harbored.
   F.   Any animal in heat that is not confined so as to prevent attraction or
contact with other animals.
   G.   Any animal, whether or not on the property of its owner, that without
provocation, molests, attacks, or otherwise interferes with the freedom of
movement of persons in a public right- of-way.
   H.   Any animal that chases motor vehicles in a public right-of-way.
   I.   Any animal that attacks domestic animals.
   J.   Any animal that causes unsanitary conditions in enclosures or
surroundings where the animal is kept or harbored.
   SANITARY — A condition of good order and cleanliness to minimize the
possibility of disease transmission.
   UNDER RESTRAINT — An animal is secured by a leash, lead under the control of
a person physically capable of restraining the animal and obedient to that
person's commands, or securely enclosed within the real property limits of the
owner's premises.
   WILD FELINES — Wild felines are considered, include, but are not limited to
lions, tigers, cougars, leopards, jaguars, mountain lions and nondomesticated
cats. [Added 6-23-2014 by Ord. No. 48-2014]
§ 141-203. Animal bites and attacks.
   A.   The City of Reading requires all animal bites and attacks to be
reported to the Property Maintenance Division and the Police Department within
48 hours, and requires a ten day quarantine period for the animal. Details can
be found in Chapter 288 Health and Safety, § 288-109 Animal bite incidents.
Police Officers may be called for emergency situations. [Amended 6-23-2014 by
Ord. No. 48-2014]
   B.   An attack by an animal upon any person or domestic animal conducting
himself in a lawful manner, as determined by the Investigating Officer, at the
time of such attack, whether such attack occurs on or off the property of the
owner or custodian of such animal, shall be deemed prima facie evidence that
there was not adequate preventive provisions made and therefore constitutes a
violation of this Chapter and requires the Animal Control Officer to visit the
property within 48 hours.
§ 141-204. Nuisances.
It shall be unlawful for any person to keep any animal on any property located
within the incorporated limits of the City when such animal constitutes a
public nuisance animal or a menace to public health or safety.
§ 141-205. Sanitation. [Amended 12-28-2009 by Ord. No. 57-2009]
   A.   All persons shall be responsible for the sanitary maintenance of the
premises on which any animals are harbored, housed, maintained or kenneled.
[Amended 6-23-2014 by Ord. No. 48-2014]
   B.   People owning, harboring or keeping an animal within the City shall not
permit any waste matter from the animal to collect and remain on the property
of the owner or custodian, or on the property of others so as to cause or
create an unhealthy, unsanitary, dangerous or offensive living condition on the
owner's or custodian's property, or to abutting property of others.
   C.   Excess animal food shall not be allowed to accumulate in such a manner
as to create a food source for bacteria, insects or rodents.
   D.   No person shall maintain, transport or carry any animal or pet into any
eating and drinking establishment, food manufacturing or food service facility,
except trained, certified service dogs. [Amended 6-23-2014 by Ord. No. 48-2014]
   E.   Owners of leashed or unleashed animals shall be responsible for the
removal and disposal of fecal matter deposited by his animal anywhere within
the City.
§ 141-206. Caring for animals. [Amended 5-11-2015 by Ord. No. 22-2015; 3-27-
2017 by Ord. No. 25-2017; 8-14-2017 by Ord. No. 80-2017]
   A.   Conduct prohibited by 18 Pa. C.S.A. §5511 (Cruelty to Animals) shall be
unlawful under this part of the City Code of Ordinances. Rules and regulations
made part of the Pa. Code which are promulgated under 18 Pa. C.S.A. § 5511 are
incorporated herein by reference.
   B.   Animal shelters, or areas in which animals are maintained, shall be
permitted only as approved by the City Zoning Office. Animal Shelters shall not
be constructed or located in such a manner that it creates a health hazard or
nuisance to the adjoining property owners. [Amended 6-23-2014 by Ord. No. 48-
2014]
§ 141-207. Code Blue/Code Red.
   The City’s Animal Control Officer shall have the authority to announce/call
a Code Blue, relating to extreme cold, or Code Red, relating to extreme heat,
requiring the owners of dogs to protect the unattended dog from the extreme
heat or cold by bringing the dog into the place where the owner or person who
has custody, control or possession of the dog resides.
   (1)   A Code Blue may be called by the Animal Control Officer when the
National Weather Service (NWS) predicts a wind chill temperature of 20° F. or
below or precipitation with temperatures below 32° F.
   (2)   A Code Red may be called by the Animal Control Officer when the
National Weather Service (NWS) predicts a heat index at 95° F. or above.
   (3)   The Animal Control Officer shall announce the declaration of the Code
Blue or Code Red on its website, to all local media outlets, and to the social
media outlets it regularly uses to communicate with the public. A minimum of
eight hours’ notice shall be provided to Reading residents.
   (4)   In addition to the requirements of the Pa. Code animal regulations as
per Subsection
141-206 A herein, any person who owns or has possession, custody or control of
a dog shall not allow the animal to remain unattended outdoors (except for
brief walks and brief periods of exercise) whenever a Code Blue or Code Red
weather emergency has been declared by the City’s Animal Control Officer.
   (5)   If the City’s Animal Control Officer finds that any person who owns or
has possession, custody or control of a dog has not complied with the
regulations herein, the City’s Animal Control Officer shall have the ability to
impound the dog, as per §
141-217, Impoundment, Part 6.
   (6)   Upon impoundment, the City’s Animal Control Officer shall follow the
procedures in §
141-218, Impoundment notice to owner and redemption.
   (7)   Any person in violation of this Part shall be subject to the
provisions of §
141-225, Violations and penalties, herein.
§ 141-208. Tethering prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for any person to tether, fasten, chain, tie, restrain or
cause an unattended dog to be fastened, chained, tied or restrained to houses,
trees, fences, garages, stakes or other stationary or highly immobile objects
by means of a rope, chain, strap or other physical restraint for the purpose of
confinement, except in circumstances where all of the following requirements
are satisfied:
   (1)   The tethering is not for a longer period of time than reasonably
necessary for the dog’s owner or custodian to complete a temporary task that
requires the dog to be physically restrained, and
   (2)   The tether is attached to the dog by a non-choke type collar and
attached to the stationary object by swivel anchors, latches, or similar
devices in a manner which prevents the tether from becoming entangled around
any object so as to limit the dog’s freedom within the tethered area, or to
prevent the dog, or any of its appendages, from becoming entangled by the
tether, and
   (3)   The tether must be of a type commonly used for the size of the dog
involved and if the tether is a chain, it may not be thicker than one-eighth of
an inch, and
   (4)   The dog has easy access to (i) potable drinking water, (ii) edible
food and (iii) adequate shade and/or shelter within the tethered area, and
   (5)   The dog is periodically monitored while tethered for the
aforementioned reasonable period of time, and
   (6)   The dog is not tethered outdoors in violation of §
141-207, Code Red or Code Blue above.
§ 141-209. Restraining and confinement generally.
   A.   It shall be unlawful for the owner of any dangerous dog and/or
aggressive dog to fail to keep such dangerous dog and/or aggressive dog under
restraint or to permit such dangerous dog and/or aggressive dog to run at large
upon the streets and public ways of the City.
   B.   Any dog, while on a street, sidewalk, public way or in any park, public
square, or other public space, or upon any private property without the consent
of the owner, shall be secured by a leash or chain of sufficient tensile
strength to restrain the particular dog, or shall be at heel and securely
muzzled.
   C.   No owner or custodian of any animal shall fail to exercise proper care
and control of such animal to prevent the same from becoming a public nuisance.
   D.   Every female dog in heat shall be confined to the residence of the
owner or keeper in such a manner that such female dog cannot come into contact
with another animal except for planned breeding.
   E.   Tethering a dog outdoors shall be prohibited as per §141-207 Code Red
or Code Blue above. [Amended 3-27-2017 by Ord. No. 25-2017]
§ 141-210. Restraint of guard dogs.
   A.   Every owner of a guard or attack dog shall keep such dog confined in a
building, compartment or other enclosure. Any such enclosure shall be
completely surrounded by a fence at least six feet in height and shall be
topped with an anticlimbing device constructed of angle metal braces with at
least three strands of equally separated barbed wire stretched between them.
   B.   All anticlimbing devices shall extend inward at an angle of not less
than 45° nor more than 90° when measured from the perpendicular.
   C.   The areas of confinement shall all have gates and entrances thereto
securely closed and locked, and all fences property maintained and escape
proof.
   D.   The provisions of this section shall not apply to dogs owned or
controlled by government law enforcement agencies.
§ 141-211. Restraining of aggressive dogs and vicious animals.
[Amended 12-28-2009 by Ord. No. 57-2009; 6-23-2014 by Ord. No. 48-2014; 9-8-
2025 by Ord. No. 55-2025]
   A.   Every dangerous dog, aggressive dog, or vicious animal shall be
confined by its owner or authorized agent of its owner to the residence of the
owner or keeper in accordance with Pennsylvania [P.S.] Title 3, Agriculture,
Chapter 8, Dog Law 3 P.S. § 459-502 in the case of dangerous dogs, and this
Part in the case of aggressive dogs or vicious animals. Such residence shall be
conspicuously posted with a placard provided by the issuing office. Whenever
off the premises of its owner, the dog shall be securely muzzled and restrained
with a chain having a minimal tensile strength of 300 pounds and not more than
three feet in length or caged.
   B.   If the animal is kept outdoors, the owner shall properly confine the
dog or animal in a pen or structure with secure sides and a secure top. The pen
shall be no less than six feet high and contain no less than 50 square feet of
ground space. All pens shall comply with City zoning guidelines so as not to be
offensive to the neighboring residents.
   C.   Every person harboring an aggressive dog or vicious animal is charged
with an affirmative duty to confine the animal in such way that children do not
have access to such animal.
   D.   No person owning or harboring an aggressive dog or vicious animal shall
permit such dog or animal to go beyond the confined area of such person’s
premises unless the dog or animal is securely leashed and muzzled. The leash
shall not be longer than three feet. Retractable or flexi-leads are not
allowed. The leash shall be controlled by an adult or by a person physically
capable of controlling the dog or animal.
   E.   Any owner who has received notice that their dog has been determined to
be an aggressive dog or vicious animal who fails to properly confine the
aggressive dog or vicious animal or permits their aggressive dog or vicious
animal to go beyond the confined area of such person's premises without
securely leashing and muzzling the dog or animal shall be subject to a fine of
$500 per incident for each dog that is in violation of this section.
§ 141-212. Property owners may impound.
[Amended 6-23-2014 by Ord. No. 48-2014]
Any person finding an animal at large upon his property may remove the same to
any animal shelter that will take possession of the animal. If no such shelter
is available, the property owner may hold the animal in their own possession,
and as soon as possible, notify the Animal Control Officer. The property owner
shall provide the Animal Control Officer with a description of the animal and
the name of the owner if known. The City shall dispatch an animal control
officer to take possession of the animal.
If the name of the owner or custodian of an animal found at large is known or
can be obtained with reasonable dispatch, the Animal Control Officer shall make
attempts to notify the owner.
§ 141-213. Disposition of large animals.
Any animal control officer or other designated person on call who removes a
large animal such as a horse, cow, mule or any other animal not acceptable by
any animal hospital or shelter shall be authorized to call a trucking firm or
company which shall convey the animal to a farm or other appropriate facility
that has an agreement with the City to accept such animals. The disposition of
any animal moved to a facility other than an animal hospital or shelter shall
be handled in the same manner as though the animal were confined in an animal
hospital or shelter. The City and Animal Shelter are authorized to bill the
owner of the animal for any charges incurred.
§ 141-214. Limited number of dogs/cats allowed without registration, permit
required.
[Added 6-23-2014 by Ord. No. 48-2014]
   A.   It shall be unlawful in any dwelling unit for a person to harbor,
house, own, or possess more than six cats, or more than six dogs, or a
combination of more than six such animals, over the age of three months without
registration with the City Property Maintenance Division, or designated Animal
Control Officer and the issuance of a permit.
   B.   The application for such permit shall be on a form supplied by the City
and shall be submitted to the Property Maintenance Division along with a fee
for the first calendar year in an amount as set by ordinance, as provided in
Chapter 212, Fees. The fee shall be disbursed partly to the Designated Animal
Control Authority and partly to the City to cover the costs of inspections and
administration, as provided in
Chapter 212, Fees. [Amended 8-26-2013 by Ord. No. 35-2013]
   Registration and permitting under this section are free.
   C.   The registration and permit application form shall include:
      (1)   The name and address of the applicant
      (2)   Description of the animals
      (3)   The purpose of keeping such animals
      (4)   A description of the quarters in which the animals will be kept and
the facilities for sanitation and disposal of animal wastes
      (5)   Registered veterinarian's health certification for each animal to
be covered by the permit, verified by an affidavit
      (6)   Such additional information as may be required.
   D.   The Animal Control Officer shall visit the address and consider other
relevant conditions, including but not limited to:
       (1)   The odor emanating or likely to emanate from the premises to
persons off the premises
      (2)   The noise emanating or likely to emanate from the premises to
persons off the premises
      (3)   Animals and animal quarters are kept in clean and sanitary
condition with adequate ventilation
      (4)   Animals shall be kept healthy and free from sickness and disease at
all times
      (5)   The security with which the animals will be restrained
      (6)   Prior complaints regarding animals at the premises
   E.   Upon satisfactory inspection and review, a City of Reading permit shall
be issued to the applicant, which shall bear an identifying number for the
animal(s) and the date of issuance. Unless revoked for violation of this Part,
the permit shall be valid for a period up to three years, or for the duration
that the animal's rabies vaccination is effective.
   F.   Upon complaint, the Animal Control Officer and/or Property Maintenance
Inspector shall revisit the location to assess the current conditions and may
revoke the permit at that time.
   G.   This Part applies only to persons with more than six animals in a
residential dwelling unit. This Part shall not apply to licensed kennels, pet
shops, animal grooming shops, veterinary shelters or hospitals, and shall not
be construed to exclude persons from other applicable animal control
requirements.
§ 141-215. Keeping of exotic animal, domestic agricultural animal, or native
wildlife animal, permit required.
[Amended 12-28-2009 by Ord. No. 57-2009]
   A.   It shall be unlawful for anyone to own, harbor or permit at large any
exotic animal, domestic agricultural animal, or native wildlife animal within
the City without a permit issued by the Animal Control Board. Such permit shall
be given only if it is demonstrated to the satisfaction of the Board that the
animal will not constitute a threat to public health or safety.
   B.   The application for such permit shall be on a form supplied by the City
and shall be submitted to the Property Maintenance Division along with a fee
for the first calendar year in an amount as set by ordinance, as provided in
Chapter 212, Fees. The fee shall be disbursed partly to the Designated Animal
Control Authority and partly to the City to cover the costs of inspections and
administration, as provided in
Chapter 212, Fees. [Amended 8-26-2013 by Ord. No. 35-2013]
   C.   The fee is levied per household, not per permitted animal. Fees are
nonrefundable.
   D.   The application form shall include:
      (1)   The property address
      (2)   The property owner's name
      (3)   The applicant's name
      (4)   The type of exotic animal, domestic agricultural animal or native
wildlife animal
      (5)   The number of animals to be permitted, by species
      (6)   Description of the animals to be permitted
      (7)   The purpose of keeping such animals
      (8)   A description of the quarters in which the animals will be kept and
the facilities for sanitation and disposal of animal wastes
      (9)   Such additional information as may be required.
   E.   The Animal Control Officer shall visit the address and consider other
relevant conditions, including but not limited to:
      (1)   The odor emanating or likely to emanate from the premises to
persons off the premises
      (2)   The noise emanating or likely to emanate from the premises to
persons off the premises
      (3)   Animals and animal quarters are kept in clean and sanitary
condition with adequate ventilation
      (4)   Animals shall be kept healthy and free from sickness and disease at
all times
      (5)   The security with which the animals will be restrained
      (6)   Prior complaints regarding animals at the premises.
   F.   Upon satisfactory inspection and review, a City of Reading permit shall
be issued to the applicant, which shall bear an identifying number for the
animal(s) and the date of issuance. Unless revoked for violation of this Part,
the permit shall be valid for a period up to three years, or for the duration
that the animal's rabies vaccination is effective.
   G.   Upon complaint, the Animal Control Officer and/or Property Maintenance
Inspector shall revisit the location to assess the current conditions and may
revoke the permit at that time.
§ 141-216. Aggressive dog, vicious animal determination/permit required.
[Amended 12-28-2009 by Ord. No. 57-2009; 9-8-2025 by Ord. No. 55-2025]
   A.   Determination of aggressive dog/vicious animal. Upon receiving a
complaint directed to the Reading Police Department, the Animal Control Officer
or any other authorized representative of the City, the Animal Control Officer
or the City Police shall make a determination as to whether the dog which is
the subject of a complaint shall be determined and deemed to be an aggressive
dog, or whether any other animal which is the subject of a complaint shall be
deemed and determined to be a vicious animal. The Animal Control Officer shall
take into account the definition of aggressive dog and vicious animal set forth
in §
141-202. The Animal Control Officer or City Police shall provide notice to the
property owner that their dog or animal has been determined to be an aggressive
dog or vicious animal.
   B.   Notwithstanding the criteria for aggressive dog/vicious animal noted
above, no dog or animal will be declared aggressive/vicious for inflicting
injury or damage on a person or other animal that was teasing, tormenting,
abusing or assaulting the dog/animal as determined by the investigating
officer; or upon any person committing or attempting to commit a willful
trespass or crime while the dog/animal was taking action to defend or protect a
human being within the immediate vicinity of the dog/animal from an attack or
assault, as determined by the Investigating Officer.
   C.   Appeal procedure: Within 14 days of the date of the notice of the
Police or Animal Control Officer's decision that an animal is vicious or
aggressive, the owner of the dog may appeal the decision to the Animal Control
Board. The owner of the dog shall send notice of his/her intent to appeal by
certified mail to the Animal Control Board, with copies to the Property
Maintenance Division and City Clerk. If such an appeal is filed, a hearing
shall be commenced within 15 business days of its filing. Within five days of
the close of the appeal hearing, the Animal Control Board shall determine
whether to uphold or reverse the decision of the Police Officer or Animal
Control Officer. The determination shall be sent by first class mail to the
appellant. Service is deemed complete if said notice is mailed to the last
known address of the owner and is not returned as undeliverable. If the notice
is returned, the property will be posted as necessary.
   D.   Determination of dangerous dog. Determination of whether a dog is a
dangerous dog shall be made in accordance with Pennsylvania Dog Law, 3 P.S. §
459-101, et seq., specifically under Section 459-502A, as that section may be
amended from time to time.
   E.   Permitting. Any person owning an aggressive dog, vicious animal must
register the dog or animal with the City of Reading Property Maintenance
Division to enforce the provisions of this Part, pay a fee for such
registration to the Designated Animal Control Authority, as set by ordinance
and provided in Chapter 212, Fees, and obtain a permit to keep the dog or
animal.
      The registration and permit application shall include all of the
information detailed at §
141-214.C above, and the premises where such dog or other animal small be kept
shall be subject to inspection by the Animal Control Officer as set forth in §
141-214.D above.
      The owner must provide proof at the time of registration that:
      (1)   The dog's rabies vaccination status is current.
      (2)   The dog is licensed for the current year.
      (3)   The dog is microchipped with a permanent ID.
      (4)   Every dog for which the owner is required to obtain a permit must
wear a valid permit tag at all times when the animal is off the premises of its
owner. The permit tag shall be issued and be made of highly visible material
with the words "aggressive dog" or "vicious animal" prominently displayed upon
it.
   F.   Upon licensing an aggressive dog or vicious animal, the owner shall
display, in a conspicuous manner, a sign on his or her premises warning that
there is an aggressive dog or vicious animal on the premises. The sign shall be
visible and legible from the sidewalk and street.
   G.   Any person owning an aggressive dog or vicious animal without a permit
as required in subsection E. above shall be subject to a fine of no less than
$500 and no greater than $1,000.
§ 141-217. Impoundment.
[Amended 12-28-2009 by Ord. No. 57-2009]
   A.   In addition to any other remedies provided in this Part, an Animal
Control Officer or a police officer may seize, impound and humanely confine any
of the following animals in accordance with Pennsylvania [P.S.] Title 3,
Agriculture, Chapter 8, Dog Law, [3 P.S. § 459-101 et seq.]:
      (1)   Any animal at large.
      (2)   Any public nuisance animal or other animal considered to be a
danger to the public.
      (3)   Any animal that is in violation of any quarantine or confinement
order of a City Official.
      (4)   Any unattended animal that is ill, injured or otherwise in need of
care.
      (5)   Any animal that is charged with dangerous, vicious, or aggressive
activity or displays aggressive behavior where an Animal Control Officer,
Property Maintenance Inspector or Police Officer determines that there is a
threat to public health and safety. [Amended 6-23-2014 by Ord. No. 48-2014]
      (6)   Any animal that a court of competent jurisdiction has ordered
impounded or destroyed.
      (7)   Any animal that is considered unattended or abandoned, as in
situations where the owner is deceased, has been arrested or evicted from his
regular place of residence.
      (8)   Any exotic animal, domestic agricultural animal, or native wildlife
animal without a valid permit.
    B.   An Animal Control Officer, Property Maintenance Inspector or Police
Officer may, in lieu of impoundment, issue to the owner a Notice of Violation
and/or citation. [Amended 6-23-2014 by Ord. No. 48-2014]
§ 141-218. Impoundment notice to owner and redemption.
   A.   Upon impoundment of an animal, the designated Animal Control Agency or
Property Maintenance Division shall immediately attempt to notify the owner by
first class mail. The owner shall also be advised that the failure to claim the
animal within a specified period of time may result in the disposition of the
animal.
   B.   An owner reclaiming an impounded animal shall pay a fee for each day
the animal has been impounded, in an amount set by the Animal Control Agency
and provided in
Chapter 212, Fees.[Amended 8-26-2013 by Ord. No. 35-2013]
   C.   Any animal not reclaimed by its owner within 48 hours shall become the
property of the City Animal Control Agency and shall be placed for adoption in
a suitable home or, when necessary, euthanized in a manner prescribed by the
designated animal control authority. [Amended 6-23-2014 by Ord. No. 48-2014]
   D.   Any dangerous, vicious or aggressive dog/animal impounded shall not be
redeemed by the owner or adopted by any other person until all applicable
permit fees imposed by this Part shall be paid and proof thereof shall be
presented to the designated animal control authority. [Amended 6-23-2014 by
Ord. No. 48-2014]
§ 141-219. Animal Control Board established.
[Amended 5-22-2006 by Ord. No. 42-2006; 12-28-2009 by Ord. No. 57-2009]
   A.   There is hereby established a City Animal Control Board.
   B.   The Mayor shall appoint seven members subject to confirmation by City
Council. [Amended 2-27-2012 by Ord. No. 16-2012]
      (1)   Four members shall be appointed as representatives of the community
at large.
      (2)   Two members shall be appointed representatives of animal humane
societies and animal shelters.
      (3)   One member shall be appointed as a representative of private
veterinarians or veterinary hospitals.
   C.   The term of each member shall be three years, or until a successor
takes office.
   D.   The Police Chief or his/her designee shall serve as liaison to the
Board.
   E.   A Property Maintenance Inspector shall serve as liaison to the Board.
§ 141-220. Animal Control Board; powers and duties.
[Amended 12-28-2009 by Ord. No. 57-2009]
   A.   The Animal Control Board is authorized to prepare written rules and
regulations to govern its operations and conduct hearings before it. The rules
and regulations shall become effective upon the approval, by resolution, of
City Council. Copies of the Board’s rules and regulations shall be available
for inspection by the public in the Office of the City Clerk. [Amended 6-23-
2014 by Ord. No. 48-2014]
   B.   The Board shall also have the authority to do the following:
      (1)   Receive requests for permission to own exotic animals, domestic
agricultural animals, native wildlife animals and requests to own more than six
dogs/cats; conduct an investigation it deems proper and hold hearings in
conjunction with such investigation. The Board may grant, in writing, permits
for the keeping of exotic animals, domestic agricultural animals, native
wildlife animals, aggressive dogs, vicious animals and more than six dogs/cats
and may impose any condition on such permission that it deems necessary to
protect the animal, owner, and the general public.
      (2)   Hear appeals of owners of animals determined to be vicious animals
or aggressive dogs as defined under §
141-202, Definitions. [Amended 6-23-2014 by Ord. No. 48-2014]
      (3)   Impose any or all of the sanctions and remedies set forth at § 141-
221 for violations of this Part.
    C.   The Board shall meet at the call of the Chairperson to recommend
changes in the law regarding the control of animals to City Council. [Amended
6-23-2014 by Ord. No. 48-2014]
   D.   Removal of members. Any member may be removed for misconduct or neglect
of duty or for other just cause by a majority vote of Council taken after the
member has received 15 days’ advance notice of the intent to take such vote.
Failure of a member to attend three consecutive regular meetings of the Board
will constitute grounds for immediate removal from the Board by City Council.
Failure of a member to attend at least 50% of the regular meetings of the Board
in a calendar year will constitute grounds for immediate removal from the Board
by City Council. The Chairperson of the Board shall inform the City Clerk in
writing when a member has failed to comply with this attendance policy.
Following such notification, City Council may vote to remove the member and
seek applicants to fill the vacant position. [Amended 9-27-2010 by Ord. No. 73-
2010]
§ 141-221. Sanctions and remedies.
[Amended 12-28-2009 by Ord. No. 57-2009]
   A.   Muzzling of an animal while off the property of the owner.
   B.   Confinement within a secure enclosure, with the exception of tethering,
as permitted with conditions under § 141-208. Caring for animals herein.
[Amended 3-27-2017 by Ord. No. 25-2017]
   C.   Reduction of the number of animals kept at any one location.
   D.   Citation of the animal's owner or custodian in cases of cruelty.
   E.   The sterilization of an animal.
   F.   A ban on maintaining other animals in the City.
   G.   Any other measure or sanction designed to eliminate a violation,
prevent future violations, or protect the health and safety of the public.
§ 141-222. Appeals.
[Amended 12-28-2009 by Ord. No. 57-2009]
Any person aggrieved by any decision of an Animal Control Board may appeal the
same to the Berks County Court of Common Pleas.
§ 141-223. Severability.
   If any provision, paragraph, word, section, or subsection of this Part is
invalidated by a court of competent jurisdiction, remaining provisions shall
not be affected and shall remain in full force and effect.
§ 141-224. Enforcement.
[Amended 12-28-2009 by Ord. No. 57-2009; 6-23-2014 by Ord. No. 48-2014; 3-27-
2017 by Ord. No. 25-2017]
   A.   Animal control officers or Property Maintenance Inspectors shall be the
enforcement officials for this Part. These officials, along with police
officers, shall have the authority to act on behalf of the City and the Animal
Control Agency in investigating complaints, impounding and destroying animals,
issuing Notice of violations and/or citations, and taking other lawful actions
as required to enforce the provisions of this Part and all State Laws relating
to the care, maintenance and cruelty of animals. It shall be a violation to
interfere with any animal control officer or other enforcement official in the
performance of their duties.
   B.   Any officer or agent duly authorized to enforce this Chapter may, in
addition to imposing other penalties permitted in this Chapter, enter the
premises of any owner and temporarily remove a dog if such officer or agent
determines that the dog is being held or tethered in violation of this Chapter.
Prior to removing any dog under this section, such officer must give notice to
the owner either in writing or by posting such notice upon the premises of the
nature of the violation of this Chapter, and such notice must contain an order
to bring the violation into compliance within 24 hours of receipt of such
notice.
      (1)   Any owner of a dog removed under this section may regain possession
of the dog upon an adequate showing to the confiscating party that the
situation has been brought into compliance and the party has paid all required
fees imposed.
§ 141-225. Violations and penalties.
[Amended 12-28-2009 by Ord. No. 57-2009; 3-27-2017 by Ord. No. 25-2017]
   A.   It shall be violation of the Part to:
      (1)   Fail to comply with any provision of this Part.
      (2)   Fail to comply with any lawful order of the Animal Control Board,
an Animal Control Officer, City official, or police officer unless such order
is lawfully stayed or reversed. [Amended 6-23-2014 by Ord. No. 48-2014]
   B.   Any person who shall violate any provision of this Part shall be, upon
conviction thereof, sentenced to pay a fine of not less than$300 nor more than
$1,000 plus costs; and, in default of payment of said fine and costs, to a term
of imprisonment not to exceed 30 days.
      (1)   The penalty shall be $1,000 plus costs for each subsequent offense
and, in default thereof, imprisonment not exceeding 30 days. This is in
addition to any state or federal fines or penalties or terms of imprisonment.
   C.   Notwithstanding any other penalties imposed by this section of this
Part, any person who violates any provision of this Part and said violation
involves an aggressive dog (as defined in §
141-202, Definitions), shall be subject to a minimum fine of $500 to a maximum
of $1,000 plus costs and other fees and penalties included within the terms of
this Part and, in default of payment of said fine and costs, to a term of
imprisonment not to exceed 30 days.
   D.   Nothing contained in this Chapter shall be construed to in any way
limit the right of any victim, or owner of a victim in the case of an animal
victim, to recover civil damages, including reasonable medical expenses if the
owner of the offending animal knew or should have known of the animal's
dangerous, aggressive or vicious propensities and the offending animal was not
defending itself from an annoying, harassing or provoking act or assisting a
City, State or Federal employee in the performance of an official duty.
   E.   All fines collected shall be forwarded to the designated Animal Control
Authority to cover administrative expenses.
Chapter 166
CABLE TELEVISION
§
166-101.   Intent.
§
166-102.   Short title.
§
166-103.   Definitions.
§
166-104.   Grant of franchise.
§
166-105.   Regulation of franchise.
§
166-106.   General financial and insurance provisions.
§
166-107.   Reports.
§
166-108.   Franchise violations.
§
166-109.   Operation and maintenance.
§
166-110.   Design and construction provisions.
§
166-111.   Service provisions.
§
166-112.   Rights reserved to grantor.
§
166-113.   Rights reserved to grantee.
§
166-114.   Miscellaneous provisions.
[HISTORY: Adopted by the City Council of the City of Reading 12-24-1985 by Ord.
No. 101-1985 (Ch. 13, Part 14, of the 2001 Code of Ordinances). Amendments
noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Streets and sidewalks — See
Ch. 508.
Zoning — See
Ch. 600.
§ 166-101. Intent.
The City of Reading finds that the development of cable television and
communications systems has the potential of having great benefit and impact
upon the people of the City of Reading. It is the intent of this chapter to
establish regulatory powers to be vested in the City, consistent with the Cable
Communications Policy Act of 1984, to regulate cable to the extent necessary to
achieve the purpose of the Act, protect the public safety, health and welfare
of the citizens of Reading. Such regulation shall not exceed that permitted by
the Cable Communications Policy Act of 1984 and federal and state law. The City
recognizes that the grantee is engaged in the business of cable broadcasting,
which business involves the free expression of ideas and thoughts and has been
recognized by substantial existing case law to be protected by the Pennsylvania
and United States Constitutions.
§ 166-102. Short title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "City of Reading Cable
Television Ordinance."
§ 166-103. Definitions.
For the purpose of this chapter, the following terms, phrases, words and their
derivations shall have the meaning given herein. When not inconsistent with the
context, words used in the present tense include the future, words in the
plural number include the singular number, and words in the singular number
include the plural number. The word "shall" is mandatory and "may" is
permissive. Words not defined shall be given their common and ordinary meaning.
   ACCESS CHANNEL — Any program or signal channel available for nonprofit,
noncommercial use by government agencies, educational institutions, community
groups, or individual members of the public.
   ACCESS CHANNEL MANAGER — Any entity designated by the grantor to manager the
community access channels facilities and resources defined herein.
   ACT — The Cable Communication Policy Act of 1984, as amended from time to
time. BASIC CABLE SERVICE — Shall be defined by the Act and any amendments
thereto. BROADCAST SIGNAL — A television or radio signal that is broadcast over
the air and is
received by a cable communications system off-the-air or by microwave or
satellite link.
   CABLECAST FACILITY — A facility used to originate cable programming and
distribute programming to subscribers.
   CABLECAST SIGNAL — A communication signal that originates within the
facilities of the cable communications system.
   CABLE COMMUNICATIONS SYSTEM — A facility, consisting of a set of closed
transmission paths and associated signal generation, reception, and control
equipment that is designed to provide cable service which includes video
programming and which is provided to multiple subscribers within a community.
   CABLE SERVICE — The one-way or two-way transmission of video programming or
other communication services.
   CHANNEL — A six-Megahertz (MHZ) frequency band, which is capable of carrying
either one standard video signal, a number of audio, digital or other nonvideo
signals, or some combination of such signals.
   CITY or GRANTOR — The City of Reading, as it is presently, and may be in the
future, constituted.
   CLOSED-CIRCUIT OR INSTITUTIONAL SERVICE — Such video, audio, data and other
services provided to institutional users on an individual application, private
channel basis. These may include, but not be limited to, two-way video, audio
or digital signals among institutions, or from institutions to residential
subscribers.
   COMMUNITY ACCESS CHANNEL or COMMUNITY CHANNEL — The access channels operated
and controlled by the access channel manager for public, educational and
government purposes. It does not include programs or the signal channel
designated as the local origination channels.
   CONNECTION CHARGE or INSTALLATION CHARGE — Any nonrecurring charge for
connecting a subscriber to the cable television system, or to a particular
service.
   COUNCIL — The City Council, the governing body of the City of Reading.
   EDUCATIONAL CHANNEL — Any educational channel where the Reading School
District is the designated programmer.
   FCC — The Federal Communications Commission and any legally appointed or
elected successor.
   FRANCHISE — The rights granted pursuant to this chapter to construct and
operate a cable communications system along the public ways within the service
area. Any such authorizations, in whatever form granted, shall not mean and
include any license or permit required for the privilege of transacting and
carrying on a business within the City as required by other ordinances and laws
of this City.
   FRANCHISE AGREEMENT — The ordinance and the grantee's final proposal to be
submitted by the grantee and negotiated and accepted by both the grantor and
grantee.
   FRANCHISE FEE — The charges imposed as consideration for the granting of a
franchise and the continuing use of the public streets and rights-of-way.
   GOVERNMENT CHANNEL or GOVERNMENT ACCESS CHANNEL — Any community access
channel where the City of Reading is the only designated programmer.
   GRANTEE — Any person, corporation or other business entity receiving a
franchise pursuant to this chapter and its lawful successor, transferee or
assignee.
   GRANTOR — The City of Reading as represented by the City Council or its
delegate acting within the scope of its jurisdiction.
   GROSS REVENUE — All revenue, as determined in accordance with generally
accepted accounting principles, which is received, directly or indirectly, by
the grantee and by each affiliated person from or in connection with the
distribution of any service over the cable communications system. Gross revenue
shall not include:
   A.   The revenue of any person, including, without limitation, a supplier of
programming to the grantee, to the extent that said revenue is also included in
gross revenue of the grantee;
   B.   The revenue of the grantee or any other person which is received
directly from the sale of any merchandise through any service distributed over
the cable system;
   C.   Taxes imposed by law on subscribers which the grantee is obligated to
collect;
   D.   Amounts collected by the grantee from subscribers on behalf of leased
or access channel programmers, other than affiliated persons, to the extent
that said amounts are passed on by the grantee to said programmers;
   E.   The revenue of any affiliated person which represents standard and
reasonable amounts paid by the grantee to said affiliated person for ordinary
and necessary business expenses of the grantee, including, without limitation,
professional service fees and insurance or bond premiums;
   F.   Any investment income earned by the grantee;
   G.   That portion of the fee paid by the grantee to an affiliated person for
any service which exceeds the revenue of the grantee from said service; or
   H.   Any revenues, including subscription fees and advertising receipts,
received by the grantee or any affiliated person in connection with the sale
within the City of any cable programming magazine, provided that the grantee or
an affiliated person provides to all subscribers, without charge, a written
listing of all services distributed over the cable system.
   INSTITUTIONAL NETWORK or INSTITUTIONAL LOOP — A closed-circuit portion of
the cable communication system designed to provide communication services to
institutional network users authorized by the franchise agreement or by the
grantee.
   LEASED CHANNEL or LEASED ACCESS CHANNEL — Any channel available for lease
and programming by persons or entities other than the grantee.
   LOCAL ORIGINATION CHANNEL — Any channel where the grantee is the only
designated programmer and provides local programs to subscribers.
   PERSON — An individual, partnership, association, organization, corporation
or any lawful successor, transferee or assignee of said individual,
partnership, association, organization or corporation.
   PROGRAMMER — Any person or entity who or which produces or otherwise
provides program material or information for transmission by video, audio,
digital, or other signals, either live or from recorded tapes or other storage
media, to subscribers, by means of the cable communications system.
   PUBLIC CHANNEL or PUBLIC ACCESS CHANNEL — The community access channel
available to the public at no charge.
   RESIDENT — Any person residing in the City as otherwise defined by
applicable law.
   SECTION — Any section, subsection, or provision of this chapter.
   SERVICE AREA or FRANCHISE TERRITORY — The areas within the boundaries of the
City of Reading.
   STATE — The State of Pennsylvania.
   STREET — Includes each of the following which have been dedicated to the
public or hereafter dedicated to the public and maintained under public
authority or by others and located within the City limits: streets, roadways,
highways, avenues, lanes, alleys, sidewalks, easements, right-of-way and
similar public ways and extensions and additions thereto, together with such
other public property and areas that the City shall permit to be included
within the definition of street from time to time.
   SUBSCRIBER — Any person, firm, corporation, or other entity who is
authorized to receive a service provided by the grantee by means of or in
connection with the cable communications system.
   YEAR — A full calendar year.
§ 166-104. Grant of franchise.
   A.   Grant.
      (1)   In the event that grantor shall grant to a grantee a nonexclusive
franchise to construct, operate, maintain, and reconstruct a cable
communications system within the City, said franchise shall constitute both a
right and an obligation to provide the services of a cable communications
system as required by the provisions of this chapter and any franchise
agreement. The franchise agreement or grant ordinance shall include those
provisions of the grantee's application for franchise that are finally
negotiated and accepted by the grantor and grantee. While the City reserves the
right to grant a similar franchise to additional cable communication systems
within the franchise territory at any time, in the event that a franchise is
granted with terms that the grantee reasonably deems more favorable than those
set out in its franchise agreement with the grantor, the terms in grantee's
franchise agreement shall be automatically modified to include the more
favorable provisions, grantee shall notify grantor of such modification within
10 days. If grantor does not agree that the subject terms are more favorable
than those set out in the grantee's franchise agreement, the grantor may ask
the grantee to justify grantee's modification.
      (2)   Any franchise granted is hereby made subject to the general
ordinance provisions now in effect or hereafter made effective. Nothing in the
franchise shall be deemed to waive the requirements of the various codes and
ordinances of the City regarding permits, fees to be paid or manner of
construction.
   B.   Use of public streets and ways. For the purpose of operating and
maintaining a cable communications system in the City, the grantee may erect,
install, construct, repair, replace, reconstruct, and remain in, on, over,
under, upon, across, and along the public streets and ways within the City such
wires, cables, conductors, ducts, conduits, vaults, manholes, amplifiers,
appliances, pedestals, attachments, and other property and equipment as are
necessary and appurtenant to the operation of the cable communications system
and in accordance with
Chapter 600, Zoning.
   C.   Duration. The term of any franchise and all rights, privileges,
obligations and restrictions pertaining thereto shall be as specified in the
franchise agreement. The effective date of the franchise shall be 30 days after
acceptance and adoption of the franchise proposal through ordinance or
resolution by Council. The grantee must file by the effective date in the
office of the City Clerk, a written acceptance of the franchise, or the
franchise shall be null and void.
   D.   Transfer of ownership or control.
      (1)   Transfer of franchise. Any franchise granted hereunder shall be a
privilege to be held for the benefit of the public. Said franchise cannot in
any event be sold, transferred, leased, assigned or disposed of, including but
not limited to by forced or voluntary sale, merger, consolidation, or
receivership, without the prior consent of the grantor, and then only under
such conditions as the grantor may reasonably establish. Such prior consent
shall not be unreasonably withheld. Prior consent shall not be necessary unless
the sale, transfer, lease or assignment results in a change of management or
actual working control of the cable system. If any transfer of the franchise
occurs without the prior consent of the grantor, the franchise may, at
grantor's sole option, be terminated in accordance with §
166-108B.
      (2)   Ownership or control. The grantee shall promptly notify the grantor
of any pending change in, or transfer of, or acquisition by any other party of,
control of the grantee. The word "control" as used herein is not limited to
major stockholders but includes actual working control in whatever manner
exercised. A rebuttable presumption that a transfer of control has occurred
shall arise upon the acquisition or accumulation by any person or group of
persons of 10% of the voting shares of the grantee. Every change, transfer, or
acquisition of control of the grantee shall make the franchise subject to
cancellation unless and until the grantor shall have consented thereto, which
consent shall not be unreasonably withheld. For the purpose of determining
whether it shall consent to such change, transfer or acquisition control, the
grantor may inquire into the qualification of the prospective controlling
party, and the grantee shall assist the grantor in any such inquiry.
      (3)   In seeking the grantor's consent to any change in ownership or
control, the grantee shall have the responsibility:
         (a)   To show to the satisfaction of the grantor whether the proposed
purchaser, transferee, or assignee (the proposed transferee), which in the case
of a corporation, shall include all officers, directors, employees and all
persons having a legal or equitable interest in 5% or more of its voting stock,
or any of the proposed transferee's principals:
            [1]   Has ever been convicted or held liable for acts involving
moral turpitude (including, but not limited to any federal or state agency, or
violation of any tax or securities law), or is presently under an indictment,
investigation or complaint charging such acts.
            [2]   Has ever had a judgment in an action for fraud, deceit or
misrepresentation entered against it, her, him, or them by any court of
competent jurisdiction.
            [3]   Has pending any legal claim, lawsuit or administrative
proceeding arising out of or involving a cable system.
            [4]   Has ever filed or been declared bankrupt, or been associated
with any cable company that has filed or been declared bankrupt.
         (b)   To establish, to the satisfaction of the grantor, the financial
solvency of the proposed transferee by submitting all current financial data
for the proposed transferee which the grantor was required to submit in its
franchise application, and such other data as the grantor may request.
Financial statements shall be audited, certified and qualified by an
independent certified public accountant.
         (c)   To establish to the satisfaction of the grantor that the
financial standing of the proposed transferee is such as shall enable it to
maintain and operate the cable system for the remaining term of the franchise.
         (d)   To provide grantor with a list of municipalities currently
served or which have been served in the past, with cable service by the
proposed transferee.
      (4)   The grantee shall require that any financial institution or person
having a pledge of the franchise or its assets for the advancement of money for
the construction and/or operation of the franchise shall, as a material
condition of such advance of money, assume the duty to reasonably notify the
grantor that it or its designee, satisfactory to the grantor, intends to take
control and operate the cable television system. Further, said financial
institution or person shall also agree to submit a plan for such operation that
will insure continued service and compliance with all franchise obligations
during the term the financial institution or person exercises control over the
system. Such financial institution or person shall not exercise control over
the system for a period exceeding one year unless extended by the grantor. In
its discretion and during said period of time, it shall have the right to
petition the grantor to transfer franchise to another grantee. If the grantor
finds that the legal, financial, character, technical and other public interest
qualities of the applicant are satisfactory, the grantor may transfer and
assign the rights and obligations of such franchise as in the public interest.
The consent of the grantor to such transfer shall not be unreasonably withheld.
      (5)   The consent or approval of the grantor to any transfer of the
grantee shall not constitute a waiver or release of the rights of the grantor
in and to the streets, and any transfer shall by its terms, be expressly
subordinate to the terms and conditions of this franchise.
      (6)   In no event shall a transfer of ownership or control be approved
without successor in interest becoming a signatory to the franchise agreement.
   E.   Police powers.
      (1)   In accepting this franchise, the grantee acknowledges that its
rights hereunder are subject to the police powers of the City to adopt and
enforce general ordinances necessary to the safety and welfare of the public;
and it agrees to comply with all applicable general laws and Parts enacted by
the City pursuant to such power.
      (2)   Any conflict between the provisions of this franchise and any other
present or future lawful exercise of the grantor's police powers shall be
resolved in favor of the latter, except that any such exercise that is not of
general application in the jurisdiction or applies exclusively to grantee or
cable communications systems which contains provisions inconsistent with this
franchise shall prevail only if, upon such exercise, an emergency exists
constituting a danger to health, safety, property or general welfare or such
exercise is mandated by law.
   F.   Franchise fee.
      (1)   Annual franchise payment. A grantee of a franchise hereunder shall
pay to the grantor an annual fee of 5% of the annual gross revenues. In the
event of a dispute, the grantor, if it so requests, shall be furnished a
statement of said payment, audited and qualified by an independent certified
public accountant, reflecting the total amounts of annual gross revenues and
the computations for the period covered by the payment. In the event of a
material discrepancy between the grantee's payment and the amount determined by
the CPA to be due, the cost of this audited statement shall be borne by the
grantee. Absent such material discrepancy, the cost of this audited statement
shall be borne by the grantor.
      (2)   Acceptance by grantor. Acceptance of any payment toward the
franchise fee by the grantor shall not waive the grantor's right to seek
additional sums payable under the franchise agreement.
      (3)   Failure to make required payment. In the event that any franchise
payment or recomputed amount is not made on or before the dates specified
herein, grantee shall pay liquidated damage as specified in §
166-108, Franchise violations.
      (4)   Payments due the grantor under this subsection shall be computed
quarterly, for the preceding quarter, as of March 31, June 30, September 30 and
December 31. Each quarterly payment shall be due and payable no later than 30
days after the dates listed in the previous sentence. Each payment shall be
accompanied by a brief report showing the basis for the computation and such
other relevant facts as may be required by the grantor.
   G.   Forfeiture or revocation. The grantor reserves the right to revoke any
franchise granted hereunder and rescind all rights and privileges associated
with the franchise in the following circumstances, each of which shall
represent a default and breach under this chapter and the franchise grant:
      (1)   Acts justifying revocation.
         (a)   If the grantee should default in the performance of any of its
material obligations under the franchise agreement.
         (b)   If the grantee's quality of service and response to subscriber
complaints has demonstrated a continuing, willful pattern of inadequacy, which
has not been corrected by the grantee within a reasonable period of time after
due notice by grantor.
         (c)   If the grantee should fail to provide or maintain in full force
and effect, the liability and indemnification coverage or the construction
performance bond as required herein.
         (d)   If the grantee should materially violate any orders or rulings
of any regulatory body having jurisdiction over the grantee relative to this
franchise unless said order or ruling is subject to appeal and the grantee
evidences its good faith intent to seek such appeal.
         (e)   If the grantee practices any fraud or deceit upon the grantor.
         (f)   The grantee's construction schedule is delayed for more than six
months later than the schedule contained in the franchise agreement without
reasonable cause and for reasons within the grantee's control.
         (g)   The grantee is adjudged bankrupt.
      (2)   Procedure prior to revocation.
         (a)   The grantor shall make written demand that the grantee do so
comply with any such requirement, limitation, term, condition, rule or
regulation or correct any action deemed cause for revocation. If the failure,
refusal or neglect of the grantee continues for a period of 30 days following
such written demand, the grantor may place its request for termination of the
franchise upon a regular Council meeting agenda. The grantor shall cause a
written notice to be served upon such grantee, and shall publish notice thereof
at least 10 days before such meeting in a newspaper of general circulation
within the City.
         (b)   The Council shall hear any persons interested therein, and shall
determine, in its discretion, whether or not any failure, refusal or neglect by
the grantee was with just cause.
         (c)   If such failure, refusal or neglect by the grantee was with just
cause, the Council shall direct the grantee to comply within such time and
manner and upon such terms and conditions as are reasonable.
         (d)   If the Council shall determine such failure, refusal or neglect
by the grantee was without just cause, then the Council may, by resolution,
declare that the franchise of such grantee shall be terminated and bond
forfeited unless there be compliance by the grantee within such reasonable
period as the Council may fix.
         (e)   In addition to this section, the grantee shall not be precluded
from seeking due process under any other procedures set forth in the franchise
agreement.
   H.   Requirements of post-termination.
      (1)   Disposition of facilities. In the event a franchise expires, is
finally revoked or otherwise mutually terminated, the grantor may order the
removal of the aerial plant and exposed apertures facilities from the City
within six months from the end of the franchise agreement.
      (2)   Restoration of property. In removing its aerial plant and
apertures, the grantee shall leave all public ways and places in as good
condition as that prevailing prior to the grantee's removal. The liability,
indemnity and insurance as provided herein and the construction performance and
payment bonds provided therein shall continue in full force and effect during
the period of removal and until full compliance by the grantee with the terms
and conditions of this subsection and this chapter.
   I.   Receivership and foreclosure.
      (1)   The franchise herein granted shall, at the option of the grantor,
cease and terminate 120 days after the appointment of a receiver or receivers
or trustee or trustees to take over and conduct the business of the grantee
whether in a receivership, a reorganization, bankruptcy or other action or
proceeding unless such receivership or trusteeship shall have been vacated
prior to the expiration of said 120 days, or unless:
         (a)   Such receivers or trustees shall have, within 120 days after
their election or appointment, fully complied with all the terms and provisions
of this chapter and the franchise granted pursuant hereto, and the receivers or
trustees within said 120 days shall have remedied all defaults under the
franchise.
         (b)   Such receivers or trustees shall, within said 120 days, execute
an agreement duly approved by the Court having jurisdiction in the premises,
whereby such receivers or trustees assume and agree to be bound by each and
every term, provision and limitation of the franchise herein granted.
      (2)   In the case of a foreclosure or other judicial sale of the plant,
property and equipment of the grantee, or any part thereof, including or
excluding this franchise, the grantor may serve notice of termination upon the
grantee and the successful bidder at such sale, in which event the franchise
herein granted and all rights and privileges of the grantee hereunder shall
cease and terminate 30 days after service of such notice, unless:
         (a)   The grantor shall have approved the transfer of this franchise,
as in the manner provided in this chapter.
         (b)   Such successful bidder shall have covenanted and agreed with the
grantor to assume and be bound by all the terms and conditions of this
franchise.
   J.   Franchise required. No cable communications system shall be allowed to
occupy or use the streets of the City or be allowed to operate without a
franchise in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.
§ 166-105. Regulation of franchise.
   A.   Regulatory authority. The grantor shall exercise appropriate regulatory
authority under the provisions of this chapter and applicable law.
   B.   Regulatory responsibility. The grantor may exercise or delegate the
following regulatory responsibility:
      (1)   Administering and enforcing the provisions of the cable
communications system franchise.
      (2)   Coordination of the operation of facilities and community access
channels provided for in any franchise agreements.
      (3)   Providing for technical, programming and operational support to
public agency users, such as City departments, school and health care
institutions.
      (4)   Establishing procedures and standards for public and government
institutional operations and services, use of community access channels, and
sharing of public facilities.
      (5)   Planning expansion and growth of public and government cable
services.
      (6)   Analyzing the possibility of integrating public and government
cable communications with other City, state, or regional telecommunications
networks.
   C.   Public usage of the system. As specified in §
166-111 of this chapter, the grantor may utilize the community access channel
capacity and the institutional network to develop and provide cable services
that will be in the public interest. In furtherance of this purpose, the
grantor may designate a nonprofit corporation, to receive and allocate
facilities, support funds and other considerations provided by the grantee,
and/or others. Such a corporation, if designated, may be delegated the
following responsibilities:
      (1)   To set out rules and regulations under which grantee is allowed to
use community access channel capacity if such channel capacity is not being
used for its designated purpose; and for recapture of such capacity for public
use.
      (2)   Receive, and utilize or reallocate for utilization, channel
capacity, facilities, funding and other support provided specifically for
public usage of the cable system.
      (3)   Review the status and progress of each community access channel
developed for public benefit.
      (4)   Reallocate resources on a periodic basis to conform with changing
priorities and public needs.
      (5)   Report to the grantor annually on the utilization of resources, the
new public services developed and the benefits achieved for the City and its
residents.
   D.   Reservation by grantor. The grantor reserves the right, at its
discretion, from time to time, to determine if the corporation described in
Subsection C above is performing its purposes in a manner satisfactory to the
grantor, and if it is not, the grantor may receive and reallocate all or a
portion of the channel capacity, operating appropriation, and capital
appropriation, including any facilities and equipment purchased previously with
such appropriations, to another entity. A new entity shall be required to
comply in all respects with the legal responsibilities which the corporation
has assumed under Subsection C.
   E.   Rate regulation. Grantor may regulate cable system rates and charges in
accordance with this chapter and applicable law, but only to the extent
permitted by § 623 of the Act and regulations of the Federal Communications
Commission which are lawfully promulgated thereunder or as otherwise permitted
by law.
   F.   Initial rates. The grantee shall establish initial monthly rates and
nonrecurring installation connection charges that shall be applied fairly and
uniformly to all subscribers for its services. This provision shall not be
deemed to prohibit promotional campaigns or other legitimate activities; nor
shall it be deemed to prohibit the establishment of a graduated scale of
charges and classified rate schedules to which any customer coming within such
classifications shall be entitled.
   G.   Schedule of rates. Grantee shall maintain and file with the grantor, a
complete schedule of then-current subscriber rates and nonrecurring charges and
deposits.
   H.   Access channel management.
      (1)   Intent. It is the intent of the grantor to ensure that access and
community channels provided for in any franchise agreement shall be managed in
the best public interest, so that programming on such channels will be free of
censorship, open to all residents, and available for all forms of public
expression, community information and debate of public issues. Pursuant to
these objectives, the grantor may delegate the responsibility for access
channel management to a nonprofit entity, termed the "Access Channel Manager,"
which may include, but shall not be limited to, any of the following:
         (a)   An established nonprofit entity with special cablecasting
capability.
         (b)   A nonprofit corporation.
         (c)   An access management commission or committee, appointed by the
grantor, and representing a broad spectrum of the community.
      (2)   Functions. The Access Channel Manager shall have the following
functions:
         (a)   Responsibility for program production for and management of the
community access channel.
         (b)   Establishment of budgets on an annual basis, and utilization of
available funds and resources for the purpose of access programming.
         (c)   To assure that no censorship or control over program content of
the community access channels exists, except as provided by the Act with regard
to programming that is obscene or otherwise unprotected by the constitution of
the United States, and to assure that the community access channels are made
available to all residents of the City.
         (d)   To devise, establish, and administer all rules, regulations, and
procedures pertaining to the use and scheduling of the community access
channels.
         (e)   To prepare, in conjunction with the grantee, such regular or
special reports as may be required or desirable.
         (f)   To hire and supervise staff.
         (g)   To make all purchases of materials and equipment that may be
required.
         (h)   To develop additional sources of funding, such as foundation or
federal or state grants, to further community programming.
         (i)   To perform such other functions relevant to the community access
channel(s) as may be appropriate.
      (3)   Access Channel Manager reports to grantor. The Access Channel
Manager shall provide a report to the grantor, at least annually, indicating
achievements in community-based programming and services.
§ 166-106. General financial and insurance provisions.
   A.   Construction performance bond.
      (1)   Within 30 days after the granting of any franchise and prior to the
commencement of any construction work by the grantee, the grantee shall file
with the grantor a construction performance bond in the amount equal to the
construction cost specified in the grantee's proposal, in favor of the grantor
and any other person who may claim damages as a result of the breach of any
duty by the grantee assured by such bond.
      (2)   Such bond as contemplated herein shall be in the form approved by
the City Attorney in accordance with standard municipal bonding practices and
shall among other matters cover the cost of removal of any properties installed
by the grantee in the event said grantee shall default in the performance of
its construction obligation.
      (3)   In no event shall the amount of said bond be construed to limit the
liability of the grantee for damages.
   B.   Compliance bond.
      (1)   In addition to the construction performance bond set forth above,
the grantee shall, at least 30 days prior to the commencement of operation,
file with the grantor a compliance bond in the amount specified in the
franchise agreement, in favor of the grantor and including the payments
required to be made to the grantor hereunder.
      (2)   Such bond as contemplated herein shall be in the form approved by
the City Solicitor in accordance with standard municipal bonding practices and
shall among other matters cover the cost of removal of any properties installed
by the grantee in the event said grantee shall default in the performance of
its franchise obligation.
      (3)   In no event shall the amount of said bond be construed to limit the
liability of the grantee for damages.
   C.   Indemnification.
      (1)   The grantee shall by acceptance of the franchise granted herein
indemnify, defend and hold harmless the grantor, its officers, boards,
commissions, agents, and employees from any and all claims, suits, judgments
for damages in any way arising out of or through or alleged to arise out of or
through the acts or omissions of grantee, its servants, employees or agents.
      (2)   In the event any such claims shall arise, the grantee shall tender
the defense thereof to the grantor; provided, however, that the grantor, in its
sole discretion, may participate in the defense of such claims at its expense.
      (3)   As between the grantor and the grantee, the foregoing liability and
indemnity obligations of the grantee pursuant to this section shall not apply:
         (a)   To any services distributed over the municipal channels or the
portion of the institutional network available to and used by the grantee to
the extent that the grantor has not participated in the production of said
services or any other act forming the basis for such claim.
         (b)   With respect to any negligent or wrongful act or failure to act
by the grantor, its officers, employees, or agents.
   D.   Insurance.
      (1)   The grantee shall maintain throughout the term of the franchise
insurance in amounts at least as follows:
         (a)   Workers' compensation insurance. In such coverage as may be
required by the laws of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania and any amendments
thereto.
         (b)   Grantee's liability. In the amount specified in the franchise
agreement.
         (c)   Comprehensive general liability. Bodily injury and property
damage in the amount specified in the franchise agreement.
         (d)   Comprehensive automobile liability. Comprehensive automobile
liability insurance for damages in the amount specified in the franchise
agreement.
      (2)   The grantee shall furnish the grantor with copies of such insurance
policies or certificates of insurance.
      (3)   Such insurance policies provided for herein shall name the grantor,
its officers, boards, commissions, agents, and employees as additional insured
and shall contain the following or similar endorsement: "It is hereby
understood and agreed that this insurance policy may not be canceled by the
surety or the intention not to renew be implemented by the surety until 30 days
after receipt by the grantor by registered mail written notice of such
intention to cancel or not renew."
      (4)   The minimum amounts set forth for such insurance shall not be
construed to limit the liability of the grantee to the grantor under the
franchise issued to the amounts of such insurance.
   E.   Payment of costs. Within 30 days of notice from the City, the grantee
shall reimburse the City for all costs and charges reasonably incidental to the
award or renewal of a franchise agreement.
§ 166-107. Reports.
   A.   Annual reports. Within 60 days after the close of the grantee's fiscal
year for the franchise, the grantee shall submit a written annual report
setting forth the following information:
      (1)   A summary of the previous year's (or, in the case of the initial
reporting year, the initial year's) activities in development of the cable
communication system's services begun or discontinued during the reporting
year, and user participation.
      (2)   A financial revenue statement for franchise fee computation,
certified by a certified public accountant.
      (3)   Report of construction progress in past year and planned
construction for next year.
      (4)   A list of grantee's officers, and members of its board of
directors.
      (5)   A list of stockholders or other equity investors holding 5% or more
of the voting interest in the grantee and its parent, subsidiary and affiliated
corporations and other entities, if any.
      (6)   Privacy report. Upon request by the grantor, the grantee shall
provide a written report to the grantor outlining the grantee's policies and
procedures intended to assure that the privacy rights of its subscribers are
protected.
   B.   Plant survey report. Simultaneously with the annual report required by
Subsection A, the grantee shall submit to the grantor an annual plant survey
report which shall be a complete survey of the grantee's plant and a full
report thereon. Said report shall include, but not be limited to, a description
and as-built maps of the portions of the franchise area that have been cabled
and have all services available, and an appropriate engineering evaluation
including suitable electronic measurements conducted in conformity with such
requirements, including supervision, as the grantor may prescribe. Said report
shall be in sufficient detail to enable the grantor to ascertain that the
service requirements and technical standards of the FCC and/or the franchise
are achieved and maintained.
   C.   Copies of federal and state reports. The grantee shall submit to the
grantor copies of all nonconfidential pleadings, applications, reports
submitted by the grantee to, as well as copies of all decisions, correspondence
and actions by federal, state and local courts, regulatory agencies and other
government bodies specifically regarding grantee's cable television operations
within the franchise area. The grantee shall submit such documents to the
grantor with its submission to such courts, agencies and bodies; and within
five days after its receipt from such courts, agencies and bodies. In the event
that the Grantee claims confidentiality, a copy of the appropriate
confidentiality agreement will be submitted to the grantor. In the event that
the grantee submits information designated by the grantee as confidential to
the grantor, said information shall be retained in confidence by the grantor
and its authorized agents and shall not be made available for public
inspection.
   D.   Public reports. A copy of each of grantee's annual and other periodic
public reports and those of its subsidiary and affiliated corporations shall as
the grantor may reasonably request, and is reasonably appropriate, be submitted
to the grantor within 60 days.
   E.   Complaint file and reports. Grantee shall keep a record of all
unresolved billing/payment disputes and maintenance service logs. To the extent
permitted by law, grantor, upon reasonable notice, may review said records and
log during normal business hours. Grantee further agrees to report the
disposition of complaints forwarded to it by the grantor.
   F.   Miscellaneous reports. The grantee shall submit to the grantor such
other information or reports in such forms and at such times as the grantor may
reasonably request or require where such information or reports are necessary
for the purposes permitted under current federal and state law.
   G.   Inspection of facilities. In order to verify the accuracy of any
submitted report, the grantee shall allow the grantor to make reasonable
inspections of the grantee's facilities and equipment in the franchise area
during normal business hours upon one day's prior notice.
   H.   Business office and files. The grantee shall maintain an office within
the franchise area and shall keep complete and accurate books and records
therein. Upon one day's notice, the grantor shall have the right to inspect all
books and records where necessary and appropriate under the provisions of the
franchise agreement during normal business hours.
   I.   Failure to report. The refusal or failures by the grantee to file any
of the reports required under this section may be deemed a material breach of
the franchise, and may subject the grantee to all liquidated damages and
remedies, legal or equitable, which are available to the grantor under the
franchise agreement or otherwise.
   J.   False statements. Any materially false or misleading statement or
representation made knowingly by the grantee in any report required under the
franchise agreement may be deemed a material breach of the franchise and may
subject the grantee to all liquidated damages and remedies, legal or equitable,
which are available to the grantor under the franchise agreement or otherwise.
   K.   Cost of reports. All reports and records required under this or any
other section shall be furnished at the sole expense of the grantee.
§ 166-108. Franchise violations.
   A.   Damages for franchise violations. If the grantee fails to perform any
obligation under the franchise agreement, or fails to do so in a timely manner,
the grantor may require, as liquidated damages, that the following sums may be
assessed after full compliance with the procedures detailed in Subsection B:
      (1)   For failure to adhere to system construction milestones in
accordance with the plan included in the franchise agreement, unless the
grantor specifically approves the modification due to the occurrence of
conditions beyond grantee's control, grantee shall pay $250 per day for each
day, or part thereof, that the time schedule is not met.
      (2)   For failure to provide upon request of the grantor, data,
documents, reports or information as specified herein grantee shall pay $250
per day for each day, or part thereof, each violation occurs or continues.
      (3)   For failure to test, analyze and report on the performance of the
system following a request pursuant to the franchise, as specified herein, the
grantee shall pay to the grantor $250 per day for each day, or part thereof,
that such noncompliance continues.
      (4)   For failure to comply with operational, performance or maintenance
standards as specified herein, grantee shall pay to the grantor $250 per day
for each day, or part thereof, that such noncompliance continues.
      (5)   For failure to provide channels, equipment, and capital funding for
access channels as required in the franchise agreement with the grantor, the
grantee shall pay $250 per day for each day, or part thereof, that such
noncompliance continues.
      (6)   For failure to pay the franchise fee on time, the grantee shall pay
1% per month of the franchise fee due and owing if payment is late.
      (7)   No liquidated damages shall be assessed if the violation occurs
without fault of the grantee or occurs as a result of circumstances beyond its
control. The grantee shall not be excused by mere economic hardship nor by
misfeasance or malfeasance of its directors, officers or employees.
      (8)   Subject to Subsection B, the grantor may terminate the franchise,
for any of the causes stated in §
166-104G.
      (9)   No such liquidated damages shall be imposed by the grantor against
grantee for any violation of this franchise without the grantee being afforded
the procedures provided for in Subsection B.
   B.   Procedure for remedying franchise violations. In the event that the
grantor determines that the grantee has violated any provision of the franchise
agreement, any rule or regulation promulgated pursuant hereto or any applicable
federal, state, or local law, the grantor shall make a written demand on the
grantee that it remedy such violation. If the violation, breach, failure,
refusal, or neglect is not remedied to the satisfaction of the grantor within
30 days following the receipt of such demand, the grantor shall determine
whether or not such violation, breach, failure, refusal, or neglect by the
grantee was excusable or inexcusable, in accordance with the following
procedure, which shall be conducted so as to provide the grantee with notice of
the alleged violation and an opportunity to respond:
      (1)   A televised public hearing shall be held and the grantee shall be
provided with an opportunity to be heard upon 30 days' written notice to the
grantee of the time and the place of the hearing provided and the allegations
of franchise violations. A permanent record of this hearing shall be kept.
      (2)   If, after notice is given and at the grantee's option, a full
public proceeding is held, the grantor determines that such violation, breach,
failure, refusal, or neglect by the grantee was excusable as provided in
Subsection C below, the grantor shall direct the grantee to correct or remedy
the same within such additional time, in such manner and upon such terms and
conditions as the grantor may direct.
      (3)   If, after notice is given and at the grantee's option a full public
proceeding is held, the grantor determines that such violation, breach,
failure, refusal or neglect was inexcusable, then the grantor may assess a
penalty or remedy in accordance with Subsection A above.
      (4)   If, after notice is given, and at the grantee's option, a full
public proceeding is held, the grantor declares the franchise or any renewal
thereof breached, the parties may pursue their remedies pursuant to the
franchise or any other remedy, legal or equitable.
   C.   Force majeure; grantee's inability to perform. In the event the
grantee's performance of any part of the terms, conditions, obligations, or
requirements of the franchise is prevented or impaired due to any cause beyond
its reasonable control or not reasonably foreseeable, such inability to perform
shall be deemed to be excused and no penalties or sanctions shall be imposed as
a result thereof. Such causes beyond the grantee's reasonable control or not
reasonably foreseeable shall include, but shall not be limited to, acts of God
and civil emergencies.
§ 166-109. Operation and maintenance.
   A.   Maintenance and complaints.
      (1)   The grantee's office and technical personnel, or answering
services, will receive customer calls 24 hours per day and respond to all
customer complaint calls between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 8:00 p.m. on normal
business days. After 8:00 p.m. on any normal business day, trained technicians
shall respond to calls if three or more calls are received from the same
service area as defined in the franchise agreement. A written log shall be
maintained listing all complaints and their disposition, including the time
taken to respond to the complaint and to repair the problem.
      (2)   The grantee shall maintain sufficient phone service to ensure that
subscribers' calls will be answered within a reasonable amount of time and no
subscriber will be put on hold unnecessarily.
      (3)   The grantee shall render efficient service, make repairs promptly,
and interrupt service only for good cause for the shortest time possible. Such
interruptions, insofar as possible, shall be preceded by notice and shall occur
during periods of minimum use of the system. A written log shall be maintained
for all plant maintenance service interruptions exceeding 30 minutes.
      (4)   The grantee shall maintain a repair force of technicians capable of
responding to subscriber complaints or requests for repair service within 24
hours after receipt of the complaint or request.
      (5)   The grantee shall furnish each subscriber at the time service is
installed, written instructions that clearly set forth procedures, furnish
information concerning the procedures for making inquiries or complaints,
including the name, address and local telephone number of the service
department where complaints or inquiries are to be addressed, and furnish
information concerning the City office responsible for administration of the
franchise with the address and telephone number of the office when provided by
the City.
   B.   Rights of individuals.
      (1)   The grantee shall not deny service, deny access, or otherwise
discriminate against subscribers, channel users, or general citizens on the
basis of race, color, religion, national origin, age or sex. The grantee shall
comply at all times with all other applicable federal, state and local laws and
regulations, and all executive and administrative orders relating to
nondiscrimination which are hereby incorporated and made part of this chapter
by reference.
      (2)   The grantee shall strictly adhere to the equal employment
opportunity requirements of the Act, § 634, and of the FCC, state and local
regulations, as amended from time to time.
   C.   Protection of subscriber privacy. All rights pursuant to the protection
of subscriber privacy shall be governed by § 631 of the Act.
   D.   Tenant rights.
      (1)   Interference with cable service prohibited. Neither the owner of
any multiple-unit residential dwelling nor his agent or representative shall
unreasonably interfere with the right of any tenant or lawful resident thereof
to receive cable television service, cable installation or maintenance from a
cable television company regulated by and lawfully operating under a valid and
existing cable television franchise issued by the City.
      (2)   Gratuities and payment to permit service prohibited. The owner of
any multiple-unit residential dwelling shall be entitled to reasonable
compensation for the grantee's occupation of the owner's property. Neither the
owner of any multiple-unit residential dwelling nor his agent or
representative, however, shall as demand or receive any additional payment,
service or gratuity in any form as a condition for permitting or cooperating
with the installation of cable communications service to the dwelling unit
occupied by a tenant or resident requesting service.
      (3)   Penalties and charges to tenants for service prohibited. Neither
the owner of any multiple-unit residential dwelling nor his agent or
representative shall knowingly penalize, charge or surcharge a tenant or
resident, or forfeit or threaten to forfeit any right of such tenant or
resident, or discriminate in any way against such tenant or resident who
requests or receives cable communications service from a grantee operating
under a valid and existing cable communication franchise issued by the City.
      (4)   Protection of property permitted. Nothing in this section shall
prohibit a person from requiring that cable television system facilities
conform to laws and regulations and reasonable conditions necessary to protect
safety, functioning, appearance and value of premises or the convenience and
safety of persons or property.
      (5)   Risks assumed by grantee. Nothing in this section shall prohibit a
person from requiring a grantee to agree to indemnify the owner, or his agents
or representatives, for damages or from liability for damages caused by the
installation, operation, maintenance or removal of cable television facilities.
      (6)   Relief. In the event that permission to serve tenants of any
multiple unit, or single, residential dwelling, is denied by the landlord or
his agent or representative, the grantee may petition the grantor for relief
from the requirement to provide service to such units and such relief shall not
unreasonably be withheld.
   E.   Grantee rules and regulations. The grantee shall have the authority to
promulgate such rules, regulations, terms and conditions governing the conduct
of its business as shall be reasonably necessary to enable the grantee to
exercise its rights and perform its obligations under this franchise, and to
assure an uninterrupted service to each and all of its customers. Provided,
however, that such rules, regulations, terms and conditions shall not be in
conflict with the provisions hereof or applicable state and federal laws, rules
and regulations.
§ 166-110. Design and construction provisions.
   A.   System design.
      (1)   The grantee shall construct, operate, and maintain a cable
communications system with a residential subscriber network (Cable A) having a
capacity of 54 channels. Said residential subscriber network shall consist of a
minimum of single 400 MHz trunk and feeder cables. The grantee's residential
subscriber network shall have bidirectional and addressable capability.
      (2)   The grantee shall incorporate into its cable communications systems
the capability which will permit the grantor, or the highest government body as
prescribed by the state, in times of emergency, to override the audio portion
of all channels simultaneously, by telephone or other communicating medium to
be provided by the grantee.
         (a)   The grantee shall designate a channel which will be used for
emergency broadcasts of both audio and video.
         (b)   The grantee shall cooperate with the grantor in the use and
operation of the emergency alert override system.
      (3)   The grantee shall construct, install, operate and maintain a
separate institutional network (Cable B), in addition to the residential
subscriber network.
         (a)   The institutional network shall be installed with a
configuration to accommodate adequate upstream and downstream transmission.
         (b)   The institutional network's full upstream capabilities shall be
activated initially.
         (c)   The institutional network shall be capable of handling data and
facsimile transmissions in such a way as to make it capable of performing as a
high-speed digital network.
         (d)   Features incorporated into the system design shall permit
institutions to transmit programming via upstream institutional channels
downstream on both institutional network and/or residential subscriber network
channels.
         (e)   The grantee's system shall allow for switching between the
residential subscriber network and the separate institutional network and allow
for switching between points on the institutional network.
         (f)   The institutional network will be equipped for switching two
simultaneous split- screen teleconferences, each consisting of up to five
sites.
         (g)   The institutional network shall be capable of providing
telemetry services for all institutional network users.
         (h)   Subject to Subsection A(3), when requested to do so by the
grantor, grantee shall expand the separate institutional network so that
appropriate facilities annexed in the City can be connected to said network.
         (i)   The institutional network shall have the capability of serving
commercial users.
         (j)   The grantee shall extend the institutional network for a
distance not to exceed 500 aerial feet without charge to all noncommercial
users specified by the grantor.
         (k)   Institutional network channels coordinated by the access channel
manager shall be available for noncommercial, nonprofit video transmissions on
a party line or private line basis for annual, monthly or weekly use.
   B.   Geographical coverage. The grantee shall design and construct the cable
communications system in such a manner as to have the capability to pass by
every single-family dwelling unit, multiple-family dwelling unit, agency, and
business establishment within the franchise area. Service shall be provided to
subscribers in accordance with the schedules and line extension policies
specified in the franchise agreement. Cable system construction and provision
of service shall be nondiscriminatory, and shall not delay or defer service to
any section of the franchise area on the grounds of economic preference.
   C.   Cablecasting facilities. The grantee shall provide cable communication
facilities in accordance with the requirements of the franchise agreement.
   D.   System construction schedule.
      (1)   The grantee shall comply with the requirements of the system
construction schedule contained in the franchise agreement.
      (2)   The grantee shall provide a detailed construction plan indicating
progress schedule, area construction maps, test plan, and projected dates for
offering service. In addition, the grantee shall update this information on a
quarterly basis, showing specifically whether schedules are being met and the
reasons for any delay.
      (3)   Failure to begin construction within one year after award of the
franchise will be grounds for franchise revocation, at the option of the
grantor.
   E.   Compensation for delay in construction. The grantor may in accordance
with Subsection B, apply any of the following in connection with delays in
system construction:
      (1)   Reduction in the duration of the franchise on a month-for-month
basis for each month of delay exceeding 60 months.
      (2)   Forfeiture of the construction performance bond and/or assessment
of liquidated damages not to exceed $250 per day, assessed for delays exceeding
one year.
      (3)   Termination of the franchise for delays exceeding 18 months.
   F.   Provision of service. After service has been established by activating
trunk and feeder cables for any area, the grantee shall provide service to any
requesting subscriber within that area 30 days from the date of request.
   G.   Undergrounding of cable. The undergrounding of cables is encouraged. In
any event, newly served areas shall be installed underground at grantee's cost
where existing power and telephone utilities are already underground, and the
grantee utilizes the same public right- of-way. Previously installed aerial
cable shall be undergrounded in concert, and on a cost- sharing basis, with
other utilities sharing the same pole, when such other utilities may convert
from aerial to underground construction. All undergrounding plans shall be
subject to prior grantor approval, and the issuance of permits, at designated
permit fees. In the event that the grantee is denied access to conduit by said
utility, the grantee shall notify the grantor in writing.
   H.   New development undergrounding. In cases of new construction of
property development where power and telephone utilities are to be placed
underground, the developer or property owner shall give grantee reasonable
notice of such construction or development, and of the particular date on which
open trenching will be available for grantee's installation of conduit,
pedestals and/or vaults, and laterals to be provided at grantee's expense.
Grantee shall also provide specifications as needed for trenching.
   I.   Service at multiple-dwelling units. In cases of multiple-dwelling units
serviced by aerial utilities, grantee shall make every effort to minimize the
number of individual aerial drop cables.
   J.   Street occupancy.
      (1)   Grantee shall utilize existing poles, conduits and other facilities
whenever possible, and shall not construct or install any new, different, or
additional poles, conduits, or other facilities on public property until the
written approval of the grantor is obtained. However, no location of any pole
or wire-holding structure of the grantee on public property shall be a vested
interest and such poles or structures shall be removed or modified by the
grantee at its own expense whenever the grantor determines that the public
convenience would be enhanced thereby.
      (2)   Grantee shall notify the grantor at least 10 working days prior to
the intention of the grantee to commence any construction in any streets. The
grantee in granting any permits required, providing such grant and subsequent
construction by the grantee shall not unduly interfere with the use of such
streets and that proposed construction shall be done in accordance with the
pertinent provisions of the ordinances of the City.
      (3)   All transmission lines, equipment and structures shall be so
installed and located as to cause minimum interference with the rights and
reasonable convenience of property owners and at all times, shall be kept and
maintained in a safe, adequate and substantial condition, and in good order and
repair. The grantee shall, at all times, employ ordinary care and shall install
and maintain in use commonly accepted methods and devices for preventing
failures and accidents which are likely to cause damage, injuries, or nuisances
to the public. Suitable barricades, flags, lights, flares or other devices
shall be used at such times and places as are reasonably required for the
safety of all members of the public. Any poles or other fixtures placed in any
public way by the grantee shall be placed in such a manner as not to interfere
with the usual travel on such public way.
      (4)   Grantee shall, at its own expense, and in a manner approved by the
Department of Public Works, restore to grantor's reasonable standards and
specifications any damage or disturbance caused to the public way as a result
of its operations or construction on its behalf. 1
      (5)   Whenever, in case of fire or other disaster, it becomes necessary
in the judgment of the grantor to remove any of the grantee's facilities, no
charge shall be made by the grantee against the grantor for restoration and
repair, unless such acts amount to gross negligence by grantor. Grantor shall
notify the grantee as soon as possible.
      (6)   Grantee shall have the authority to trim trees on public property
at its own expense as may be necessary to protect its wires and facilities,
subject to the supervision and direction of the grantor and shall restore any
damage at grantee's sole cost. Trimming of trees on private property shall
require the consent of the property owner.
      (7)   The grantee, at his expense, shall protect, support, temporarily
disconnect, relocate, or remove any property of grantee when, in the opinion of
the grantor, the same is required by reason of traffic conditions, public
safety, street construction, change or establishment of street grade,
installation of sewers, drains, water pipes, power line, signal line,
transportation facilities, tracks, or any other types of structure or
improvements by governmental agencies, whether acting in a governmental or a
proprietary capacity, or any other structure of public improvement, including
but not limited to movement of buildings, urban renewal and redevelopment, and
any general program under which the grantor shall undertake to cause all
utilities to be located beneath the surface of the ground. The grantee shall in
all cases have the privilege, subject to the corresponding obligations, to
abandon any property of grantee in place. Nothing hereunder shall be deemed a
taking of the property of grantee and grantee shall be entitled to no surcharge
by reason of anything hereunder.
      (8)   Upon failure of grantee to commence, pursue or complete any work
required by law or by the provisions of this chapter to be done in any street,
within the time prescribed and to the satisfaction of the grantor, the grantor
may, at its option, cause such work to be done and the grantee shall pay to the
grantor the reasonable cost thereof in the itemized amounts reported by the
grantor to grantee within 30 days after receipt of such itemized report.
      (9)   The grantee shall make no paving cuts or curb cuts unless
absolutely necessary, but only after written permission has been given by the
grantor. Said permission may not be unreasonably withheld.
      (10)   The grantee shall install in conduit all cable passing under any
major roadway.
   K.   Construction and technical standards.
      (1)   Construction standard.
         (a)   Compliance with safety codes. All construction practices shall
be in accordance with all applicable sections of the Occupational Safety and
Health Act of 1970 and any amendments thereto as well as applicable state and
local codes.
         (b)   Compliance with electrical codes. All installation of electronic
equipment shall be of a permanent nature, durable and installed in accordance
with the provisions of the National Electrical Code as adopted by the grantor.
         (c)   Antennas and towers. Antenna-supporting structures (towers)
shall be designed for the proper loading as specified in Electronics Industry
Association's specifications.
         (d)   Compliance with aviation requirements. Antenna-supporting
structures (towers) shall be painted, lighted, erected and maintained in
accordance with all applicable rules and regulations of the Federal Aviation
Administration and all other applicable state or local codes and regulations as
determined by the grantor.
         (e)   Construction standards and requirements. All of the grantee's
plant and equipment, including but not limited to the antenna site, head-end
and distribution system, towers, house connections, structures, poles, wire,
cable, coaxial cable, fixtures and appurtenances shall be installed, located,
erected, constructed, reconstructed, replaced, removed, repaired, maintained
and operated in accordance with good engineering practices, performed by
experienced maintenance and construction personnel so as not to endanger or
interfere with improvements the municipality may deem properly to make, or to
interfere in any manner with the rights of any property owner, or to
unnecessarily hinder or obstruct pedestrian or vehicular traffic on municipal
properties.
         (f)   Safety, nuisance, requirements. The grantee shall at all times
employ ordinary care and shall install and maintain in use commonly accepted
methods and devices preventing failures and accidents which are likely to cause
damage, injury or nuisance to the public.
      (2)   Technical standards. The cable communications system shall meet all
technical and performance standards contained in the franchise agreement.
      (3)   Test and compliance procedure. The grantee shall submit, for
inclusion in the franchise agreement, a detailed test plan describing the
methods and schedules for testing the cable communications system on an ongoing
basis to determine compliance with the provisions of FCC technical standards
and the franchise agreement.
      (4)   Special tests. At any time after commencement of service to
subscribers the grantor may require additional tests, full or partial repeat
tests, different test procedures, or tests involving a specific subscriber's
terminal. Requests for such additional tests will be made on the basis of
complaints received or other evidence indicating an unresolved controversy or
significant noncompliance, and such tests will be limited to the particular
matter in controversy. The grantor shall endeavor to so arrange its requests
for such special tests so as to minimize hardship or inconvenience to grantee
or to the subscriber. Costs of such tests will be borne by the grantee.
   L.   Areawide interconnection.
      (1)   Interconnection. The grantee may interconnect origination and
access channels of the cable communications system with any or all other cable
systems in adjacent areas, upon the request of the grantor and mutual consent
of all parties. Interconnection of systems shall permit interactive
transmission and reception of program materials, and may be done by direct
cable connection, microwave link, satellite, or other appropriate method.
      (2)   Interconnection procedure. Upon receiving the request of the
grantor to interconnect, the grantee shall immediately initiate negotiations
with the other affected system or systems.
      (3)   Cooperation. The grantee may cooperate with any interconnection
corporation, regional interconnection authority or City, county, state and
federal regulatory agency which may be hereafter established for the purpose of
regulating, financing, or otherwise providing for the interconnection of cable
systems beyond the boundaries of the City. Such cooperation shall not be
unreasonably withheld.
      (4)   Initial technical requirements to assure future interconnection
capability.
         (a)   All cable communications systems receiving franchises to operate
within the City shall use the frequency allocations assigned by the existing
system operator for all access channels television signals.
         (b)   Grantee(s) shall provide local origination equipment that is
compatible through the area so that videocassettes or video tapes can be shared
by various systems.
1.   Editor's Note: Amended during codification (see
Ch. 1, General Provisions, Part 2).
§ 166-111. Service provisions.
   A.   Program services. Grantee shall notify grantor of its program services
and any changes thereto.
   B.   Basic cable service (BCS). The basic cable service may include the
retransmission of local television broadcast signals as prescribed by the FCC
or other governing regulatory body and shall include all community access and
local origination channels.
   C.   Institutional service (IS). The institutional service may include the
provision of transmission and/or reception services to institutional users, on
a leased channel basis at established IS rates. Video service for public and
nonprofit institutions will be free of charge. Grantee will offer nonprofit
institutional users grantee's nonvideo services on the institutional network at
the lowest rate being charged at that time to commercial users for comparable
services.
   D.   Local origination channel. The grantee shall operate and control its
cablecasting studio(s) as specified in the franchise agreement for the purpose
of providing cablecast programming responsive to local needs and interests.
   E.   Government access channel. The grantee shall provide one government
access channel, including all necessary interface equipment and cabling to
permit operation, for the use of the grantor, county and state government at no
charge. The grantee shall make every effort to provide advice and technical
expertise to aid in the utilization of this channel.
   F.   Educational access channel. The grantee shall provide one channel,
including all necessary interface equipment and cabling to permit operation,
for the use of the local educational institutions at no charge. The grantee
shall make every effort to provide advice and technical expertise to aid in the
utilization of this channel.
   G.   Public access channel. The grantee shall provide one channel including
all necessary interface equipment and cabling to permit operation, to be
available to the public at no charge. The community access channel shall be
managed and operated by the Access Channel Manager, as described in §
166-105.
   H.   Grantor use of the institutional network.
      (1)   Pursuant to the franchise agreement, the grantee reserve a portion
of the upstream and downstream capability of the institutional network for use
by government agencies and nonprofit institutions for video services free of
charge.
      (2)   The grantee shall have available one-way or two-way audio channels
in conjunction with video services to institutional network users as reasonably
requested.
      (3)   Institutional users may have reasonable access to the institutional
network.
      (4)   Institutional network channels utilized by the grantor will be
managed by the Access Channel Manager.
   I.   Leased access channels. Grantee shall make available for lease, on a
nondiscriminatory basis, cable channels for commercial use as required by § 612
of the Act. All revenues from the leasing of such channels shall be included in
gross revenues.
   J.   Universal service. The grantor requires that all dwelling units within
the City, upon request of the occupants of said dwelling units, who pay the
installation charge, shall be connected physically in the cable communication
system by the grantee by means of drop cables terminating at each dwelling
unit, whether or not the dwelling unit occupants desire to subscribe to basic
cable service. The programming transmitted to the occupant shall be limited to
the access channels.
   K.   Additional channel capacity for municipal use.
      (1)   Grantee shall provide sufficient channel capacity to enable the
grantor to utilize remote meter reading, traffic light control, energy
management and video monitoring. Grantee shall assist grantor in planning the
utilization of these services as specified in the franchise agreement.
      (2)   As set forth in the franchise agreement, additional community
access channels may be made available by the grantee upon a showing that the
existing access channels have become fully utilized, and shall be made
available if directed by the arbitration procedure described in the final
proposal.
   L.   Access funding. Grantee shall provide capital funding for the access
channels as specified in the franchise agreement.
§ 166-112. Rights reserved to grantor.
   A.   Rights to purchase the system.
      (1)   Pursuant to the Act, the grantor may upon the payment of a fair
market valuation lawfully purchase, condemn, acquire, or take over and hold the
property and plant of the grantee in whole or in part. If such purchase or
taking over be upon revocation of the franchise or at the expiration of the
term of the franchise, such valuation shall not include any sum for the value
of the franchise or grant under which plant and property is being operated.
      (2)   The fair market value purchase price shall be determined by the
appraisal of two certified appraisers: one appraiser chosen by the City; one
appraiser chosen by the grantee. In the event that said appraisers are unable
to reach a consensus as to the fair market value purchase price, the appraisers
shall submit the question to a third appraiser, chosen by them, whose
determination shall be final and binding. The grantor may affirmatively accept
the decision of the appraisers within 90 days after the rendering of the
appraiser's decision. However, if the grantor fails to accept the appraiser's
decision within the aforesaid ninety-day period, the rights of the grantor to
purchase shall expire.
   B.   Right of inspection records. There shall be kept in the grantor's
office a separate record for the franchise, which record shall show the things
set forth in §§
166-107 and 166-109.
   C.   Right of inspection of construction. The grantor shall have the right
to inspect all construction or installation work performed subject to the
provisions of the franchise.
   D.   Right of intervention. The grantor shall have the right of intervention
in any suit or proceeding relating to this chapter to which the grantee is
party, and the grantee shall not oppose such intervention by the grantor.
   E.   Right to require removal of property. In the event the franchise is
revoked or not renewed under the Act, the grantor shall have the right to
require the grantee to remove, at its own expense, all aerial portions and
exposed apertures of the cable communications system from all streets and
public ways within the City.
§ 166-113. Rights reserved to grantee.
Should the grantee become dissatisfied with any material decision or ruling of
the grantor pertaining to cable communications matters, the grantee may pursue
such other remedies as are available, including the bringing of action in any
court of competent jurisdiction.
§ 166-114. Miscellaneous provisions.
   A.   Compliance with state and federal laws. Notwithstanding any provision
of this franchise to the contrary, the grantee shall at all times comply with
all laws and regulations of the state and federal government or any
administrative agencies thereof. If any such state or federal law or
regulation, as enacted, adopted or interpreted by any court or government
agency subsequent to the date of this chapter, shall require the grantee to
perform any service or shall permit the grantee to perform any service, or
shall prohibit the grantee from performing any service, in conflict with the
terms of this chapter or of any law or regulation of the grantor, then as soon
as possible following knowledge thereof, the grantee shall notify the grantor
of the point of conflict believed to exist between such regulation or law and
the laws or regulations of the grantor of this chapter, and the grantee shall
be excused from performance hereunder, provided that it acts in good faith
reliance thereon, pending resolution of such conflict.
   B.   Separability; nonmaterial provisions. If any provision of this chapter
or any related agreements is held by any court or by any federal, state or
county agency of competent jurisdiction to be invalid as conflicting with any
federal, state or county law, rule or regulation now or hereafter in effect, or
is held by such court or agency to be modified in any way in order to conform
to the requirements of any such law, rule or regulation, and if said provision
is considered nonmaterial by the grantor, said provision shall be considered a
separate, distinct and independent part of this chapter, and such holding shall
not affect the validity and enforceability of all other provisions hereof. In
the event such law, rule or regulation is subsequently repealed, rescinded,
amended or otherwise changed, so that the provision hereof or thereof which had
been held invalid or modified is no longer in conflict with the law, rules and
regulations then in effect, said provision shall thereupon return to full force
and effect and shall thereafter be binding on the parties hereto, provided that
the grantor shall give the grantee 30 days written notice of such change before
requiring compliance with said provision.
   C.   Separability; material provisions. If any material section of this
chapter, as determined by the grantor, is held to be invalid or preempted by
federal or state regulations or laws, the grantor shall negotiate with grantee
appropriate modifications to the franchise to provide reasonable relief from
such invalidity or preemption, including the payment of liquidated damages. If
the parties are unable to reach agreement on such modifications, then the
dispute will be submitted to a mutually agreeable arbitrator, in accordance
with state law, who will determine what modifications and/or liquidated damages
are appropriate. The arbitrator's decision shall be binding on the parties,
provided, that no decision of the arbitrator shall require the grantor or
grantee to be in violation of any federal or state law or regulation.
   D.   Notices. All notices from grantee to the grantor pursuant to this
franchise shall be to the City Clerk. Grantee shall maintain with the grantor,
throughout the term of the franchise, an address for service of notices by
mail, grantee shall also maintain within the franchise territory, a local
office and telephone number for the conduct of matters related to this
franchise during normal business hours.
   E.   Public notice. Minimum public notice of any public meeting relating to
the franchise shall be publication at least once in a newspaper of general
circulation in the area at least 30 days prior to the meeting, posting at City
Hall, by announcement on at least two access channels of the grantee's cable
communications system between the hours of 7:00 p.m. and 9:00 p.m., for five
consecutive days prior to the meeting.
   F.   Nonenforcement by the grantor. The grantee shall not be relieved of its
obligation to comply with any of the provisions of this chapter by reason of
any failure of the grantor to enforce prompt compliance.
   G.   Theft of services and tampering.
      (1)   Offense. It shall be unlawful for any person:
         (a)   Without authority of the grantee, to knowingly obstruct, injure,
break, tamper with or destroy or in any manner interfere with or interrupt any
cable television service, line, cable or other cable television equipment, or
the transmission of signals by the grantee in connection with such line, cable
or equipment, or to knowingly take, carry away, injure or destroy any of the
converters, posts, cables, wires, insulators, fixtures, equipment, installation
or other things belonging to the grantee or used in connection with the
furnishing of cable television service.
         (b)   To knowingly obtain or attempt to obtain cable service without
the payment to the grantee of all lawful compensation.
         (c)   To knowingly divert, intercept, decode, descramble, convert, use
or receive any television, radio, audio, video or other signal by any
unauthorized connection with any line or cable of the grantee.
         (d)   To extend equipment designed to receive a cable transmission to
an additional television set or sets, without the grantee's permission or
knowingly making use of said additional sets or equipment.
         (e)   To knowingly retain or withhold possession from the grantee or
refuse to delivery any appliance, equipment or property of the grantee which
may have been used, loaned or rented in connection with such cable television
service or to sell, loan or in any manner dispose of the same to any person
other than the grantee thereof.
         (f)   Without the expressed authorization of the grantee, to knowingly
manufacture, import into this City, distribute, sell, offer to sell, possess
for sale, or advertise for sale any device, or any plant or kit for a device or
for a printed circuit, designed in whole or in part to divert, intercept,
decode or descramble any signal carried over the cable television system.
         (g)   To knowingly assist or instruct any other person in obtaining or
attempting to obtain any cable television service with out the payment to the
grantee of all lawful compensation.
      (2)   Prima facie evidence.
         (a)   It shall be prima facie evidence that a person has committed the
crime of theft of cable television service if he is obtaining service from a
grantee without authorization from the said grantee.
         (b)   The presence at any time on or about the wires, cables or other
cable television equipment of the grantee of any device, wire or connection of
any other modification not authorized by the grantee resulting in the diversion
of television, radio, audio or other signals shall constitute prima facie
evidence of the intention on the part of the person having custody or control
of the room or place where such signals are diverted to violate Subsection G(1)
of this section.
      (3)   Contraband equipment. Any device, kit for a device or for a printed
circuit, designed to violate this section may be seized as contraband and no
property right of the possessor shall exist in such property.
      (4)   Civil action.
         (a)   Any grantee may bring an action to enjoin and restrain any
violation of the provisions of this chapter or bring an action for conversion.
In addition to any actual damages, an operator may be entitled to punitive
damages and reasonable attorneys fees.
         (b)   It is not a necessary prerequisite to an action pursuant to this
section that the grantee have suffered, or be threatened with, actual damage.
Chapter 173
COMMERCIAL LAUNDRY CODE
§
173-101.   Definitions.
§
173-102.   Adoption.
§
173-103.   Title.
§
173-104.   Scope.
§
173-105.   Permit required.
§
173-106.   Fees.
§
173-107.   Plumbing and electric standards.
§
173-108.   General standards.
§
173-109.   Violations and penalties.
[HISTORY: Adopted by the City Council of the City of Reading 4-26-2004 by Ord.
No. 19-2004 (Ch. 10, Part 10, of the 2001 Code of Ordinances). Amendments noted
where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
International Electrical Code — See
Ch. 180, Part 7.
International Plumbing Code — See
Ch. 180, Part 9.
§ 173-101. Definitions.
   A.   As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated, unless a different meaning clearly appears from the context.
   LAUNDRY — Laundry facilities, washerettes, laundromats, including coin-
operated businesses. [Amended 3-26-2012 by Ord. No. 35-2012]
   PERSON — A natural person, firm, partnership, association, corporation or
other legal entity.
   RESIDENTIAL COMMON LAUNDRIES — Those rental apartments that provide washing
machines and/or dryers for the use of the residents of the property and for
which compensation is received.
   B.   In this chapter, the singular shall include the plural; the plural
shall include the singular; and the masculine shall include the feminine and
the neuter.
§ 173-102. Adoption.
There is hereby established a health permit by the City of Reading for the
purpose of prescribing regulations governing the sanitary and safety conditions
of commercial laundry facilities within the limits of the City of Reading.
§ 173-103. Title.
These regulations shall be known as the "Commercial Laundry Code of the City of
Reading."
§ 173-104. Scope.
[Amended 3-26-2012 by Ord. No. 35-2012]
The premises and operating equipment of commercial laundry facilities,
washerettes, laundromats, including coin-operated businesses and similar public
facilities, including laundry facilities provided for tenants in apartment
buildings for the purpose of laundering and cleaning clothing, shall be in
accordance with this code.
§ 173-105. Permit required.
[Amended 3-26-2012 by Ord. No. 35-20121]
All facilities providing means for laundering clothing shall be required to
hold a permit issued by the City of Readin, Property Maintenance Division in
the Department of Community Development. Said permit shall be issued annually
and shall expire December 31.
1.   Editor's Note: Amended during codification (see
Ch. 1, General Provisions, Part 2).
§ 173-106. Fees.
[Amended 3-26-2012 by Ord. No. 35-20122]
All permits secured under the Health Code shall be paid to the Treasurer of the
City of Reading within the calendar month issued. Fees for a permit covered
under this code shall be as per the fee schedule enacted by the City of
Reading. The fee for every commercial laundry establishment is set by
ordinance, as provided in
Chapter 212, Fees. In addition, there is a per-unit charge of as set by
ordinance for each washer and/or dryer. Residential common laundries shall be
required to pay the per-unit fee only.
2.   Editor's Note: Amended during codification (see
Ch. 1, General Provisions, Part 2).
§ 173-107. Plumbing and electric standards.
   A.   Plumbing. The installation of any traps, fixture replacements,
disposals, relief valves, hot water heaters, automatic washer wastes, water
fountains, specialty piping, such as factory equipment, industrial waste
equipment, backflow preventers, rain conductors, water service, water piping,
building sewer connections (sanitary and storm), and repairs to same shall be
in conformity with the provisions of the City Plumbing Code (
Chapter 180, Part 9).
   B.   Electric. The installation of any electrical system used for the
transmission of electric current for electric lights, heat, power, signs,
electrical materials, electrical equipment or electrical fixtures shall be in
conformity with the provisions of the City Electrical Code (
Chapter 180, Part 7). 3
3.   Editor's Note: Amended during codification (see
Ch. 1, General Provisions, Part 2).
§ 173-108. General standards.
   A.   All floors, walls, and ceilings of laundries shall be kept in an
acceptable sanitary condition at all times.
   B.   An adequate number of approved waste receptacles with fitted covers
shall be provided as required by the Health Officer.
   C.   Persons owning or operating establishments open on a twenty-four-hour-
a-day basis shall be required to sweep down the floors at least two times in
each twenty-four-hour period. Where establishments are closed for a minimum of
eight hours each day, floors shall be swept down at least one time daily.
   D.   Persons owning or operating establishments open to the general public
shall be required at least one time in every seven-day period to run each
washing machine through a cleaning cycle with water and a cleaning compound to
cleanse each machine thoroughly and maintain a record thereof kept for
inspection by the Health Officer.
   E.   All laundry dryers shall be adequately connected by a means of duct to
an outside vent that is baffled in such a manner that the dryer effluent does
not create a nuisance or hazard to the health of an individual or neighboring
property. The duct work shall also be provided with filters, or a system of
trapping the lint as approved by the Health Officer.
   F.   The premises shall be adequately lighted while open to the public.
   G.   All washing machines shall be properly connected to the water and sewer
systems in accordance with the City Plumbing Code (
Chapter 180, Part 9).
   H.   All electrical connections to washers and dryers shall be made in
accordance with the City Electrical Code (
Chapter 180, Part 7).
§ 173-109. Violations and penalties.
Any person who shall violate a provision of this chapter or code, or any other
order, rule, or regulations made thereunder, shall be liable to the issuance of
a citation, summons, complaint or warrant against him, and upon conviction
thereof, shall be sentenced to paying a fine not exceeding $300 for each
offense, together with costs, and in default payment thereof, to be sentenced
to a term of imprisonment in the Berks County Prison not to exceed 90 days.
Each day that said violation shall continue shall constitute a separate offense
for which a prosecution may be instituted as herein above set forth.
Chapter 180
CONSTRUCTION CODES
Part 1
Pennsylvania Construction Code
§
180-101.   Enactment of the Pennsylvania Construction Code.
§
180-102.   Municipal administration.
§
180-103.   Administration and enforcement.
§
180-104.   Establishment of Board of Appeals.
§
180-105.   Fees.
Part 2
International Wildland-Urban Interface Code
§
180-201.   Adoption of Wildland- Urban Interface Code.
§
180-202.   Amendments.
§
180-203.   State law and regulations.
§
180-204.   Provisions to be continuation of existing regulations.
§
180-205.   Publication.
§
180-206.   Title.
§
180-207.   Boundaries.
§
180-208.   Enforcement.
Part 3
Performance Code for Buildings and Facilities
§
180-301.   Adoption of Performance Code for Buildings and Facilities.
§
180-302.   Amendments.
§
180-303.   State law and regulations.
§
180-304.   Provisions to be continuation of existing regulations.
§
180-305.   Publication.
§
180-306.   Title.
§
180-307.   Enforcement.
Part 4
International Residential Code
§
180-401.   Adoption of International Residential Code.
§
180-402.   Amendments.
§
180-403.   Provisions to be continuation of existing regulations.
§
180-404.   State law and regulations.
§
180-405.   Publication.
§
180-406.   Title.
§
180-407.   Enforcement.
Part 5
International Existing Building Code
§
180-501.   Adoption of International Existing Building Code.
§
180-502.   Amendments.
§
180-503.   State law and regulations.
§
180-504.   Provisions to be continuation of existing regulations.
§
180-505.   Publication.
§
180-506.   Title.
§
180-507.   Enforcement.
Part 6
International Mechanical Code
§
180-601.   Adoption of International Mechanical Code.
§
180-602.   Amendments.
§
180-603.   State law and regulations.
§
180-604.   Provisions to be continuation of existing regulations.
§
180-605.   Publication.
§
180-606.   Name.
§
180-607.   Enforcement.
Part 7
International Electrical Code
§
180-701.   Adoption of International Electric Code.
§
180-702.   Amendments.
§
180-703.   State law and regulations.
§
180-704.   Provisions to be continuation of existing regulations.
§
180-705.   Publication.
§
180-706.   Name.
§
180-707.   Enforcement.
Part 8
International Building Code
§
180-801.   Adoption of International Building Code.
§
180-802.   Amendments.
§
180-803.   State law and regulations.
§
180-804.   Provisions to be continuation of existing regulations.
§
180-805.   Publication.
§
180-806.   Title.
§
180-807.   Enforcement.
Part 9
International Plumbing Code
§
180-901.   Adoption of International Plumbing Code.
§
180-902.   Amendments.
§
180-903.   State law and regulations.
§
180-904.   Provisions to be continuation of existing regulations.
§
180-905.   Publication.
§
180-906.   Name.
§
180-907.   Enforcement.
Part 10
International Fuel Gas Code
§
180-1001.   Adoption of International Fuel Gas Code.
§
180-1002.   Amendments.
§
180-1003.   State law and regulations.
§
180-1004.   Provisions to be continuation of existing regulations.
§
180-1005.   Publication.
§
180-1006.   Title.
§
180-1007.   Enforcement.
Part 11
International Energy Conservation Code
§
180-1101.   Adoption of International Energy Conservation Code.
§
180-1102.   Amendments.
§
180-1103.   State law and regulations.
§
180-1104.   Provisions to be continuation of existing regulations.
§
180-1105.   Publication.
§
180-1106.   Name.
§
180-1107.   Enforcement.
Part 12
Property Maintenance Rules and Regulations
§
180-1201.   Purpose.
§
180-1202.   Definitions.
§
180-1203.   Quality of life (QOL) violations.
§
180-1204.   Authority for issuance of violation ticket.
§
180-1205.   Enforcement.
§
180-1206.   Service.
§
180-1207.   Separate offense.
§
180-1208.   Regulations.
§
180-1209.   Abatement of violation.
§
180-1210.   Violations and penalties.
§
180-1211.   Appeal.
§
180-1212.   Collections.
§
180-1213.   Liens.
§
180-1214.   Nonexclusive remedies.
Part 13
International Property Maintenance Code
§
180-1301.   Adoption of International Property Maintenance Code.
Part 14
International Fire Code
§
180-1401.   Adoption of International Fire Code.
§
180-1402.   State law and regulations.
§
180-1403.   Provisions to be continuation of existing regulations.
§
180-1404.   Publication.
§
180-1405.   Title.
§
180-1406.   Enforcement.
§
180-1407.   Amendments to the International Fire Code.
Exhibit A, Hazard Areas Table R301.2(1), Climatic and Geographic Design
Criteria
Property Maintenance Code
[HISTORY: Adopted by the City Council of the City of Reading as indicated in
part histories. Amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
House numbering — See
Ch. 302.
Stormwater management — See
Ch. 505.
Subdivision and land development — See
Ch. 515.
Zoning — See
Ch. 600.
STATE LAW REFERENCES
Uniform Construction Code — See 35 P.S. § 7210.101 et seq.
Part 1
Pennsylvania Construction Code
[Adopted 4-26-2004 by Ord. No. 26-2004 (
Ch. 5, Part 1A, of the 2001 Code of Ordinances)]
§ 180-101. Enactment of the Pennsylvania Construction Code.
The City of Reading, Pennsylvania, hereby elects to administer and enforce the
provisions of the Pennsylvania Construction Code Act, Act 45 of 1999, 35 P.S.
§§ 7210.101 through 7210.1103, as amended from time to time, and its
regulations.
§ 180-102. Municipal administration.
The Uniform Construction Code, contained in 34 Pa. Code. Chapters 401 through
405, as amended from time to time, and enacted under certain separate
ordinances of the City of Reading, Pennsylvania, on or about April 5, 2004, is
incorporated by reference as the City of Reading, Pennsylvania, Building Code.
§ 180-103. Administration and enforcement.
Administration and enforcement of the Building Code within the City of Reading,
Pennsylvania, shall be undertaken in any of the following ways as determined by
the governing body of the City of Reading. Pennsylvania, from time to time by
appropriate legislation:
   A.   By the designation of an employee of the City of Reading, Pennsylvania
to serve as the municipal code official to act on the behalf of the City of
Reading, Pennsylvania.
   B.   By the retention of one or more construction code officials or third-
party agencies to act on behalf of the City of Reading, Pennsylvania.
   C.   By agreement with one or more other municipalities for the joint
administration and enforcement of this Part through an intermunicipal
agreement.
   D.   By entering into a contract with another municipality for the
administration and enforcement of this Part on behalf of the City of Reading,
Pennsylvania.
   E.   By retention of a building code official certified as an accessibility
specialist, to perform accessibility plan reviews and inspections pursuant to
Chapter 11 of the International Building Code. [Amended 9-12-2011 by Ord. No.
43-2011]
§ 180-104. Establishment of Board of Appeals.
If at any time enforcement and administration is undertaken jointly with one or
more other municipalities, any Board of Appeals shall be established by joint
action of the participating municipalities.
§ 180-105. Fees.
Fees assessable to the City of Reading, Pennsylvania, for the administration
and enforcement undertaken pursuant to this Part 1, other specific code
ordinances, and the Code shall be established by the governing body through
appropriate legislation.
Part 2
International Wildland-Urban Interface Code
[Adopted 12-11-2006 by Ord. No. 92-2006 (
Ch. 5, Part 10, of the 2001 Code of Ordinances)]
§ 180-201. Adoption of Wildland-Urban Interface Code.
[Amended 12-28-2009 by Ord. No. 78-2009]
A certain document, three copies of which are on file in the office of the City
Clerk of City of Reading, being marked and designated as the International
Wildland-Urban Interface Code, 2009 Edition, as published by the International
Code Council, be and is hereby adopted as the Wildland-Urban Interface Code of
the City of Reading in the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania for regulating and
governing the mitigation of hazard to life and property from the intrusion of
fire from wildland exposures, fire from adjacent structures and prevention of
structure fires from spreading to wildland fuels as herein provided; providing
for the issuance of permits and collection of fees therefor; and each and all
of the regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of said
Wildland-Urban Interface Code on file in the office of the City of Reading are
hereby referred to, adopted, and made a part hereof, as if fully set out in
this Part, with the additions, insertions, deletions and changes, if any,
prescribed in §
180-202 of this Part.
§ 180-202. Amendments.
The following sections of the International Wildland-Urban Interface Code for
the City of Reading is hereby amended, revised, deleted, etc., as indicated:
   A.   
Chapter 1, Section 101.1, is amending by deleting the words "name of
jurisdiction" and the brackets surrounding that phrase and by inserting in
place thereof the words "the City of Reading."
§ 180-203. State law and regulations.
In all matters that are regulated by the law of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania or by regulations of departments or agencies of the Commonwealth
promulgated by authority of law, such laws or regulations, or other ordinances
of the City of Reading, Pennsylvania, as the case may be, shall control where
the requirements thereof are the same as or in excess of the provisions of this
Part. This code shall control in all cases where the state requirements, or the
requirements of other ordinances of this City, are not as strict as those
contained in this Part.
§ 180-204. Provisions to be continuation of existing regulations.
Nothing in this Part or in the Wildland-Urban Interface Code hereby adopted
shall be constructed to affect any suit or proceeding impending in any court,
or any rights acquired, or liability incurred, or any cause or causes of action
acquired or existing, under any act or ordinance as repealed by this Part; nor
shall any just or legal right or remedy of any character be lost, impaired or
affected by this Part.
§ 180-205. Publication.
The City Clerk is hereby ordered and directed to cause this Part to be
published as required by all applicable statutes, laws, regulations, charters
and ordinances.
§ 180-206. Title.
[Amended 12-28-2009 by Ord. No. 78-2009]
This Part shall be known as the "2009 International Wildland and Urban
Interface Code" also known as "Wildland-Urban Interface Code" for the City of
Reading.
§ 180-207. Boundaries.
Specific boundaries of natural or man-made features of wildland-urban interface
areas shall be as shown on the wildland area interface map attached hereto as
Exhibit A. 1  The legal description of such areas are available from the
Department of Fire and Rescue Services.
1.   Editor's Note: Exhibit A, Hazard Areas, is included at the end of this
chapter. Copies of the wildland-urban interface map are available in the Fire
Department.
§ 180-208. Enforcement.
[Amended 12-28-2009 by Ord. No. 78-2009]
The 2009 International Wildland-Urban Interface Code, also known as "Wildland-
Urban Interface Code" of the City of Reading shall be enforced by City of
Reading Codes Service Division - Building/Trades and/or City of Reading Fire
Marshal or his/her designee of the Fire Prevention Division of the City of
Reading Department of Fire and Rescue.
Part 3
Performance Code for Buildings and Facilities
[Adopted 12-11-2006 by Ord. No. 93-2006 (
Ch. 5, Part 11, of the 2001 Code of Ordinances)]
§ 180-301. Adoption of Performance Code for Buildings and Facilities.
[Amended 12-28-2009 by Ord. No. 78-2009]
A certain document, three copies of which are on file in the office of the City
Clerk of City of Reading, being marked and designated as the International
Performance Code for Buildings and Facilities, 2009 Edition, as published by
the International Code Council, be and is hereby adopted as the Performance
Code for Buildings and Facilities of the City of Reading, in the Commonwealth
of Pennsylvania for regulating and governing the performance-based design,
construction, quality of materials, erections, installation, alteration,
repair, location, relocation, replacement, addition to, use or maintenance of
building and/or fire protection systems as herein provided; providing of the
issuance of permits and collection of fees therefor; and each and all of the
regulations, provisions; penalties, conditions and terms of said Performance
Code on file in the office of the City of Reading are hereby referred to,
adopted, and made a part hereof, as if fully set out in this Part, with the
additions, insertions, deletions and changes, if any, prescribed in §
180-302 of this Part.
§ 180-302. Amendments.
[Amended 12-28-2009 by Ord. No. 78-2009]
The issuance of permits and collection fees therefor, and each and all of the
regulations, provisions, conditions and terms of the International Codes, 2009
edition published by the International Code Council, adopted by the City of
Reading Ordinance No. 78-2009, 2  also on file in the Office of the City of
Reading, shall provide enforcement, permits, plan review, inspection, fees and
certificate of occupancy requirements where not specified in the ICC
Performance Code for Buildings and Facilities. The City of Reading also
establishes the following performance groups for new and/or existing use groups
or specific buildings or facilities for the application of this code.
Allocation of Use and Occupancy Classifications and Specific Buildings or
Facilities to Performance Groups
 
Performance Group Use and Occupancy Classification or Specific Buildings or
                  Facilities
I
II
III
 
2.   Editor's Note: See Part 4, International Residential Code.
§ 180-303. State law and regulations.
In all matters that are regulated by the law of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania or by regulations of departments or agencies of the commonwealth
promulgated by authority of law, such laws or regulations, or other ordinances
of the City of Reading, Pennsylvania, as the case may be, shall control where
the requirements thereof are the same as or in excess of the provisions of this
Part. This code shall control in all cases where the state requirements, or the
requirements of other ordinances of this City, are not as strict as those
contained in this Part.
§ 180-304. Provisions to be continuation of existing regulations.
Nothing in this Part or in the Performance Code for Buildings and Facilities
hereby adopted shall be construed to affect any suit or proceeding impending in
any court, or any rights acquired, or liability incurred, or any cause or
causes of action acquired or existing, under any act or ordinance as repealed
by this Part; nor shall any just or legal right or remedy of any character be
lost, impaired or affected by this Part.
§ 180-305. Publication.
The City Clerk is hereby ordered and directed to cause this Part to be
published as required by all applicable statutes, laws, regulations, charters
and ordinances.
§ 180-306. Title.
[Amended 12-28-2009 by Ord. No. 78-2009]
This Part shall be known as the "2009 International Performance Code for
Buildings and Facilities," also known as "Performance Code for Buildings and
Facilities" for the City of Reading.
§ 180-307. Enforcement.
The Performance Code of Buildings and Facilities 3  of the City of Reading
shall be enforced by City of Reading Codes Service Division - Building/Trades
and/or City of Reading Fire Marshal or his/her designee of the Fire Prevention
Division of the City of Reading Department of Fire and Rescue.
3.   Editor's Note: Ord. No. 93-2006, as enacted, read "Fuel Gas Code."
Part 4
International Residential Code
[Adopted 12-11-2006 by Ord. No. 94-2006 (
Ch. 5, Part 8, of the 2001 Code of Ordinances)]
§ 180-401. Adoption of International Residential Code.
[Amended 12-28-2009 by Ord. No. 78-2009]
A certain document, three copies of which are on file in the office of the City
Clerk of the City of Reading, being marked and designated as the International
Residential Code, 2009 Edition, including Appendix Chapters A, B, C, D, E, F,
G, I, J and L (see International Residential Code, § R102.5, 2009 edition), as
published by the International Code Council, be and is hereby adopted as the
Residential Code of the City of Reading, in the State of Pennsylvania, for
regulating and governing the construction, alteration, movement, enlargement,
replacement, repair, equipment, location, removal and demolition of attached
one- and two-family dwelling and multiple single-family dwellings (townhouses)
not more than three stories in height with separate means of egress as herein
provided; providing for the issuance of permits and collection of fees
therefor; and each of all of the regulation, provisions, penalties, conditions
and terms of said residential code on file in the office of the Code Official
are hereby referred to, adopted, and made a part hereof, as if fully set out in
this Part, with the additions, insertions, deletions and changes, if any,
prescribed in §
180-402 of this Part.
§ 180-402. Amendments.
[Amended 9-24-2007 by Ord. No. 72-2007]
The following sections are hereby amended, revised, deleted, etc., as
indicated:
   A.   Section R101.1, is amended by deleting the words "name of jurisdiction"
and the brackets surrounding that phrase and by inserting in place thereof the
words "the City of Reading."
B.   Section R108.2, is amended by adding: [Amended 9-12-2011 by Ord. No. 42-
20114]
All tradespersons shall pay the permit fees based on labor and materials
provided in
Chapter 212, Fees, prior to commencing work or performing services in or upon
all premises within the City based upon aggregate cost of labor and materials:
Administrative fee
In addition to the aforesaid fee, all tradespersons shall be required to pay an
administrative fee as provided in
Chapter 212, Fees, for each permit applied for and received. This fee is in
addition to the above-listed permit fee.
As built. Should it be determined that the job costs greatly differentiate from
the as- built costs to save monies on the fee for the permit at the discretion
of the Codes Services Division - Building/Trades, said persons reserve the
right to undertake any and all appropriate and applicable methods including,
but not limited to, commencement of legal action to obtain the difference of
the fee submitted for a permit and estimated job costs and the as-built costs.
Consultation fee. In addition to the fee for a permit as set forth herein, a
fee per hour, as provided in
Chapter 212, Fees, shall be charged for consultation either in person or via
telephone with the any Building/Trades Inspector for consultation prior to
submission of plans for review and subsequent to approval of plans and issuance
of permit beyond one hour total time calculated by combining time of all
Building/Trades Inspector consulted on single project per above parameters.
Removal of placard. The Building Code Official, his designee or Code Official
shall remove the stop-work order placard whenever the defect or defects upon
which the stop- work order and placarding action were based have been
eliminated and with the payment of a fee as provided in
Chapter 212, Fees. Any person who conceals, covers, hides, defaces or removes a
stop-work order placard without the approval of the Building Code Official
shall be subject to the penalties provided by this code.
   C.   Section R108.5 is amended to read as follows:
Upon written documentation and confirmation that project was not commenced, 80%
of the permit fee, excluding the $2 administrative fee, is refundable.
No refund will be issued for plan review.
   D.   Table R301.2(1) is amended by inserting "Refer to Table R301.2(1)
attached as, Exhibit A." 5
   E.   Section R311.4.1 is amended by adding:
R311.4.1.2. Every basement level shall be provided with an exterior hatchway or
door to grade with a minimum door height of six feet eight inches and a minimum
door width of 36 inches.
   F.   Section P2603.6.1 is amended to delete the word "number" in both places
provided and the brackets surrounding it and insert in place thereof "36
inches" and "36 inches."
   G.   Section P3103.1 is amended to delete the word "number" in both places
provided and the brackets surrounding it and insert in place thereof "24
inches" and "24 inches" where provided.
   H.   Delete Bill No. 27-2003, Pier Construction, and replace with Section
AE502.4 Appendix E by adding:
All single-family dwelling units shall be erected on a full perimeter
foundation consisting of minimum eight-inch-by-sixteen-inch concrete masonry
unit, eight-inch poured concrete wall construction or a design approved by the
Code Official. No perimeter pier construction shall be permissible.
4.   Editor's Note: Amended during codification (see
Ch. 1, General Provisions, Part 2).
5.   Editor's Note: Table R301.2(1), Climatic and Geographic Design Criteria,
is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 180-403. Provisions to be continuation of existing regulations.
[Amended 12-28-2009 by Ord. No. 78-2009]
Nothing in this Part or in the 2009 International Residential Code as the
Residential Code for the City of Reading as hereby adopted shall be construed
to affect any suit or proceeding impending in any court, or any rights
acquired, or liability incurred, or any cause or causes of action acquired or
existing, under any act or ordinance as repealed by this Part; nor shall any
just or legal right or remedy of any character be lost, impaired or affected by
this Part.
§ 180-404. State law and regulations.
In all matters that are regulated by the law of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania or by regulations of departments or agencies of the Commonwealth
promulgated by authority of law, such laws or regulations, or other ordinances
of the City of Reading, Pennsylvania, as the case may be, shall control where
the requirements thereof are the same as or in excess of the provisions of this
Part. This code shall control in all cases where the state requirements, or the
requirements of other ordinances of this City, are not as strict as those
contained in this Part.
§ 180-405. Publication.
The City Clerk is hereby ordered and directed to cause this Part to be
published as required by all applicable statutes, laws, regulations, charters
and ordinances.
§ 180-406. Title.
[Amended 12-28-2009 by Ord. No. 78-2009]
This Part shall be known as the "2009 International Residential Code" and as
the "Residential Code" for the City of Reading.
§ 180-407. Enforcement.
The Residential Code of the City of Reading shall be enforced by City of
Reading Codes Service Division - Building/Trades and/or City of Reading Fire
Marshal or his/her designee of the Fire Prevention Division of the City of
Reading Department of Fire and Rescue.
Part 5
International Existing Building Code
[Adopted 12-11-2006 by Ord. No. 96-2006 (
Ch. 5, Part 1C, of the 2001 Code of Ordinances)]
§ 180-501. Adoption of International Existing Building Code.
[Amended 12-28-2009 by Ord. No. 78-2009]
A certain document, three copies of which are on file in the office of the City
Clerk of the City of Reading, being marked and designated as the International
Existing Building Code, 2009 Edition, including Appendix Chapter A (see
International Existing Building Code, § 101.7, 2009 Edition), as published by
the International Code Council, be and is hereby adopted as the Existing
Building Code of the City of Reading, in the State of Pennsylvania for
regulating and governing the repair, alteration, change of occupancy, addition,
and relocation of existing building, including historic buildings, as herein
provided; providing for the issuance of permits and collection of fees
therefor; and each and all of the regulations, provisions, penalties,
conditions and terms of said Existing Building Code on file in the office of
the Code Official are hereby referred to, adopted, and made a part hereof, as
if fully set out in this Part 5, with the additions, insertions, deletions and
changes, if any, prescribed in §
180-502 of this Part 5.
§ 180-502. Amendments.
[Amended 9-27-2007 by Ord. No. 72-2007; 12-28-2009 by Ord. No. 78-2009]
The following sections of the International Existing Building Code, 2009
Edition, a/k/a Existing Building Code for the City of Reading, is hereby
amended, revised, deleted, etc., as indicated:
   A.   Section 101.1, is amended by deleting the words "name of jurisdiction"
and the brackets surrounding that phrase and by inserting in place thereof the
words "the City of Reading."
   B.   Section 102.1 of this section is amended by adding:
It is the intent of the City of Reading Building Code and Fire Code ordinance
amendments to apply to the respective sections of the International Existing
Building Code regarding specific sections in the IBC and IFC Chapter 4, § 403,
"High-Rise Buildings," and Chapter 9, "Fire Protection Systems."
   C.   Section 105.1.2.3 is amended to read as follows: [Amended 9-12-2011 by
Ord. No. 42-2011; 11-19-2012 by Ord. No. 111-20126]
All tradespersons shall pay permit fees as specified by the City of Reading Fee
Schedule 7  prior to commencing work or performing services in or upon all
premises within the City based upon aggregate cost of labor and materials.
Administrative fee
In addition to the aforesaid fee, all tradespersons shall be required to pay an
administrative fee as specified by the City of Reading Fee Schedule 8  for each
permit applied for and received. This fee is in addition to the above-listed
permit fee.
As-built. Should it be determined that the job costs greatly differentiate from
the as-built costs to save monies on the fee for the permit at the discretion
of the Codes Services Division - Building/Trades, said persons reserve the
right to undertake any and all appropriate and applicable methods including,
but not limited to, commencement of legal action to obtain the difference of
the fee submitted for a permit and estimated job costs and the as-built costs.
Consultation fee. In addition to the fee for a permit as set forth herein, a
fee as specified in the City of Reading Fee Schedule 9  shall be charged for
consultation either in person or via telephone with the/any Building/Trades
Inspector for consultation prior to submission of plans for review and
subsequent to approval of plans and issuance of permit beyond one hour total
time calculated by combining time of all Building/Trades Inspector consulted on
single project per above parameters.
Removal of placard. The Building Code Official, his designee or Code Official
shall remove the stop-work order placard whenever the defect or defects upon
which the stop- work order and placarding action were based have been
eliminated and with the payment of a fee as provided in
Chapter 212, Fees. Any person who conceals, covers, hides, defaces or removes a
stop-work order placard without the approval of the Building Code Official
shall be subject to the penalties provided by this code.
   D.   Section 1201.2 is amended by inserting in "1978."
6.   Editor's Note: Amended during codification (see
Ch. 1, General Provisions, Part 2).
7.   Editor's Note: See
Ch. 212, Fees.
8.   Editor's Note: See
Ch. 212, Fees.
9.   Editor's Note: See
Ch. 212, Fees.
§ 180-503. State law and regulations.
In all matters that are regulated by the law of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania or by regulations of departments or agencies of the commonwealth
promulgated by authority of law, such laws or regulations, or other ordinances
of the City of Reading, Pennsylvania, as the case may be, shall control where
the requirements thereof are the same as or in excess of the provisions of this
Part. This code shall control in all cases where the state requirements, or the
requirements of other ordinances of this City, are not as strict as those
contained in this Part.
§ 180-504. Provisions to be continuation of existing regulations.
[Amended 12-28-2009 by Ord. No. 78-2009]
Nothing in this Part or in the 2009 International Existing Building Code, also
known as the "Existing Building Code for the City of Reading," as hereby
adopted, shall be construed to affect any suit or proceeding impending in any
court, or any rights acquired, or liability incurred, or any cause or causes of
action acquired or existing, under any act or ordinance as repealed by this
Part; nor shall any just or legal right or remedy of any character be lost,
impaired or affected by this Part.
§ 180-505. Publication.
The City Clerk is hereby ordered and directed to cause this Part to be
published as required by all applicable statutes, laws, regulations, charters
and ordinances.
§ 180-506. Title.
[Amended 12-28-2009 by Ord. No. 78-2009]
This Part shall be known as the "2009 International Existing Building Code" and
as the "Existing Building Code" for the City of Reading.
§ 180-507. Enforcement.
The Existing Building Code of the City of Reading shall be enforced by City of
Reading Codes Service Division - Building/Trades and/or City of Reading Fire
Marshal or his/her designee of the Fire Prevention Division of the City of
Reading Department of Fire and Rescue.
Part 6
International Mechanical Code
[Adopted 12-11-2006 by Ord. No. 97-2006 (
Ch. 5, Part 5, of the 2001 Code of Ordinances)]
§ 180-601. Adoption of International Mechanical Code.
[Amended 12-28-2009 by Ord. No. 78-2009]
A certain document, three copies of which are on file in the office of the City
Clerk, being marked and designated as the "International Mechanical Code, 2009
Edition," including Appendix A (see International Mechanical Code, § 101.2.1,
2009 Edition), as published by the International Code Council, be and is hereby
adopted and the Mechanical Code of the City of Reading, in the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania, regulating and governing the design, construction, quality of
materials, erection, installation, alteration, repair, location, relocation,
replacement, addition to, use or maintenance of mechanical systems as herein
provided; providing for the issuance of permits and collection of fees
therefor; and each and all of the regulations, provisions, penalties,
conditions and terms of said Mechanical Code on file in the Office of the City
of Reading are hereby referred to, adopted, and made a part hereof, as if fully
set out in this Part, with the additions, insertions, deletions and changes, if
any, prescribed in §
180-602 of this Part.
§ 180-602. Amendments.
[Amended 9-24-2007 by Ord. No. 72-2007; 12-28-2009 by Ord. No. 78-2009; 3-22-
2010 by Ord. No. 11-2010; 5-10-2010 by Ord. No. 18-2010; 8-23-2010 by Ord. No.
56-2010; 12-27-2010 by Ord. No. 106-2010]
The following sections of the International Mechanical Code, 2009 edition, a/k/
a Mechanical Code, for the City of Reading is hereby amended, revised, deleted,
etc., as indicated:
   A.   Section 101.1 Title, is amended to read as follows: This code shall be
known as the "Mechanical Code of the City of Reading, Pennsylvania,"
hereinafter referred to as "this code."
   B.   Section 103.1, General, is amended to read as follows: The
Administrative Authority shall be the City of Reading Mechanical Inspector and
the City of Reading Mechanical Board of Standards Examiners duly appointed by
the jurisdiction, and have authority to administer and enforce the provisions
of this code as adopted or amended. The City of Reading Mechanical Inspector
shall be the Code Official of this code.
   C.   Section 103.2, Appointment, is amended to include as follows:
103.2.1 Qualifications.
         (a)   In order to be eligible for appointment for Mechanical
Inspector, the candidate shall have a minimum of 10 years' experience in the
heating/cooling field, with some installation background and shall have the
approval of the Mechanical Board.
         (b)   The candidate shall hold at least a mechanical contractors'
license or master plumber license.
         (c)   The Mechanical Inspector shall not engage in any activities
contrary to the provision of this code, nor shall engage in any activities
creating a conflict of interest.
   D.   Section 103.5, Mechanical Board, is amended to include as follows:
103.5 Mechanical Board. There is hereby established a Mechanical Board of
Standards and Examiners whose members shall be appointed by the Mayor and
approved by City Council. The Mechanical Inspector shall serve as liaison
officer to the Mechanical Board and attend all meetings.
         (a)   Membership. The Mechanical Board shall consist of nine members,
of whom all shall be selected from any of the following disciplines: the HVAC
service industry, the air conditioning and refrigeration industry, the HVAC
engineering profession, the electrical trade, the plumbing trade or an
instructor or administrator of an institution of vocational training. No more
than two board members may be selected from any one of these professions. In
the event of a failure to appoint a successor after the expiration of any
member's term, such member shall continue to serve until a successor(s) is duly
appointed.
         (b)   Term of office. The appointed members of the Board shall serve
for a term of six years in such manner of original appointment that the term of
two members shall expire December 31 of year one, the term of two members shall
expire December 31 of year two, the term of one member shall expire December 31
of year three, the term of one member shall expire December 31 of year four,
the term of one member shall expire December 31 of year five, the term of one
member shall expire December 31 of year six. Members not attending meetings for
one year shall be deemed inactive and their membership shall be terminated.
         (c)    Meetings of the Board. The Mechanical Board shall hold its
first meeting no later than 30 days after the effective date of this Part and
thereafter the Board shall meet at such intervals as may be necessary for the
performance of its duties; provided; however, that normal meeting dates shall
be the first Tuesday of December, March, June, and September of each calendar
year.
         (d)   Function of the Board. The Mechanical Board of Standards and
Examiners shall make all reasonable rules and regulations pertaining to the
International Mechanical Code to the City of Reading Mechanical Inspector for
Council's adoption. They shall make reasonable rules and regulations governing
its procedures, and similarly establish standards and procedures for the
qualifications, examination and licensing of mechanical contractors and
mechanical journeyman and recommend qualified applicants for issuance of
license to the Mechanical Inspector. In addition, said Board shall convene at
the instance of the Board Chairman for the purpose of holding hearings
concerning the suspension and/or revocation of licenses herein after provided.
There shall be a quorum of five members in attendance in order for the
Mechanical Board to conduct business.
         (e)   Removal of members. Any member may be removed for misconduct or
neglect of duty or for other just cause by a majority vote of Council taken
after the member has received 15 days' advance notice of the intent to take
such vote. Failure of a member to attend three consecutive regular meetings of
the Board will constitute grounds for immediate removal from the Board by City
Council. Failure of a member to attend at least 50% of the regular meetings of
the Board in a calendar year will constitute grounds for immediate removal from
the Board by City Council. The Chairperson of the Board shall inform the City
Clerk in writing when a member has failed to comply with this attendance
policy. Following such notification, City Council may vote to remove the member
and seek applicants to fill the vacant position.
   E.   Section 104, Duties and powers of the Mechanical Inspector.
      (1)   104.4.1 Rescheduling of inspections, is amended to include as
follows:10
104.4.1 Rescheduling of inspections. If the owner or representative of the
owner cannot be available at the proposed time, said owner or representative
shall provide no less than twenty- four-hour written notice to the Codes
Service Division Office. Upon failure to give such written notice or upon
failure to gain entry, an administrative fee as provided in
Chapter 212, Fees, will be assessed the owner or representative of the owner
for ailing to supply written notice or to appear. For each rescheduling beyond
the second rescheduling, an administrative fee as provided in
Chapter 212, Fees, shall be assessed in all cases.
      (2)   Section 104.5, Right of entry, is amended to read as follows:
104.5 Right of entry. If any owner, occupant or other person in charge of a
structure subject to the provision of this code refuses, impedes, inhibits,
interferes with, restricts or obstructs entry and free access to every part of
the structure or premises where inspection authorized by this code is sought,
the administrative authority shall promptly apply for a search or inspection
warrant to a court of competent jurisdiction and shall supply all necessary
affidavits and testimony to indicate that there is reasonable or probable cause
to conduct an inspection. For the purposes of this section, a reasonable or
probable cause to gain access for an inspection shall include without being
limited to the following:
1.   That the inspection of the area is part of a planned routine inspection
being conducted pursuant to a systematic or concentrated code enforcement
program in that portion of the City; or
2.   That the Code Official, after investigation or upon information received,
has knowledge, information or a reasonable belief that a violation of this code
or other codes and ordinances of the City exist; or
3. That such entry is for the purpose of inspecting a previous notice of
violation; or
4.   That the Code Official has received a complaint concerning a violation on
or within the premises; or
5.   That such entry is necessary to determine if the building, structure,
premises, dwelling, or dwelling units meet code standards.
      (3)   Section 104.7, Notice of inspection, is amended to read as follows:
104.7, Notice of inspection. When entry by the Code Official to any building
structure or premises has not been possible, a notice of inspection shall be
issued to the property owner or representative of the owner.
   F.   Section 106, Permits.
      (1)   Section 106.1.1, Homeowner clause, is amended to include as
follows:
106.1.1 Homeowner clause. Notwithstanding anything contrary to the provisions
of this code, a permit may be issued to the qualified owner occupant of a
single-family dwelling in the City of Reading, used exclusively for the living
purposes, provided that the person is the bona fide owner and that said owner
will personally perform all labor in connection therewith said permit, provided
there is no modification or alteration to any existing venting system, chimney,
connector and/or flues for gas furnaces, oil burners, wood-burning stoves or
incinerators.
All work done under this section shall be subject to inspection and other
provisions of this code.
A permit shall be secured from the Codes Service Division and approved by the
Mechanical Inspector before commencing work and an inspection shall be
performed before concealment.
      (2)   Section 106.5.2, Fees, is amended to include as follows: [Amended
9-12-2011 by Ord. No. 42-201111]
106.5.2 Fees. All tradespersons shall pay permit fees based on labor and
materials, as provided in
Chapter 212, Fees, prior to commencing work or performing services in or upon
all premises within the City based upon aggregate cost of labor and materials.
Administrative fee.
In addition to the aforesaid fee, all tradepersons shall be required to pay an
administrative fee as provided in
Chapter 212, Fees, for each permit applied for and received. This fee is in
addition to the above-listed permit fee.
As-built. Should it be determined that the job costs greatly differentiate from
the as built costs to save monies on the fee for the permit at the discretion
of the Codes Services Division - Building/Trades, said persons reserve the
right to undertake any and all appropriate and applicable methods including,
but not limited to, commencement of legal action to obtain the difference of
the fee submitted for a permit and estimated job costs and the as-built costs.
Consultation fee. In addition to the fee for a permit as set forth herein, a
fee per hour as provided in
Chapter 212, Fees, shall be charged for consultation either in person or via
telephone with the any Building/Trades Inspector for consultation prior to
submission of plans for review and subsequent to approval of plans and issuance
of permit beyond one hour total time calculated by combining time of all
Building/Trades Inspector consulted on single project per above parameters.
Removal of placard. The Building Code Official, his designee or Code Official
shall remove the stop-work order placard whenever the defect or defects upon
which the stop- work order and placarding action were based have been
eliminated and with the payment of a fee as provided in
Chapter 212, Fees. Any person who conceals, covers, hides, defaces or removes a
stop-work order placard without the approval of the Building Code Official
shall be subject to the penalties provided by this code.
      (3)   Section 106.5.3, Fee refunds, is amended as follows:
Section 106.5.3(2) is amended by deleting the words "specify percentage" and
the brackets surrounding the phrase and by inserting in place thereof the
language "80% of the permit fee, excluding the $2 administrative fee."
Section 106.5.3(3) is amended by deleting the words "specify percentage" and
the brackets surrounding the phrase and by inserting in place thereof the
language "0% (no refund shall be issued for plan review)."
   G.   Section 108, Violations.
      (1)   Section 108.4, Violation; penalties, is amended to read as follows:
108.4 Violation; penalties. Any person who shall violate any provision of this
code shall, upon conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of not less
than $500 and not exceeding $1,000 for the first two offenses and not more than
$5,000 for the third and successive offenses plus costs and restitution, or in
default of payment to imprisonment, for a term not to exceed 30 days. One fine
per month per violation shall be assessed, except that continual and
uncorrected violations that pose a threat to the public and violate the same
subsection of an ordinance for the same property can be assessed at one
citation per five calendar days.
      (2)   Section 108.4.1, Administrative fee, is amended to read as follows:
12
108.4.1 Administrative fee. Any property owners who has more than two
violations of this code in any twelve-month period shall be required to pay an
administrative fee as provided in
Chapter 212, Fees, in amounts provided for the third violation, the fourth
violation and the fifth and successive violations.
      (3)   Section 108.5. Refer to Section 108.4.
      (4)   Section 108.7.1, Authority to condemn mechanical systems, is
amended to read as follows:
108.7.1 Authority to condemn mechanical systems. Any order or notice issued
pursuant to the provisions stated in this code may be served personally upon
the person, partnership or corporation to whom or to which it is addressed, or
may be served by mailing the same in a sealed envelope with postage prepaid,
directed, in the case of the holder of any license, to the address furnished by
him to the department of his business address and, in the case of other person,
partnership or corporation, to the premises where the defects recited in such
order are alleged to exist and by the posting in a conspicuous place on such
premises of a copy of such notice or order. The service as above described by
mailing and posting shall be the equivalent of personal service.
If the notice of violation is not complied with within the time therein
specified or within a reasonable time determined by the Code Official or his
nominee, the Code Official or nominee shall cause to be instituted an
appropriate proceeding at law or in equity to restrain, correct, or abate such
alleged violation as provided herein or else where according to law or to
require the removal or termination of the use of any mechanical system in
violation of the provisions of this code or of the order or direction given or
made pursuant thereto.
   H.   Section 109, Means of appeal.
      (1)   Section 109.1, Application for appeal, is amended to read as
follows:13
109.1. Application for appeal. Any person aggrieved by the decision of the
Mechanical Inspector may appeal in writing within 20 days to the Mechanical
Board for a review of said decision. A fee in the amount provided in
Chapter 212, Fees, shall be payable for each appeal and is due at the time of
submission of application for appeal. The Board Chairman shall afford the
person a hearing within 20 days and shall give written notice of the time and
place of said hearing.
I.   Add entire Section 110 as set forth herein:14
SECTION 110. LICENSES AND EXAMINATIONS.
110.1 General license information.
         (a)   All persons engaged in mechanical, heating and cooling
contractor and journeyman work as defined and covered by this Part are required
to be licensed and shall operate within the limitations imposed by their
respective licenses. It shall be unlawful without license for any person, firm
or corporation to, or cause to, install, construct, erect, alter, repair,
improve, convert, move, use, or maintain any mechanical system within the City.
         (b)   License fees for mechanical contractors and mechanical
journeymen shall be as provided in
Chapter 212, Fees.
If not renewed until after January 31 following the expired year, a surcharge
as provided in
Chapter 212, Fees, will be applied.
         (c)   All licenses covered under this code shall be issued annually
and shall expire on December 31.
         (d)   All licenses may be renewed upon timely application. If the
holder of a license fails to renew said license within a five-year period, the
full fee must be paid for the years that the license was not renewed before a
license shall be issued. Any holders renewing the license after the fifth
consecutive year of nonrenewal shall be required to pass an examination
administered by the Mechanical Board.
         (e)   All license and examination fees must be paid to the City of
Reading, Pennsylvania, prior to the issuance of said license or examination.
         (f)   Application for an initial license of whatever class shall be
made in writing and shall furnish such information as the Mechanical Board may
require.
         (g)   Applicants for an initial license of whatever class shall pass
with a grade of 70% an examination administered by the Mechanical Board.
         (h)   The Mechanical Inspector or his assign shall serve as chief
proctor for conducting tests and examinations for all classes of licenses
herein described.
110.2 Qualification for obtaining a license.
   A.   Heating contractor license. All applicants for a mechanical contractor
license shall:
         (a)   Hold a valid mechanical journeyman license.
         (b)   Shall have been employed as a mechanical journeyman by a
registered mechanical contractor for at least two years.
   B.   Installer license. All applicants for a mechanical journeyman license
shall be employed by a registered mechanical contractor and registered with the
Pennsylvania Bureau of Apprenticeship Training, Department of Labor. He shall
have completed at least four years of approved apprenticeship training, been
instructed in subjects related to the trade not less than 216 hours per year
during the four-year apprenticeship and have been approved by the local
apprenticeship committee according to National Apprenticeship Standards, or
while employed by a registered mechanical contractor and registered with and
apprenticeship training program comparable to the foregoing program, he shall
have completed at least four years of approved apprenticeship training in such
program, or he shall have served an apprenticeship of not less than eight years
under the supervision of a registered mechanical contractor.
110.3 Reciprocal license. A reciprocal license may be issued if the applicant
holds an equivalent license from a first, second, or third class city of the
United States, issued by an equivalent board of examiners, whose qualifications
and standards are equal to that of the City of Reading, Pennsylvania, and shall
have paid to the prescribed fee pursuant to a written application.
110.4 Retired license.
         (a)   All licensees, upon retirement from business, shall surrender
said license to the Codes Service Division of the City of Reading,
Pennsylvania. Upon written request to the Mechanical Board, a license covered
under this code may be fully reinstated within a period of five years of
retirement without reexamination.
         (b)   If the holder of a retired license wishes to reactivate a
retired licensed within a five- year period, the full fee must be paid for the
years that the license was retired. All requests for reactivation must be made
in writing to the Mechanical Board.
         (c)   All persons reactivating a retired license after the fifth year
of retirement shall be required to pass an examination administered by the
Mechanical Board.
110.5 Conditions and provisions for maintaining a license and obtaining a
permit.
         (a)   Applicant shall secure a license within 30 days of examination
result notification.
         (b)   It is prohibited for any licensee to allow the use of said
license by any other person or to obtain a permit for work to be performed by
an unlicensed person.
         (c)   All persons licensed under this code shall give immediate notice
of any change in address or place of business.
         (d)   Prior to the issuance of a mechanical contractor permit, the
applicant shall submit to the Codes Service Division, City of Reading, a
certificate of insurance establishing that the mechanical contractor is
currently insured by a reputable insurance company acceptable to the Codes
Service Division, City of Reading, covering said mechanical contractor for
property damages in the amount of not less than $50,000 for any one claim, and
not less than $100,000 for multiple claims arising from the same undertaking,
as well as public liability insurance in the amount of not less than $100,000
from any one claim and not less than $300,000 for more than one claim arising
from the same undertaking. The Pennsylvania League of Cities and Municipalities
requirements go into effect on August 31, 1993. Act 44 requires the submission
to the municipality of "proof of workers' compensation insurance" or an
affidavit that insurance is not required before issuing a permit. Said
certificate shall be for continuous coverage unless cancelled by said insurance
company at which time, the Codes Service Division, City of Reading, shall be
notified in writing by said insurance company.
         (e)   All vehicles used for mechanical work in the City shall have
lettered or imprinted with letters and numbers no less than two inches high on
the driver's door the mechanical license number issued by this City and
preceded by the letters "MC."
         (f)   Application for permits shall be made by a person holding a
current contractors license issued by the Code Service Division of the City of
Reading. Each shop must a have a contractor assigned to apply for permits from
Codes Service Division for the City of Reading. There can be only one
contractor in any one shop to pull permits. All shops shall give immediate
notice of any change in person holding contractor licensed authorized to apply
for permits for that shop. Every contractor shall be permitted to apply for/
pull permits from the Codes Services Division for only one shop. A contractor
shall not be permitted to apply for/pull permits for more than one shop at any
given time.
110.6 Suspension and revocation of license.
1.   The Mechanical Board of Examiners and Standards may suspend or revoke any
license issued in conformity with this code in the event said license was
partially or wholly procured by or through nondisclosure, misstatement or
misrepresentation, or repeated violations of this code or if a previously
imposed penalty shall not have met with full compliance. "Repeated violations"
is hereby defined as a minimum of three separate offenses under this code
within a calendar year for which the licensee or offender has either pleaded
guilty or has been found guilty by a Magisterial District Judge or other court
of competent jurisdiction.
2.   The Mechanical Board of Examiners, prior to invoking a suspension or
revocation of a license, shall first cause to be served upon said licensee by a
personal service or certified mail, a written notice of suspension or
revocation of license, as the case may be, setting forth in specific terms and
language the nature of the repeated violations, the times thereof and places of
occurrence. Said written notice shall also set forth a place, date and time
where the licensee may appear at a hearing before the Board, with counsel if
desired, to hear sworn testimony as to the repeated violations the licensee is
alleged to have committed and for which his license is subject to suspension or
revocation, as the case may be.
3.   Licensee or his counsel shall be permitted to examine any witness giving
testimony against him as well as being given the privilege of offering
testimony or other proof or exhibits as a defense or rebuttal to allegations.
The hearing before the Board shall not require recordation, shall be informal
in nature, and shall not occur less than 30 days nor more than 90 days from the
date of service of the written notice upon the licensee. The decision of the
Board shall be rendered in writing not more than 30 days from the conclusion of
the hearing and shall be served upon licensee in the same manner provided
herein for service of the written notice of hearing. In the event licensee or
counsel fail to appear at the place, date and time fixed for a hearing, the
Board shall nevertheless convene for the purpose of hearing evidence and/or
testimony in order to arrive at its determination pursuant to the within
provisions. Notice of the Board's decision shall be served upon the licensee as
hereinabove set forth just as if he and/or his counsel had appeared at the
hearing.
   J.   Chapter 3, General regulations.
      (1)   Section 304, Installation, is amended to read as follows:
304.1 General. All heating equipment appurtenances and appliances installed
under the provisions of this code shall be approved. "Approved" means
acceptable to the administrative authority having jurisdiction as to design,
installation, or intended use as required by these standards. Devices listed
for the intended specific purpose and fuel by a nationally recognized testing
agency may be considered as meeting this requirement of approval. All
installations of fuel-burning equipment shall be made in accordance with the
provisions of this code, and replacement, adjustment, and lubrication.
   K.   Chapter 9, Decorative Gas-Fired Appliances for Installation in Vented
Fireplaces.
      (1)   Section 903.1, General, is amended as follows:
903.1 General.
1.   All solid-fuel-burning appliances shall be connected to a chimney. All
chimneys shall be equipped with a rain cap and approved spark arrestor.
2.   Said appliances shall not be connected into the same chimney with gas or
liquid fuel boilers or furnaces.
3.   Said appliances shall only be installed in owner-occupied dwellings, and
shall not be installed in bedrooms, bathrooms, or rooms used for sleeping
purposes.
4.   All solid-fuel-burning stoves or fireplaces shall be used only during
heating seasons, i.e., October 1 through May 1.
   L.   Chapter 13, Fuel Oil Piping and Storage.
      (1)   Section 1301, General, is amended as follows:
1301.5 Tanks out of service. All inside fuel oil tanks out of service must be
disposed of in a safe manner. Tanks out of service and waiting for removal must
be safeguarded, fill and vent piping shall be removed from outside of building
to tank, and all tank openings plugged. Tank must be tagged "Out of Service"
with company name and address and date of removal. For underground tanks, see
NFPA 30, Flammable and Combustible Liquids Code, 2-4.4.
1305.6 and 1305.7 Fill and vent pipes. Where tanks are filled by use of pump
through tight connection, a vent pipe shall not be smaller in size than its
fill size, and/or follow tank manufacturer's installation instruction for pipe
size. The vent and fill pipes shall terminate at a point outside the building
no less than two feet vertically or horizontally from any window or building
opening, excluding basement windows.
         (a)   Pitch of fill and vent pipes shall not have less than 1/4 inch
per foot to tank.
         (b)   Fill pipes shall have a minimum nominal pipe diameter of two
inches.
         (c)   Vent pipes shall have a minimum pipe diameter of 1 1/4 inch for
275 gallon tank.
10. Editor's Note: Amended during codification (see
Ch. 1, General Provisions, Part 2).
11. Editor's Note: Amended during codification (see
Ch. 1, General Provisions, Part 2).
12. Editor's Note: Amended during codification (see
Ch. 1, General Provisions, Part 2).
13. Editor's Note: Amended during codification (see
Ch. 1, General Provisions, Part 2).
14. Editor's Note: Amended during codification (see
Ch. 1, General Provisions, Part 2).
§ 180-603. State law and regulations.
In all matters that are regulated by the law of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania or by regulations of departments or agencies of the commonwealth
promulgated by authority of law, such laws or regulations, or other ordinances
of the City of Reading, Pennsylvania, as the case may be, shall control where
the requirements thereof are the same as or in excess of the provisions of this
Part. This code shall control in all cases where the state requirements, or the
requirements of other ordinances of this City, are not as strict as those
contained in this Part.
§ 180-604. Provisions to be continuation of existing regulations.
The provisions of this Part shall not affect any act done or liability
incurred, nor shall they affect any suit or prosecution pending or to be
instituted to enforce any right or penalty or to punish any offense under the
authority of the repealed ordinances.
§ 180-605. Publication.
The City Clerk is hereby ordered and directed to cause this Part to be
published as required by all applicable statutes, laws, regulations, charters
and ordinances.
§ 180-606. Name.
[Amended 12-28-2009 by Ord. No. 78-2009]
This Part shall be known as the "2009 International Mechanical Code" and as the
"Mechanical Code" for the City of Reading.
§ 180-607. Enforcement.
The Mechanical Code of the City of Reading shall be enforced by City of Reading
Codes Service Division - Building/Trades, including, but not limited to, the
Mechanical Inspector thereof and/ or City of Reading Fire Marshal or his/her
designee of the Fire Prevention Division of the City of Reading Department of
Fire and Rescue.
Part 7
International Electrical Code
Publisher's Note: This Part has been AMENDED by new legislation (Ord. 45-2022,
enacted 5-24-2022). The text of the amendment will be incorporated below when
the ordinance is codified.
[Adopted 12-11-2006 by Ord. No. 98-2006 (
Ch. 5, Part 4, of the 2001 Code of Ordinances)]
§ 180-701. Adoption of International Electric Code.
[Amended 12-28-2009 by Ord. No. 78-2009; 5-23-2022 by Ord. No. 45-2022]
A certain document, three copies of which are on file in the office of the City
Clerk of the City of Reading, being marked and designated as the National
Electrical Code as referenced by the International Building Code, current
Commonwealth of PA adopted edition, as published by NFPA, the International
Residential Code electrical provisions, current edition, as adopted by the
state and the following administrative amendments, be and is hereby adopted as
the Electrical Code of the City of Reading, Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, for
regulating the design, construction, quality of materials, erection,
installation, alteration, repair, location, relocation, replacement, addition
to, use or maintenance of electrical systems as herein provided; providing for
the issuance of permits and collection of fees therefor; and each and all of
the regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of said Electrical
Code on file in the office of the City of Reading City Clerk and Code Official
are hereby referred to, adopted and made a part hereof, as if fully set out in
this Part, with the additions, insertions, deletions and changes, if any,
prescribed in §
180-702 of this Part.
§ 180-702. Amendments.
[Amended 9-24-2007 by Ord. No. 72-2007; 3-22-2010 by Ord. No. 11-2010; 5-10-
2010 by Ord. No. 18-2010; 8-9-2010 by Ord. No. 50-2010; 12-27-2010 by Ord. No.
106-2010; 5-23-2022 by Ord. No. 45-2022; 6-27-2022 by Ord. No. 56-2022]
CHAPTER 1 SCOPE
Section 101, General.
101.1 Title. These regulations shall be known as the Electrical Code of The
City of Reading, Pennsylvania and shall be cited as such and will be referred
to herein as "this code."
101.2 Purpose. The purpose of this code is to provide minimum standards to
safeguard life or limb, health, property and public welfare by regulating and
controlling the design, construction, installation, materials, location,
operation, or use of electrical systems and equipment and incorporating the
recitals above herein.
101.3 Scope. This code shall regulate the design, construction, installation,
alteration, repairs, relocation, replacement, addition to, or use, of any
electrical systems and equipment in all residential, commercial, institutional,
and industrial applications located in the City of Reading, Berks County,
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
Section 102, Applicability.
102.1 General. The provisions of this code shall apply to all matters affecting
or relating to structures and premises, as set forth in Section 101.
102.1.1 Existing installations. Except as otherwise provided for in this
chapter, a provision in this code shall not require the removal, alteration or
abandonment of, nor prevent the continued utilization and maintenance of,
existing electrical system, and equipment lawfully in existence at the time of
the adoption of this code.
102.1.2 Maintenance. Electrical systems, equipment, materials and
appurtenances, and parts thereof shall be maintained in proper operating
condition in accordance with the original design and in a safe, hazard-free
condition. Devices or safeguards that are required by this code shall be
maintained in compliance with the code edition under which installed. The owner
or the owner's designated agent shall be responsible for the maintenance of the
electrical systems and equipment. To determine compliance with this provision,
the code official shall have the authority to require that the electrical
systems and equipment be re-inspected.
102.1.3 Additions, alterations and repairs. Additions, alterations, renovations
and repairs to electrical systems and equipment shall conform to that required
for new electrical systems and equipment without requiring that the existing
electrical systems or equipment comply with all of the requirements of this
code. Additions, alterations and repairs shall not cause existing electrical
systems or equipment to become unsafe, hazardous or overloaded. Minor
additions, alterations, renovations and repairs to existing electrical systems
and equipment shall meet the provisions for new construction, except where such
work is performed in the same manner and arrangement as was in the existing
system, is not hazardous and is approved.
102.1.4 Change in occupancy. It shall be unlawful to make a change in the
occupancy of any structure that will subject the structure to any special
provision of this code applicable to the new occupancy without approval. The
Electrical Code Official shall certify that such structure meets the intent of
the provisions of law governing building construction for the proposed new
occupancy and that such change of occupancy does not result in any hazard to
public health, safety or welfare.
102.1.5 Moved buildings. Electrical systems and equipment that are a part of
buildings or structures moved into or within the jurisdiction shall comply with
the provisions of this code for new installations.
102.1.6 Special historic buildings. The provisions of this code relating to the
alterations, repair, replacement, or restoration of those structures designated
as historic buildings shall not be mandatory when such work is deemed to be
safe and in the public interest of health, safety and welfare by the Electrical
Code Official.
102.2 Differences. Where, in any specific case, different sections of this code
specify different materials, methods of construction or other requirements, the
most restrictive shall govern. Where there is a conflict between a general
requirement and a specific requirement, the specific requirement shall be
applicable.
102.3 Other laws. The provisions of this code shall not be deemed to nullify
any provisions of local, state or federal law.
102.4 Validity. In the event any part or provision of this code is held to be
illegal or void, this shall not have the effect of making void or illegal any
of the other parts or provisions thereof. which are determined to be legal; and
it shall be presumed that this code would have been adopted without such
illegal or invalid parts or provisions.
102.4.1 Segregation of invalid provisions. Any invalid part of this code shall
be segregated from the remainder of this code by the court holding such part
invalid, and the remainder shall remain effective.
102.5 Application of references. References to chapter or section numbers, or
to provisions not specifically identified by number, shall be construed to
refer to such chapters, sections or provisions of this code.
102.6 Referenced codes and standards. The codes and standards referenced in
this code shall be those that are listed in Chapter 13 and such codes and
standards shall be considered part of the requirements of this code to the
prescribed extent of each such reference. Where differences occur between
provisions of this code and referenced codes or standards, the provisions of
this code shall apply.
   Exception: Where enforcement of a code provision would violate the
conditions of the listing of the equipment or appliance, the conditions of the
listing and manufacturer's instructions shall apply.
102.7 Appendices. Provisions in the appendices shall not apply unless
specifically referenced in the adopting ordinance.
102.8 Subjects not regulated by this code. Where no applicable standards or
requirements are set forth in this code, or are contained within other laws,
codes, regulations, ordinances or bylaws adopted by the City of Reading,
compliance with applicable standards of nationally recognized standards as are
approved shall be deemed as prima facie evidence of compliance with the intent
of this code. Nothing herein shall derogate from the authority of the
Electrical Code Official to determine compliance with codes or standards for
those activities or installations within the Electrical Code Official's
jurisdiction or responsibility.
CHAPTER 2 DEFINITIONS
Section 201, General
201.1 Scope. Unless otherwise expressly stated, the following words and terms
shall, for the purposes of this
code, have the meanings indicated in this chapter.
201.2 Interchangeability. Words used in the present tense include the future;
words in the masculine gender include the feminine and neuter; the singular
number includes the plural and the plural, the singular.
201.3 Terms defined in other codes. Where terms are not defined in this code
and are defined in the International Building Code, International Energy
Conservation Code, International Fire Code, International Fuel Gas Code,
International Mechanical Code, International Plumbing Code, International
Private Sewage Disposal Code, International Residential Code, International
Zoning Code or NFPA 70(NEC), such terms shall have meanings ascribed to them as
in those codes.
201.4 Terms not defined. Where terms are not defined through the methods
authorized by this section, such terms shall have ordinarily accepted meanings
such as the context implies.
Section 202, General definitions.
Alternative energy system. Shall include any and all components of any system
that produces electrical power independent of the utility electrical grid.
Including but not limited to: generators, solar photovoltaic panels and arrays,
battery banks, wind turbines, all associated electronic controls, control
wiring, disconnecting means, overcurrent protection, metering equipment, all
associated wiring, mounting appurtenances, and hardware. An Alternative Energy
System can be either connected to the Utility Grid (grid tied) or a standalone
(is/and) system.
Approved. Approved by the Electrical Code Official or other authority having
jurisdiction.
Approved agency. An established and recognized agency regularly engaged in
conducting tests or furnishing inspection services, where the agency has been
approved by the Electrical Code Official.
Electrical Code Official. The officer or other designated authority charged
with the administration and enforcement of this code, or a duly authorized
representative.
Electrical utility grid. The portions of a wiring system that are owned or
leased by an electric utility for the purpose of communications, metering,
generation, control, transformation, or distribution of electric energy to the
defined Service Point of a premises.
Listed and listing. Equipment, appliances or materials included in a list
published by a nationally recognized testing laboratory, inspection agency or
other organization concerned with product evaluation that maintains periodic
inspection of the production of listed equipment, appliances or materials, and
whose listing states either that the equipment, appliances or materials meet
nationally recognized standards, or has been tested and found suitable for use
in a specified manner. Not all testing laboratories, inspection agencies and
other organizations concerned with product evaluation use the same means for
identifying listed equipment, appliances or materials. Some do not recognize
equipment, appliances or materials as listed unless they are also labeled. The
authority having jurisdiction shall utilize the system employed by the listing
organization to identify a listed product.
Low voltage system. Shall include any and all components of a premises wiring
system, or an alternative energy system operating at voltages under 50 volts A/
C or D/C. Including but not limited to: alarm systems, voice, data, signaling,
CCTV, or telecommunications systems, automation, and industrial control
systems.
Material. By "material" shall be understood all electrical appliances and
electrical fixtures electrical apparatus, electric power appliances, electric
wiring, electrical fixtures and fittings, all wiring devices of any kind or
nature used as a part of any installation for the transmission or consumption
of electrical energy and including the electrical installation and apparatus
used in connection with and adjunctive to heating, cooking, plumbing,
ventilating and refrigerating equipment, display and advertising signs and
water heaters, alternative energy equipment, and voice, data, sound, or
telecommunications equipment; provided, however, such terms shall not include
lamps or domestic electrical appliances severable from freehold without
material damage thereto.
Occupancy. The purpose for which a building, or part thereof, is utilized or
occupied.
Premises wiring system. Shall include any and all components of a wiring system
that is supplied by the electrical utility grid. Including but not limited to:
service entrance conductors, load centers, switchgear, panel boards,
overcurrent protection, transformers, metering equipment, feeders, branch
circuits, and grounding conductors and systems.
Service point. The point of connection between the facilities of the serving
utility and the premises wiring.
CHAPTER 3 ORGANIZATION AND ENFORCEMENT
Section 301, Department of Electrical Inspection.
301.1 Creation of enforcement agency. The agency charged with the enforcement
of this code shall be The Building/Trades Division of the Community Development
Department of the City of Reading. This electrical code shall be enforced by
the Electrical Inspector (Electrical Code Official) of the City of Reading. The
function of the division shall be to assist the Electrical Code Official in the
administration and enforcement of the provisions of this code.
301.2 Appointment. A qualified Electrical Code Official shall be appointed by
the executive authority of the City of Reading.
301.3 Deputies. In accordance with the prescribed procedures of this
jurisdiction and with the concurrence of the appointing authority, the
Electrical Code Official shall have the authority to appoint a deputy code
official, the related technical officers, inspectors, plans examiners and other
employees. Such employees shall have powers as delegated by the Electrical Code
Official.
Section 302, Duties and powers of the Code Official.
302.1 General. The Electrical Code Official is hereby authorized and directed
to enforce the provisions of this code. The Electrical Code Official shall have
the authority to render interpretations of this code, and to adopt policies,
procedures, rules and regulations in order to clarify the application of its
provisions. Such interpretations, policies, procedures, rules and regulations
shall be in compliance with the intent and purpose of this code. Such policies
and procedures shall not have the effect of waiving requirements specifically
provided for in this code.
302.1.1 Qualifications. The Electrical Code Official, in order to be eligible
for appointment, shall:
1.   Have had not less than ten (10) years practical experience while the
holder of a City of Reading Master Electricians License or a Master
Electricians License that is issued by a jurisdiction that is recognized and
reciprocated by the City of Reading.
2.   Hold current certifications for Residential Electrical Inspector,
Commercial Electrical Inspector, and Electrical Plans Examiner as required by
the PA Dept of Labor and Industry, and UCC regulations.
302.2 Duties. The Code Official shall:
1.   Cause an inspection or inspections to be made by himself or his duly
authorized agents, upon installation, removal, extension or alteration of any
premises wiring systems, alternative energy systems, low voltage system, and
materials pursuant to this Part, to determine that the electrical work conforms
with the NEC, this Part and other ordinances of the City of Reading, and the
statutes of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
302.3 Rule-making authority. The Electrical Code Official shall have authority
as necessary in the interest of public health, safety and general welfare, to
adopt and promulgate rules and regulations and to designate requirements
applicable because of local climatic or other conditions. Such rules shall not
have the effect of waiving requirements specifically provided for in this code,
or of violating accepted engineering methods involving public safety.
302.4 Applications and permits. The Electrical Code Official is authorized to
receive applications, review construction documents and issue permits for the
installation of premises wiring systems, alternative energy systems, low
voltage systems, and materials, inspect the premises for which such permits
have been issued, and enforce compliance with the provisions of this code.
302.5 Notices and orders. The Electrical Code Official is authorized to issue
all necessary notices or orders in accordance with Chapter 10 as are required
to effect compliance with this code.
302.6 Identification. The Electrical Code Official shall carry proper
identification as required by Section 702.4.1.
302.7 Right of entry. The Electrical Code Official is authorized to enter the
structure or premises at reasonable times to inspect or perform the duties
imposed by this code in accordance with Section 702.4.
302.8 Department records. The Electrical Code Official as part of the Building/
Trades Division shall keep official records of applications received, permits
and certificates issued, fees collected, reports of inspections, notices and
orders issued, and as required by this code, such records shall be retained in
the official records for the period required for retention of public records.
302.8.1 Approvals and modifications. A record of approvals and modifications
granted shall be maintained by the Electrical Code Official and shall be
available for public inspection during business hours in accordance with
applicable laws.
302.8.2 Inspections. The Electrical Code Official shall keep a record of each
inspection made, including notices and orders issued, showing the findings and
disposition of each.
302.8.3 Alternative methods or materials. The application for modification,
alternative methods or materials and the final decision of the Electrical Code
Official shall be in writing and shall be officially recorded in the permanent
records of the code official.
302.9 Liability. The Electrical Code Official, officer or employee charged with
the enforcement of this code, while acting for the jurisdiction in good faith
and without malice in the discharge of the duties required by this code or
other pertinent law or ordinance, shall not thereby be rendered liable
personally, and is hereby relieved from all personal liability for any damage
accruing to persons or property as a result of any act or by reason of an act
or omission in the discharge of official duties. Any suit instituted against
any officer or employee because of an act performed by that officer or employee
in the lawful discharge of duties and under the provisions of this code shall
be defended by the legal representative of the jurisdiction until the final
termination of the proceedings.
   The Electrical Code Official or any subordinate shall not be liable for
costs in any action, suit or proceeding that is instituted in pursuance of the
provisions of this code; and any official, officer or employee, acting in good
faith and without malice, shall be free from liability for acts performed under
any of its provisions or by reason of any act or omission in the performance of
official duties in connection therewith.
Section 303 - Certificate of Occupancy.
303.1 Use and occupancy. No building or structure shall be used or occupied
until a certificate of occupancy has been provided in accordance with the
International Building Code.
CHAPTER 4 PERMITS AND FEES
Section 401, General.
401.1 Permits required. Permits required by this code shall be obtained from
the Electrical Code Official.
Permit fees, if any, shall be paid prior to issuance of the permit. Issued
permits shall be kept on the premises designated therein at all times and shall
be readily available for inspection by the Electrical Code Official.
401.2 Work requiring permit. It shall be unlawful for any individual person,
partnership, copartnership, firm, association, corporation or other legal
entity to commence or cause to commence any installation of electrical system
used for the transmission of electric current for electric lights heat or power
in existing buildings, structures or outdoor electrical displays or signs or in
the construction, reconstruction, alteration or repair of buildings, structures
or outdoor electrical displays or signs, or the alteration, replacement,
conversion or addition of same, without first applying for and obtaining a
permit to do so pursuant to this Part.
1.   Any necessary forms and applications required by utility companies shall
be secured before work commences.
2.   Service and repair work permits shall be secured within five days of
commencing work. New construction work permits shall be secured prior to
commencing work.
3.   In cases of emergency, the permit shall be secured, within 3 (three) days
of commencing work.
4.   New construction work permits, shall be secured prior to commencing work.
401.3 Work exempt from permit. The following work shall be exempt from the
requirement for a permit:
1.   Listed cord and plug connected temporary decorative lighting.
2.   Removal and replacement of existing, defective wiring devices with like
kind, without alteration to existing branch wiring.
3.   Removal and replacement of existing, defective light ballasts with like
kind, without alteration to existing branch wiring.
4.   Removal and replacement of existing, defective lamps with like kind,
without alteration to existing branch wiring.
5.   Removal and replacement of existing, defective branch circuit over-current
devices of the required capacity in the same location without alteration to
existing branch wiring.
6.   Temporary wiring for experimental purposes in suitable experimental
laboratories.
Exemption from the permit requirements of this code shall not be deemed to
grant authorization for work to be done in violation of the provisions of this
code or other laws or ordinances of this jurisdiction.
Section 402, Application.
402.1 General. The Electrical Code Official is authorized to receive
applications for and issue permits as required by this code.
402.2 Application. Process for obtaining electrical permits.
1.   Holders of a Master Electrician License, Special License or Electrical
Equipment and Appliance Contractor License when self-employed, as defined in
this code, before the installation, introduction or construction of any
premises wiring systems, alternative energy systems, low voltage system, and
materials within the City shall first file a written and signed application for
permit in the Building/Trades Division Office.
2.   Permit applications forms may be mailed to the Building/Trades Division
Office accompanied by the proper fee and a stamped, self-addressed envelope,
and the office shall issue the permit upon the approval of the Electrical Code
Official, pending any required plan reviews. Permits shall be displayed on the
premises where the work is being performed so they are visible from the street
before such work commences. The applicant, on the day of issue, shall pay to
the City of Reading all fees according to the existing schedule of fees.
3.   Application for permits shall be made by a person holding a current Master
Electrician License, Special License or Electrical Equipment and Appliance
Contractor License issued by the Building/Trades Division of the City of
Reading. Every Electrical Contracting Business must a have a holder of a
current Master Electrician License, Special License or Electrical Equipment and
Appliance Contractor License assigned to apply for permits from the Building/
Trades Division for the City of Reading. There can be only 1 (one) holder of a
Master Electrician License, Special License or Electrical Equipment and
Appliance Contractor License designated by any individual business to pull
permits. All businesses shall give immediate notice of any change in the person
holding the Master Electrician License, Special License or Electrical Equipment
and Appliance Contractor License authorized to apply for permits for that
business. Every holder of a Master Electrician License, Special License or
Electrical Equipment and Appliance Contractor License shall be permitted to
apply for/obtain permits from the Building/Trades Division for only 1 (one)
business. A holder of a Master Electrician License, Special License or
Electrical Equipment and Appliance Contractor License shall not be permitted to
apply for/obtain permits for more than 1 (one) business at any given time.
4.   Homeowner clause. Notwithstanding anything contrary to the provisions of
this code, a permit may be issued to the owner or owners of residential
property within the City provided they currently reside in said residential
property as their primary residence, to personally install electrical fixtures,
receptacles, switches, electrical wiring for domestic clothes washing machines,
dryers, or water heaters, garbage disposals and/or any electric heat. When it
is necessary to increase/replace the service entrance and/or the load center
equipment, in order to accommodate any additional light, heat, or power loads,
such changes shall made be by a licensed master electrician.
   Homeowners installing wiring for alternative energy systems that are grid
tied must have a Licensed Master Electrician make any final connections to
utility and metering equipment.
5.   Certificate of Insurance. Prior to the issuance of any permit, the
Contractor shall deposit and execute to the Building/Trades Division of the
City of Reading, a Certificate of Insurance establishing that the Contractor is
currently covered by a reputable Insurance Company, licensed to do business in
the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania. The Contractor shall be covered for:
   •   PROPERTY DAMAGES, in the amount of not less than $50,000.00 (Fifty
Thousand Dollars)for any one claim and not less than $100,000. 00 (One Hundred
Thousand Dollars) for multiple claims, arising from the same undertaking.
   •   BUSINESS LIABILITY INSURANCE, in the amount of not less than $100,000.00
(One Hundred Thousand Dollars) for any one claim and not less than $300,000.00
(Three Hundred Thousand Dollars) for multiple claims, arising from the same
undertaking.
   •   WORKMEN'S COMPENSATION, the Certificate shall be for Continuous Coverage
unless cancelled by the Insurance Company. At which time, the Building/Trades
Division shall be notified in writing, 30 (thirty) days prior to the
cancellation by said Insurance Company.
402.3 Action on application. The Electrical Code Official shall examine or
cause to be examined applications for permits and amendments thereto within 30
(thirty) business days for commercial/industrial/institutional projects and 15
(fifteen/days for residential projects, after filing. If the application or the
construction documents do not conform to the requirements of pertinent laws,
the Electrical Code Official shall reject such application in writing, stating
the reasons therefore. If the Electrical Code Official is satisfied that the
proposed work conforms to the requirements of this code and laws and ordinances
applicable thereto, the Electrical Code Official shall issue a permit therefore
as soon as practicable.
402.4 Inspection required. Before a permit is issued, the Electrical Code
Official is authorized to inspect and approve the systems, equipment,
buildings, devices, premises and spaces or areas to be used.
402.5 Time limitation of application. An application for a permit for any
proposed work or operation shall be deemed to have been abandoned 180 (one
hundred eighty) days after the date of filing, unless such application has been
pursued in good faith or a permit has been issued; except that the Electrical
Code Official is authorized to grant one or more extensions of time for
additional periods not exceeding 90 (ninety) days each. The extension shall be
requested in writing and justifiable cause demonstrated.
Section 403, Conditions.
403.1 Conditions of a permit. A permit shall constitute permission to conduct
work as set forth in this code in accordance with the provisions of this code.
Such permission shall not be construed as authority to violate, cancel or set
aside any of the provisions of this code or other applicable regulations or
laws of the jurisdiction.
403.2 Expiration. Every permit issued shall become invalid unless the work on
the site authorized by such permit is commenced within 180 (one hundred eighty)
days after its issuance, or if the work authorized on the site by such permit
is suspended or abandoned for a period of 180 days after the time the work is
commenced. The Electrical Code Official is authorized to grant, in writing, one
or more extensions of time, for periods not more than 180 (one hundred eighty)
days each. The extension shall be requested in writing and justifiable cause
demonstrated.
403.3 Extensions. The Electrical Code Official is authorized to grant, in
writing, one or more extensions of the time period of a permit for periods of
not more than 90 (ninety) days each. Such extensions shall be requested by the
permit holder in writing and justifiable cause demonstrated.
403.4 Posting the permit. Issued permits shall be kept on the premises
designated therein at all times and shall be posted in a conspicuous place, and
readily available for inspection by the Electrical Code Official.
403.5 Validity. The issuance or granting of a permit shall not be construed to
be a permit for, or an approval of, any violation of any of the provisions of
this code or of any other ordinance of the jurisdiction. Permits presuming to
give authority to violate or cancel the provisions of this code or other
ordinances of the jurisdiction shall not be valid. The issuance of a permit
based on construction documents and other data shall not prevent the Electrical
Code Official from requiring the correction of errors in the construction
documents and other data. The Electrical Code Official is also authorized to
prevent occupancy or use of a structure where in violation of this code or of
any other ordinances of this jurisdiction.
403.6 Information on the permit. The Electrical Code Official shall issue all
permits required by this code on an approved form furnished for that purpose.
The permit shall contain a general description of the operation or occupancy
and its location and any other information required by the Electrical Code
Official Issued permits shall bear the signature of the Electrical Code
Official.
403.7 Suspension or revocation. The Electrical Code Official is authorized to
suspend or revoke a permit issued under the provisions of this code wherever
the permit is issued in error, on the basis of incorrect, inaccurate or
incomplete information; in violation of any ordinance, regulation or any of the
provisions of this code; or if any one of the following conditions exists:
1.   The permit is used for a location or establishment other than that for
which it was issued.
2.   The permit is used for a condition or activity other than that listed in
the permit.
3.   Conditions and limitations set forth in the permit have been violated.
4.   There have been any false statements or misrepresentations as to the
material fact in the application for permit or plans submitted or a condition
of the permit.
5.   The permit is used by a different person or firm than the name for which
it was issued.
6.   The permitee failed, refused or neglected to comply with orders or notices
duly served in accordance with the provisions of this code within the time
provided therein.
7.   The permit was issued in error or in violation of an ordinance, regulation
or this code.
Section 404, Fees.
404.1 Payment of fees. A permit shall not be valid until the fees prescribed by
law have been paid. Nor shall an amendment to a permit be released until the
additional fee, if any, has been paid.
404.2 Trades permit fee schedule. All tradespersons shall pay permit fees based
on labor and materials, as provided in
Chapter 212, Fees, prior to commencing work or performing services in or upon
all premises within the City based upon aggregate cost of labor and materials:
Administrative fee.
   In addition to the aforesaid fee, all tradespersons shall be required to pay
an administrative fee as provided in
Chapter 212, Fees, for each permit applied for and received. This fee is in
addition to the above-listed permit fee.
   The Electrical Code Official or officials of the Building/Trades Division
reserve the right to undertake any and all appropriate and applicable methods
including but not limited to commencement of legal action to obtain the
difference of the fee submitted for a permit and stated job valuation and the
as built costs.
404.3 Work commencing before permit issuance. Commencement of a project without
a permit or commencing additional work in excess of the value of an existing
permit will result in a charge of 100% (one hundred percent) of the usual
permit fee in addition to normal fee or doubling of the cost of the permit fee.
404.4 Related fees. The payment of the fee for the construction, alteration,
removal or demolition for work done in connection with, or concurrently with,
the work authorized by a permit shall not relieve the applicant or holder of
the permit from the payment of other fees that are prescribed by law.
404.5 Refunds. Upon written documentation and confirmation that a project was
not commenced, 80% (eighty percent) of the permit fee, excluding the $4.00
(four dollar) administrative fee is refundable.
No refund will be issued for plan reviews.
CHAPTER 5 CONSTRUCTION DOCUMENTS
Section 501, General.
501.1 Submittal documents. Construction documents, special inspection and
structural observation programs, and other data shall be submitted in 2 (two)
sets with each application for a permit. The construction documents shall be
prepared by a registered design professional where required by the Electrical
Code Official. Where special conditions exist, the Electrical Code Official is
authorized to require additional construction documents to be prepared by a
registered design professional.
   Exception. The Electrical Code Official is authorized to waive the
submission of construction documents and other data not required to be prepared
by a registered design professional if it is found that the nature of the work
applied for is such that reviewing of construction documents is not necessary
to determine compliance with this code.
501.2 Information on construction documents. Construction documents shall be
drawn to scale upon suitable material. Electronic media documents are permitted
to be submitted where approved by the Electrical Code Official. Construction
documents shall be of sufficient clarity to indicate the location, nature and
extent of the work proposed and show in detail that it will conform to the
provisions of this code and relevant laws, ordinances, rules and regulations,
as determined by the Electrical Code Official.
501.2.1 Penetrations. Construction documents shall indicate where penetrations
will be made for electrical systems and shall indicate the materials and
methods for maintaining required structural safety, fire-resistance rating and
fire-blocking as per the specific UL design for each application.
501.2.2 Load calculations. Where an addition or alteration is made to an
existing electrical system, an electrical load calculation shall be prepared to
determine if the existing electrical service has the capacity to serve the
added load.
501.3 Site plan. The construction documents submitted with the application for
permit shall be accompanied by a site plan showing to scale the size and
location of new construction and existing structures on the site, distances
from lot lines, the established street grades and the proposed finished grades;
and it shall be drawn in accordance with an accurate boundary line survey. In
the case of demolition, the site plan shall show construction to be demolished
and the location and size of existing structures and construction that are to
remain on the site or plot. The Electrical Code Official is permitted to waive
or modify the requirement for a site plan where the application for permit is
for alteration or repair or where otherwise warranted.
Section 502, Examination of Documents.
502.1 General. The Electrical Code Official shall examine or cause to be
examined the accompanying construction documents and shall ascertain by such
examinations whether the construction indicated and described is in accordance
with the requirements of this code and other pertinent laws or ordinances.
502.2 Approval of construction documents. When the Electrical Code Official
issues a permit, the construction documents shall be approved. in writing or by
stamp, as "Reviewed for Code Compliance." 1 (One) set of construction documents
so reviewed shall be retained by the Electrical Code Official. The other set
shall be returned to the applicant, shall be kept at the site of work and shall
be open to inspection by the Electrical Code Official or the authorized
representative.
502.2.1 Previous approvals. This code shall not require changes in the
construction documents, construction or installation of electrical systems or
equipment for which a lawful permit has been heretofore issued or otherwise
lawfully authorized, and the construction of which has been pursued in good
faith within 180 (one hundred eighty/days after the effective date of this code
and has not been abandoned.
502.2.2 Phased approval. The Electrical Code Official is authorized to issue a
permit for the installation of part of an electrical system before the
construction documents for the electrical system have been submitted, provided
that adequate information and detailed statements have been filed complying
with pertinent requirements of this code. The holder of such permit shall
proceed at the holder's own risk with the building operation and without
assurance that a permit for the entire system will be granted.
Section 503, Design Professional in Responsible Charge.
503.1 General. Where it is required that documents be prepared by a registered
design professional, the Electrical Code Official shall require the owner to
engage and designate on the permit application a registered design professional
who shall act as the registered design professional in responsible charge. If
the circumstances require, the owner shall be permitted to designate a
substitute registered design professional in responsible charge who shall
perform the duties required of the original registered design professional in
responsible charge. The Electrical Code Official shall be notified in writing
by the owner if the registered design professional in responsible charge is
changed or is unable to perform the duties.
The registered design professional in responsible charge shall be responsible
for reviewing and coordinating submittal documents prepared by others,
including phased and deferred submittal items, for compatibility with the
design of the system.
Section 504, Handling Submittals.
504.1 Deferred submittals. For the purposes of this section, deferred
submittals are defined as those portions of the design that are not submitted
at the time of the application and that are to be submitted to the Electrical
Code Official within a specified period.
Deferral of any submittal items shall have the prior approval of the Electrical
Code Official. The registered design professional in responsible charge shall
list the deferred submittals on the construction documents for review by the
Electrical Code Official.
Submittal documents for deferred submittal items shall be submitted to the
registered design professional in responsible charge, who shall review them and
forward them to the Electrical Code Official with a notation indicating that
the deferred submittal documents have been reviewed and that they have been
found to be in general compliance with the design of the system. The deferred
submittal items shall not be installed until their design and submittal
documents have been approved by the Electrical Code Official.
504.2 Amended construction documents. Work shall be installed in accordance
with the reviewed construction documents, and any changes made during
construction which are not in compliance with the approved construction
documents shall be resubmitted for approval as an amended set of construction
documents.
504.3 Retention of construction documents. One set of approved construction
documents shall be retained by the Electrical Code Official for a as long as
the related building, structure, or equipment exists as it relates to
commercial construction.
CHAPTER 6 APPROVAL
Section 601, General.
601.1 Approved materials and equipment. All premises wiring systems,
alternative energy systems, low voltage systems, and materials approved by the
Electrical Code Official shall be constructed and installed in accordance with
such approval.
   601.1.1 Technical assistance. To determine the acceptability of
technologies, processes, products, facilities, materials and uses attending the
design, operation or use of a building or premises subject to the inspection of
the department, the Electrical Code Official is authorized to require the owner
or the person in possession or control of the building or premises to provide,
without charge to the jurisdiction, a technical opinion and report. The opinion
and report shall be prepared by a qualified engineer, specialist, laboratory or
organization acceptable to the Electrical Code Official and shall analyze the
properties of the design, operation or use of the building or premises and the
facilities and appurtenances situated thereon, to recommend necessary changes.
The Electrical Code Official is authorized to require design submittals to be
prepared by and bear the stamp of a registered design professional.
601.2 Modification. Wherever there are practical difficulties involved in
carrying out the provisions of this code, the Electrical Code Official shall
have the authority to grant modifications for individual cases, provided the
Electrical Code Official shall first find that special individual reason makes
the strict letter of this code impractical and that the modification is in
compliance with the intent and purpose of this code, and that such modification
does not lessen health, life and fire-safety requirements. The details of
action granting modifications shall be recorded and entered in the files of the
Building/Trades Division.
601.3 Alternative materials, methods, equipment and appliances. The provisions
of this code are not intended to prevent the installation of any material or to
prohibit any method of construction not specifically prescribed by this code,
provided that any such alternative has been approved. An alternative material
or method of construction shall be approved where the code official finds that
the proposed design is satisfactory and complies with the intent of the
provisions of this code, and that the material, method or work offered is, for
the purpose intended, at least the equivalent of that prescribed in this code
in quality, strength, effectiveness, fire resistance, durability and safety.
601.4 Material, equipment and appliance reuse. Premises wiring systems,
alternative energy systems, low voltage systems, and materials shall not be
reused unless such elements have been reconditioned, tested and placed in good
and proper working condition and approved.
Section 602, Testing.
602.1 Required testing. Wherever there is insufficient evidence of compliance
with the provisions of this code, or evidence that a material or method does
not conform to the requirements of this code, or in order to substantiate
claims for alternative materials or methods, the Electrical Code Official shall
have the authority to require tests as evidence of compliance to be made at no
expense to the jurisdiction.
602.2 Test methods. Test methods shall be as specified in this code or by other
recognized test standards. In the absence of recognized and accepted test
methods, the Electrical Code Official shall approve the testing procedures.
602.3 Testing agency. All tests shall be performed by an approved agency.
602.4 Test reports. Reports of tests shall be retained by the Electrical Code
Official for the period required for retention of public records .
Section 603, Alternative Engineered Design.
603.1 General. The design, documentation, inspection, testing and approval of
an alternative engineered design electrical system shall comply with this
section.
603.2 Design criteria. An alternative engineered design shall conform to the
intent of the provisions of this code and shall provide an equivalent level of
quality, strength, effectiveness, fire resistance, durability and safety.
Premises wiring system, alternative energy systems, low voltage systems, and
materials shall be designed and installed in accordance with the manufacturer's
installation instructions.
603.3 Submittal. The registered design professional shall indicate on the
permit application that the electrical system is an alternative engineered
design. The permit and permanent permit records shall indicate that an
alternative engineered design was part of the approved installation.
603.4 Technical data. The registered design professional shall submit
sufficient technical data to substantiate the proposed alternative engineered
design and to prove that the performance meets the intent of this code.
603.5 Construction documents. The registered design professional shall submit
to the Electrical Code Official 2 (two) complete sets of signed and sealed
construction documents for the alternative engineered design. The construction
documents shall include floor plans and a diagram of the work.
603.6 Design approval. Where the Electrical Code Official determines that the
alternative engineered design conforms to the intent of this code, the
electrical system shall be approved. If the alternative engineered design is
not approved, the Electrical Code Official shall notify the registered design
professional in writing, stating the reasons therefore.
603.7 Inspection and testing. The alternative engineered design shall be tested
and inspected in accordance with the requirements of this code.
CHAPTER 7 INSPECTIONS AND TESTING
Section 701, General.
701.1 General. The Electrical Code Official is authorized to conduct
inspections that are deemed necessary to determine the extent of compliance
with the provisions of this code and to approve reports of inspection by
approved agencies or individuals. All reports of such inspections shall be
prepared and submitted in writing for review and approval. Inspection reports
shall be certified by a responsible officer of such approved agency or by the
responsible individual. The Electrical Code Official is authorized to engage
such expert opinion as deemed necessary to report upon unusual, detailed or
complex technical issues subject to the approval of the governing body.
Section 702, Required Inspections.
702.1 General. The Electrical Code Official, upon notification, shall make the
inspections set forth in this section.
702.1.1 Evaluation and follow-up inspection services. Prior to the approval of
a prefabricated construction assembly having concealed electrical work and the
issuance of an electrical permit, the Electrical Code Official shall require
the submittal of an evaluation report on each prefabricated construction
assembly, indicating the complete details of the electrical system, including a
description of the system and its components, the basis upon which the system
is being evaluated, test results and similar information, and other data as
necessary for the Electrical Code Official to determine conformance to this
code.
702.1.1.1 Evaluation service. The Electrical Code Official shall designate the
evaluation service of an approved agency as the evaluation agency, and review
such agency's evaluation report for adequacy and conformance to this code.
702.1.1.2 Follow-up inspection. Except where ready access is provided to
electrical systems, service equipment and accessories for complete inspection
at the site without disassembly or dismantling, the Electrical Code Official
shall conduct the in-plant inspections as frequently as necessary to ensure
conformance to the approved evaluation report or shall designate an
independent, approved inspection agency to conduct such inspections. The
inspection agency shall furnish the Electrical Code Official with the follow-up
inspection manual and a report of inspections upon request, and the electrical
system shall have an identifying label permanently affixed to the system
indicating that factory inspections have been performed.
702.1.1.3 Test and inspection records. Required test and inspection records
shall be available to the Electrical Code Official at all times during the
fabrication of the electrical system and the erection of the building; or such
records as the Electrical Code Official designates shall be filed.
702.1.2 Concealed work. Work shall remain accessible and exposed for inspection
purposes until approved. It shall be the duty of the permit applicant to cause
the work to remain accessible and exposed for inspection purposes. Wherever any
installation subject to inspection prior to use is covered or concealed without
having first been inspected, the Electrical Code Official shall have the
authority to require that such work be exposed for inspection. Neither the
Electrical Code Official nor the jurisdiction shall be liable for expense
entailed in the removal or replacement of any material required to allow
inspection.
702.1.3 Underground. Underground inspection shall be made after trenches or
ditches are excavated and bedded, piping and conductors are installed, and
before back fill is put in place. Where excavated soil contains rocks, broken
concrete, frozen chunks and other rubble that would damage or break the
raceway, cable or conductors, or where corrosive action will occur, protection
shall be provided in the form of granular or selected material, approved
running boards, sleeves or other means.
702.1.4 Rough-in. Rough-in inspection shall be made after the roof, framing,
fire blocking and bracing are in place and all wiring and other components to
be concealed are complete, and prior to the installation of wall or ceiling
membranes.
702.1.5 Other inspections. In addition to the inspections specified above, the
Electrical Code Official is authorized to make or require other inspections of
any construction work to ascertain compliance with the provisions of this code
and other laws, which are enforced by the Building/Trades Division of the City
of Reading.
702.1.6 Final inspection. The final inspection shall be made after all work
required by the permit is completed.
702.1.8 Inspection record card. Work requiring a permit shall not be commenced
until the permit holder or an agent of the permit holder shall have posted or
otherwise made available an inspection record card such as to allow the
Electrical Code Official to make conveniently the required entries thereon
regarding inspection of the work. This card shall be maintained by the permit
holder until final approval has been granted by the Electrical Code Official.
702.1.9 Approval required. Work shall not be performed beyond the point
indicated in each successive inspection and test without first obtaining the
approval of the Electrical Code Official. The Electrical Code Official, upon
notification, shall make the requested inspections and tests and shall either
indicate the portion of the construction that is satisfactory as completed, or
shall notify the permit holder or an agent of the permit holder wherein the
same fails to comply with this code. Any portions that do not comply shall be
corrected and such portion shall not be covered or concealed until authorized
by the Electrical Code Official.
702.2 Validity. Approval as a result of an inspection shall not be construed to
be an approval of a violation of the provisions of this code or of other
ordinances of the jurisdiction. Inspections presuming to give authority to
violate or cancel the provisions of this code or of other ordinances of the
jurisdiction shall not be valid.
702.3 Preliminary inspection. Before issuing a permit, the Electrical Code
Official is authorized to examine or cause to be examined buildings, structures
and sites for which an application has been filed. The Electrical Code Official
shall be notified when the installation is ready for inspection and is
authorized to conduct the inspection within a reasonable period of time.
702.4 Entry. The Electrical Code Official is authorized to enter and examine
any building, structure, marine vessel, vehicle or premises in accordance with
Section 702.4.3 for the purpose of enforcing this code.
702.4.1 Identification. The Electrical Code Official shall carry proper
identification issued by the governing authority where inspecting structures,
premises or facilities in the performance of duties under this code and shall
be identified by proper credentials issued by this governing authority.
702.4.2 Impersonation prohibited. A person shall not impersonate the Electrical
Code Official through the use of a uniform, identification card, badge or any
other means.
702.4.3 Refusal of entry. If any owner, occupant or other person in charge of a
structure subject to the provisions of this code refuses, impedes, inhibits,
interferes with, restricts or obstructs entry and free access to every part of
the structure or premises where inspection authorized by this code is sought,
the administrative authority shall promptly apply for a search or inspection
warrant to a court of competent jurisdiction and shall supply all necessary
affidavits and testimony to indicate that there is reasonable or probable cause
to conduct an inspection. For the purposes of this section, a reasonable or
probable cause to gain access for an inspection shall include without being
limited to any of the following:
1.   That the inspection of the area is part of a planned routine inspection
being conducted pursuant to a systematic or concentrated code enforcement
program in that portion of the City.
2.   That the Electrical Code Official, after investigation or upon information
received, has knowledge, information or a reasonable belief that a violation of
this code or other codes and ordinances of the City exist.
3.   That such entry is for the purpose of inspecting a previous notice of
violation.
4.   That the Electrical Code Official has received a complaint concerning a
violation on or within the premises.
5.   That such entry is necessary to determine if the building, structure,
premises, dwelling or dwelling units meet code standards.
702.4.4 Notice of Inspection. When entry by the Electrical Code Official to any
building structure or premise has not been possible, a notice of inspection
shall be issued to the property owner or representative of the owner.
702.4.5 Rescheduling Inspections. If the owner or representative of the owner
cannot be available at the proposed time, said owner or representative shall
provide no less than 24 (twenty-four) hour written notice to the Building/
Trades Division Office. Upon failure to give such written notice or upon
failure to gain entry, an administrative fee (Section 212) will be assessed the
owner or representative of the owner failing to supply written notice or to
appear. For each rescheduling beyond the second rescheduling an administrative
fee (Section 212) shall be assessed in all cases.
702.4.6 Right of entry by owner. Every occupant of a dwelling unit, building,
structure or premises shall give the owner thereof, or his agent or employee
access to any part of such dwelling, dwelling unit, building, structure or
premises, at all reasonable times for the purpose of conducting inspections to
determine whether or not violations of this code may exist, or for the purpose
of making such repairs of alterations as are necessary to effect compliance
with the provisions of this code or with any lawful rule or regulation adopted
or any lawful order issued pursuant to the provisions of this code.
702.5 Inspection agencies. The Electrical Code Official is authorized to accept
reports of approved inspection agencies, at his sole discretion, provided such
agencies and their inspectors satisfy the same requirements required of the
City of Reading Electrical Code Official as to qualifications and reliability,
and are a recognized 3rd Party Agency, by the Commonwealth of PA, Dept of Labor
and Industry.
702.5.1 Waiver. The Electrical Code Official may waive, at his sole discretion,
his inspection to determine compliance with the National Electrical Code and
this Part of all or that portion of the proposed electrical work for which he
shall have received a duplicate record of approval by a certified third-party
inspection agency. The Code Official shall give notice so that the approved
work may be concealed.
702.6 Inspection requests. It shall be the duty of the electrical contractor
authorized by a permit to notify the Electrical Code Official that such work is
ready for inspection. It shall be the duty of the person requesting any
inspections required by this code to provide access to and means for inspection
of such work.
702.6.1 Exceptions for inspections. Notwithstanding the provisions of this
section, no inspection shall be required for service work that includes
replacement of existing sockets, fixtures, controls, motors or fuses where no
additional wiring is required.
702.7 Assistance from other agencies. The assistance and cooperation of police,
fire and health department officials and all other officials shall be available
as required to the Building/Trades Division of the City of Reading, in the
performance of its duties.
702.8 Licensing.
702.8.1 General.
1.   Any license issued by the Building/Trades Division is renewable.
2.   Licenses shall be issued annually and shall expire December 31.
   The annual electrical licensing fees are as follows:
      Master: $90
      Journeyman: $50
      Appliance Installer: $50
      Reciprocal $100 plus the fee for classification being reciprocated
3.   Applicants for a license shall be at least 18 years old.
4.   Applications for a license shall be made in writing with a $20
administrative fee at least 30 days prior to the date of the examination and
the applicant shall furnish such information in the form as the Electrical
Board may require.
5.   No license shall be transferable.
6.   Each license shall continue in force only so long as the same
representative continues to be associated with the license holder.
7.   The licensee shall be responsible for informing the Building/Trades
Division Office of any change of address.
8.   Applicants for an initial license shall attain a passing grade as follows:
   A.   Journeyman - 70%
   B.   Master - 75%
9.   All license fees and examination fees are nonrefundable and must accompany
application for said examination or license.
10.   An application for a change of license to a lower classification shall be
granted without examination.
11.   The Electrical Board may waive certain requirements for applicants for
licenses upon review to determine qualifications.
702.8.2 Classes of licenses. The Building/Trades Division shall issue the
following licenses for electrical work in the City:
1.   Master and journeyman electrician. It shall be unlawful for any person to
engage in the business of installing, altering or repairing any premises wiring
systems, alternative energy systems, low voltage systems, and materials for
electric light, heat or electrical power within the City unless he shall hold a
valid Master or Journeyman Electrician License as provided for herein.
2.   Special license. It shall be unlawful for any individual person,
partnership, co-partnership, firm, association, corporation owning, leasing or
managing a building, buildings or parts thereof situated within the City to
install, maintain and repair installed premises wiring systems, alternative
energy systems, low voltage systems, and material without first applying for
and obtaining a Special License pursuant to this Part.
3.   Special electrician. It shall be unlawful for any individual person in the
employ of another individual, partnership, co-partnership, firm, association,
corporation holding a Special License to install, alter or repair premises
wiring systems, alternative energy systems, low voltage systems, and material
for light, heat power, and for signaling systems in or on buildings or lots in
the City of Reading or to determine the method to be used and persons to be
employed or such work without first applying for and obtaining a Special
Electrician License pursuant to this Part.
4.   Appliance installer license. It shall be unlawful for any individual
person, partnership, co-partnership, firm, association, corporation to install,
or cause to be installed, repaired or maintained electrical equipment, air
conditioners, signs or equipment, utilized or designed for the utilization of
electricity for heat, power, or lighting purposes, communications systems,
alarms, sound systems and who carries on such business as an independent
electrical installer (dealer) or sign dealer having the final determination and
the full responsibility for the manner in which the work is done, for the
materials used and for the selection, supervision and control of any persons
employed on the work engaged in by such person, partnership or corporation and
who employs licensed Journeyman Electricians or electrical installers without
first applying for and obtaining an Appliance Installer License as listed
below, pursuant to this Part.
5.   Appliance installer license.
   'A' license. It shall be unlawful for any individual person, partnership,
co-partnership, firm, association, corporation to install, or cause to be
installed, repaired or maintained wiring for domestic clothes washing machines,
dryers, hot water heaters, garbage disposals, hot faucets, etc., heating
equipment loads not in excess of 10KW, sign equipment leads not in excess of 2-
1/2 KW and motors not in excess of 5 HP without first applying for and
obtaining an Electrical Installer 'A' License pursuant to this Part. (When
necessary to increase or add to the service entrance equipment, service feeders
or distribution equipment to accommodate additional light, heat or power loads,
such changes shall be by a Licensed Master Electrician).
   ‘B’ license. It shall be unlawful for any individual person, partnership,
co-partnership, firm, association, corporation to install, or cause to be
installed, repaired or maintained any fire detection system, fire alarm or
security alarm systems without first applying for and obtaining an Electrical
Installer 'B' License pursuant to this Part.
   'C' license. It shall be unlawful for any individual person, partnership,
co-partnership, firm, association, corporation to install, or cause to be
installed, repaired or maintained any low voltage systems without first
applying for and obtaining an electrical Installer 'C' License pursuant to this
Part.
702.8.3 Qualifications.
1.   Master electrician.
   All master electrician licenses shall be renewed upon satisfactory showing
of an intention to continue the business of electrical contracting as a master
electrician.
   Initial master electrician license. Every applicant for an initial master
electrician license shall:
   A.   Have been a holder of a City of Reading Journeyman Electricians license
or a Journeyman Electricians license that is issued by a jurisdiction that is
recognized and reciprocated by the City of Reading for a period of 2 (two)
years.
   B.   Shall pass such examinations as the Electrical Board requires.
2.   Journeyman electrician.
   All journeyman electrician licenses shall be renewed upon the satisfactory
showing of an intention to continue the business of electrical installation as
a journeyman electrician.
   Initial journeyman electrician licenses. Every applicant for an initial
journeyman electrician license shall:
   A.   Be in the employ of a registered master electrician; and
   B.   Be registered with the Pennsylvania Bureau of Apprenticeship Training,
Department of Labor and Industry; and
   C.   Have completed at least four years of approved apprenticeship training,
been instructed in subjects related to the trade not less than 144 hours per
year during the four-year apprenticeship; or have worked a minimum of eight
years under the supervision of a registered master electrician; or
   D.   Provide documentation of having worked a minimum of 8 (eight) years
under the supervision of a Registered Master Electrician.
   E.   Shall pass such examinations as the Electrical Board requires.
3.   Special license. A special license shall be granted, on application, to
owners of buildings within the City used for public service or commercial
business that employ a special electrician.
4.   Special electrician. The City may issue a special electrician's license to
a person who:
   A.   Has qualified as a competent person to install, alter or repair
premises wiring systems, alternative energy systems, and material for electric
wiring, appliances for light, heat, power and for signaling systems in or on
buildings or lots in the City and
   B.    Who has had not less than three years of practical experience in
electrical work; and
   C.    Who is the employee of a holder of a special license as defined in
clause (3) hereof.
   D.   Shall pass such examinations as the Electrical Board requires.
5.   Appliance installer.
   Initial licenses. Those who apply for an initial appliance installer license
under this section:
   A.   Shall be in the employ of an appliance contractor.
   B.   Shall have had not less than one year of practical experience in the
electrical field.
   C.   Shall apply in writing at least 30 days prior to the time of
examination and shall pay to the City Treasurer the prescribed examination fee.
   D.   Shall pass such examinations as the Electrical Board requires.
6.   Reciprocal license. The following rules shall apply for issuing a
reciprocal license for electrical work within the City:
   A.   The City shall recognize a license issued by a foreign jurisdiction of
equal or greater standing than a third class city, provided that said license
is issued by an equivalent Board with equivalent standards as the City of
Reading.
   B.   License applications along with all pertinent data required by the
Electrical Board shall be presented to the Electrical Board for review and
determination of qualification for said license.
   C.   Licenses issued as reciprocating licenses shall be considered a
permanent City of Reading electrical license subject to the provisions of this
code.
7.   Retired license. All persons licensed under this Electrical Code shall, on
retirement from business, surrender any license to the Building/Trades Division
Office. Upon surrendering such license the Building/Trades Division Office
shall issue a certificate of retired license which may be reinstated within a
period of five years without examination, upon written request for such
reinstatement to the Electrical Board.
8.   Apprentice electrician. Any person who is registered with the Pennsylvania
Bureau of Apprentice Training, Department of Labor, and who shall comply with
the Department's rules and regulations. Apprentice electricians shall not be
permitted to install electrical work unless under the supervision of a
registered electrician.
702.8.4 Provisions and conditions.
1.   All licenses covered under this code shall be issued annually and shall
expire December 31.
2.   All licenses may be renewed upon timely application. If the holder of a
license fails to renew said license each year, the full fee plus a $25.00
surcharge must be paid for all of the years that the license was not renewed
before a license shall be issued. Any holders attempting to renew a license
after the 5th (fifth) consecutive year of non-renewal shall be required to pass
an examination as required by the Electrical Board.
3.   Farming of license. Any license holder who allows another person to
perform electrical work, secure permits, etc. using such person's license shall
be in violation of this Code.
4.   Every Master Electrician engaged in the business of electrical contracting
in the City of Reading and using a truck in that business, shall have printed
on the left side door (driver's side), the letter M.E. (Master Electrician
License) along with the permanent license number issued or the name of person,
firm or corporation and a legend depicting that he is a Licensed Master
Electrician in clearly visible letters not less that 2 (two) inches high.
5.   Every Appliance Contractor engaged in the business of appliance
contracting in the City of Reading and using a truck in that business, shall
have printed on the left side door (driver's side), the letters A.I.E.
(Appliance Installer Electrical) along with the permanent license number
issued, or the name of the person, firm or corporation and a legend depicting
that he is a registered appliance contractor in clearly visible letters no less
than 2 (two) inches high.
702.8.5 Suspension or revocation.
1.   The Electrical Board may review the status of any license issued in
conformity with this code. In the event such license was partially or wholly
procured by or through nondisclosure, misstatement or misrepresentation or the
bearer of such license has had repeated violations of this code or a previously
imposed penalty has not been met with full compliance, the Electrical Board
shall determine if a license suspension or revocation may be in order.
2.   The Electrical Board shall cause to be served upon such licensee by
personal service or certified mail, a written notice of a hearing setting forth
in specific terms and language the nature of the violation(s), the time(s)
thereof and place(s) of occurrence. Such written notice shall also set forth a
place, date and time where the licensee may appear before the aforesaid
Electrical Board with counsel if desired, to hear sworn testimony as to the
violation(s) the licensee is alleged to have committed and for which his
license is subject to suspension or revocation, as the case may be. The
licensee or his counsel shall be permitted to examine any witness giving
testimony against him as well as being given the privilege of offering
testimony or other proof or exhibits as a defense or rebuttal to the
allegations. The hearing before the aforesaid Electrical Board shall require
recordation, but shall be informal in nature, and shall not occur less than 30
(thirty) days nor more than 90 (ninety) days from the date of service of the
written notice upon the licensee. In the event the licensee or counsel fail to
appear at the place, date and time fixed for a hearing, the aforesaid
Electrical Board shall nevertheless convene for the purpose of hearing evidence
and/or testimony in order to arrive at its determination to recommend
suspension or revocation of said license pursuant to the within provisions.
3.   The decision of the aforesaid Electrical Board shall be rendered in
writing not more than 30 (thirty) days from the conclusion of the hearing to
the Building/Trades Division Chief Building Official who shall cause to be
executed an order to be served upon licensee in the same manner provided herein
for service of the written notice of hearing for the suspension or revocation
of license based upon the recommendation of the Electrical Board.
702.8.6 Trades reciprocity, examination and annual fees.
   Section 212
Section 703, Testing.
703.1 General. Electrical work shall be tested as required in this code. Tests
shall be performed by the permit holder and observed by the Electrical Code
Official.
703.2 Apparatus, material and labor for tests. Apparatus, material and labor
required for testing an electrical system or part thereof shall be furnished by
the permit holder.
703.3 Re-inspection and testing. Where any work or installation does not pass
an initial test or inspection, the necessary corrections shall be made so as to
achieve compliance with this code. The work or installation shall then be
resubmitted to the Electrical Code Official for inspection and testing.
CHAPTER 8 SERVICE UTILITIES
Section 801, General.
801.1 Connection of service utilities. No person shall make connections from a
utility, source of energy, fuel or power to any building or system that is
regulated by this code for which a permit is required, until such connections
are approved by the Electrical Code Official by the submission of a proper
utility "Cut-In-Card" containing a properly assigned Utility Design Request
(DR) number.
801.2 Temporary connection. The Electrical Code Official shall have the
authority to authorize the temporary connection of the building or system to
the utility source of energy, fuel or power.
801.3 Authority to disconnect service utilities. The Electrical Code Official
shall have the authority to authorize disconnection of utility services or
energy sources to the building, structure or system regulated by this code in
case of an emergency where it is necessary to eliminate an immediate hazard to
life or property. The Electrical Code Official shall notify the serving utility
and, wherever possible, the owner and occupant of the building, structure or
service system of the decision to disconnect prior to taking such action. If
not notified prior to disconnecting, the owner or occupant of the building,
structure or service system shall be notified in writing as soon as practical
thereafter.
801.3.1 Connection after order to disconnect. A person shall not make utility
service or energy source connections to systems regulated by this code, which
have been disconnected or ordered to be disconnected by the Electrical Code
Official, or the use of which has been ordered to be discontinued by the
Electrical Code Official until the Electrical Code Official authorizes the
reconnection and use of such systems.
CHAPTER 9 UNSAFE SYSTEMS AND EQUIPMENT
Section 901, Conditions.
901.1 Unsafe electrical systems. An electrical system that is unsafe,
constitutes a fire or health hazard, or is otherwise dangerous to human life,
as regulated by this code, is hereby declared as an unsafe electrical system.
Use of an electrical system regulated by this code constituting a hazard to
health, safety or welfare by reason of inadequate maintenance, dilapidation,
fire hazard, disaster, damage or abandonment is hereby declared an unsafe use.
Such unsafe equipment and appliances are hereby declared to be a public
nuisance and shall be abated by repair, rehabilitation, demolition or removal.
901.2 Authority to condemn electrical systems. Wherever the Electrical Code
Official determines that any electrical system, or portion thereof, regulated
by this code has become hazardous to life, health or property, the Electrical
Code Official shall order in writing that such electrical systems either be
removed or restored to a safe condition. A time limit for compliance with such
order shall be specified in the written notice. A person shall not use or
maintain a defective electrical system or equipment after receiving such
notice.
901.2.1 Disconnection. When a building has suffered damages as a result of a
fire, the Fire Marshal and the Electrical Code Official, acting together, may
judge it necessary for the safety of persons and property that the electrical
service be discontinued to said building. At such time that the Fire Marshal
and Electrical Code Official determine that service should be discontinued,
they shall have full authority to effect a disconnection.
   Where such electrical system is to be disconnected, written notice as
prescribed in this code shall be given. In cases of immediate danger to life or
property, such disconnection shall be made immediately without such notice.
901.3 Dangerous conditions. Wherever the Electrical Code Official shall find in
any structure or upon any premises dangerous or hazardous conditions or
materials, the Electrical Code Official is authorized to order such dangerous
conditions or materials to be removed or remedied in accordance with the
provisions of this code.
901.4 Record. The Electrical Code Official shall cause a report to be filed on
an unsafe condition. The report shall state the occupancy of the structure and
the nature of the unsafe condition.
901.5 Notice. If an unsafe condition is found, the Electrical Code Official
shall serve on the owner, agent or person in control of the structure, a
written notice that describes the condition deemed unsafe and specifies the
required repairs or improvements to be made to abate the unsafe condition, or
that requires the unsafe condition to be removed within a stipulated time. Such
notice shall require the person thus notified to declare immediately to the
Electrical Code Official acceptance or rejection of the terms of the order.
901.6 Method of service. Such notice shall be deemed properly served if a copy
thereof is: (a) delivered to the owner personally; or (b) sent by certified or
registered mail addressed to the owner at the last known address with the
return receipt requested. Additionally, a copy thereof shall be posted in a
conspicuous place in or about the structure affected by such notice. Service of
such notice in the foregoing manner upon the owner's agent or upon the person
responsible for the structure shall constitute service of notice upon the
owner.
CHAPTER 10 VIOLATIONS
Section 1001, Unlawful acts.
1001.1 General. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to
erect, construct, alter, extend, repair, move, remove, demolish or occupy any
premises wiring systems, alternative energy systems, low voltage systems, and
materials regulated by this code, or cause same to be done, in conflict with or
in violation of any of the provisions of this code.
1001.2 No license. No person, partnership, or corporation not the holder of a
current City of Reading electrical license shall install, alter or repair any
premises wiring systems, alternative energy systems, low voltage systems, and
materials for electric light, heat or power in or on any building and no
person, partnership or corporation shall cause any such work to be done by any
person, partnership or corporation not the holder of such license. No person,
partnership or corporation not the holder of such license shall falsely
represent that her or it holds such license or shall use in any advertising the
words, "Master Electrician," "Licensed Electrician" or "Electrical Contractor"
or any words of similar meaning or import on any sign, card, letterhead or in
any other manner.
1001.3 False statements. Whoever, with intent to defraud or deceive, knowingly
makes a false statement, or causes or procures to be made or aids and assists
in the making of a false statement in an application for a license or the
renewal of a license or in an application for certificate of electrical
inspection and approval or in connection therewith, or who shall in any
examination hereunder, deceive or substitute, shall be in violation of this
code.
Section 1002, Notice of violation.
1002.1 Issuance. Where the Electrical Code Official finds any building,
premises, vehicle, system or equipment that is in violation of this code, the
Electrical Code Official is authorized to issue corrective orders.
1002.2 Notice. Wherever the Electrical Code Official determines violations of
this code or observes an apparent or actual violation of a provision of this
code or other codes or ordinances under the Electrical Code Official's
jurisdiction, the Electrical Code Official is authorized to prepare a written
notice of violation describing the conditions deemed unsafe and, where
compliance is not immediate, specifying a time for re-inspection. Such order
shall direct the discontinuance of the illegal action or condition and the
abatement of the violation.
1002.3 Service. Any order or notice issued pursuant to this code shall be
served upon the owner, operator, occupant or other person responsible for the
condition or violation, either by personal service, mail or by delivering the
same to, and leaving it with, some person of responsibility upon the premises.
For unattended or abandoned locations, a copy of such order or notice shall be
posted on the premises in a conspicuous place at or near the entrance to such
premises, and the order or notice shall be mailed by certified mail with return
receipt requested or a certificate of mailing, to the last known address of the
owner, occupant or both.
1002.4 Compliance with orders and notices. Orders and notices issued or served
as provided by this code shall be complied with by the owner, operator,
occupant or other person responsible for the condition or violation to which
the order or notice pertains.
1002.5 Failure to correct violations. If the notice of violation is not
complied with, the Electrical Code Official is authorized to request the legal
counsel of the City of Reading to institute the appropriate legal proceedings
to restrain, correct or abate such violation or to require removal or
termination of the unlawful occupancy of the structure in violation of the
provisions of this code or of any order or direction made pursuant thereto.
1002.6 Failure to comply. Failure to comply with an abatement notice or other
corrective notice issued by the Electrical Code Official shall result in each
day that such violation continues being regarded as a new and separate offense.
1002.7 Unauthorized tampering. Signs, tags or seals posted or affixed by the
Electrical Code Official shall not be mutilated, destroyed or tampered with or
removed without authorization from the Electrical Code Official.
Section 1003, Penalties.
1003.1 Penalties. Any person who fails to comply with the provisions of this
code or who fails to carry out an order made pursuant of this code or violates
any condition attached to a permit, approval or certificate, upon conviction
thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of not less than $500.00 (five hundred
dollars)and not exceeding $1,000.00 (one thousand dollars) for the first 2
(two) offenses and not more than $5,000.00 (five thousand dollars) for the 3rd
(third) and successive offenses plus costs and restitution, or in default of
payment to imprisonment for a term not to exceed 30 (thirty) 1 (One) fine per
month per violation shall be assessed except that in the case of continual and
uncorrected violations that pose a threat to the public and violate the same
subsection of an ordinance for the same property can be assessed at one
citation per 5 (five) calendar days.
1003.1.1 Administrative fee. Any property owner who has more than 2 (two)
violations of this Code in any 12 (twelve) month period shall be required to
pay an administrative fee of $50.00 (fifty dollars) for the 3rd(third)
violation, $75.00 seventy-five dollars) for the 4th (fourth) violation and
$100.00 (one hundred dollars) for the 5th (fifth) and successive violations.
1003.2 Abatement of violation. The imposition of the penalties herein described
shall not prevent the legal officer of the City of Reading from instituting
appropriate action to prevent unlawful construction or to restrain, correct or
abate a violation; or to prevent illegal occupancy of a structure or premises;
or to stop an illegal act, conduct of business or occupancy of a structure on
or about any premises.
Section 1004, Stop-Work Orders.
1004.1 Issuance. Upon notice from the Electrical Code Official that any
electrical work is being done contrary to the provisions of this code or in a
dangerous or unsafe manner, such work shall immediately cease. Any such order
or notice issued pursuant to the provisions of this code may be served
personally upon the person, partnership or corporation to whom or to which it
is addressed, or may be served by mailing the same in a sealed envelope with
postage prepaid, directed, in the case of the holder of any license, to the
address furnished by him to the department of his business address and, in the
case of any other person, partnership or corporation, to the premises where the
defects cited in such order are alleged to exist and be the posting in a
conspicuous place on such premises of a copy of such notice or order. Such
notice shall be in writing and shall be given to the owner of the property, or
to the owner's agent, or to the person doing the work. The notice shall state
the conditions under which work is authorized to resume. The service as above
described by mailing and posting, shall be the equivalent of personal service.
1004.2 Emergencies. Where an emergency exists, the Electrical Code Official
shall not be required to give a written notice prior to stopping the work.
1004.3 Unlawful continuance. Any person who shall continue any work in or about
the structure after having been served with a stop work order, except such work
as that person is directed to perform to remove a violation or unsafe
condition, shall be subject to penalties as prescribed by Section 1003.
CHAPTER 11 MEANS OF APPEAL
Section 1101, General.
1101.1 Board of appeals established. In order to hear and decide appeals of
orders, decisions or determinations made by the Electrical Code Official
relative to the application and interpretation of this code, there shall be and
is hereby created an Electrical Board of Appeals. The Board of Appeals shall be
appointed by the Mayor of the City of Reading and approved by City Council and
shall hold office at its pleasure, and shall render all decisions and findings
in writing to the appellant with a duplicate copy to the Electrical Code
Official.
1101.1.1 Purpose. The Electrical Board shall:
   1.   Make recommendation concerning all reasonable rules and regulations
pertaining to this code, including rules, procedures and regulation of
examinations for all license applicants.
   2.   Shall review all applications for licenses and shall receive the
results of all examinations administered from the City of Reading Electrical
Inspector
   3.   It shall investigate and hear all written complaints against holders of
such licenses and report to the Chief Building Official its findings and
recommendations.
   4.   It shall investigate and hear all written appeals as per Section 1103
and report to the Chief Building Official its findings and recommendations.
1101.2 Limitations on authority. An application for appeal shall be based on a
claim that the true intent of this code or the rules legally adopted there
under have been incorrectly interpreted, the provisions of this code do not
fully apply, or an at least equivalent method of protection or safety is
proposed. The Electrical Board shall have no authority to waive the
requirements of this code.
Section 1102, Membership.
1102.1 Membership. The Electrical Board shall comprise seven members of which:
   •   At least 4 (four) members shall be City of Reading, Master Electricians.
   •   No more than 2 (two) members may be City of Reading, Journeyman
Electricians with at least 10 years' experience as a Journeyman Electrician.
   •   No more than 1 (one) member may be a representative of the electrical
utility industry.
   •   No more than 1 (one) member may be a registered design professional with
electrical engineering experience.
1102.1.1 Term. The members of this Board shall serve for a term of 6 (six)
years. In the event of a failure to appoint a successor after the expiration of
any member's term, such member shall continue to serve until successors are
appointed.
1102.2 Liaison. The Electrical Code Official shall serve as a liaison of the
Building/Trades Division to the Board. The liaison shall have no vote on any
matter before the Board.
1102.3 Chairman. The Board shall annually select 1 (one) of its members to
serve as chairman.
1102.4 Disqualification of members. A member shall not hear an appeal, or vote
in which that member has a personal, professional or financial interest.
1102.5 Meetings. The Board shall meet on the 1st (first) Monday of the months
of March, June, September, and December of each year, for the purpose of
considering and disposing of all applications for licenses, provided, however,
that when any of the days appointed for a meeting shall fall on a legal holiday
the board shall meet on the Monday following such holiday. The Board may hold
special meetings as frequently as is necessary for the proper and efficient
discharge of its business, such special meetings shall be held upon 24 (twenty-
four) hours written notice to each member of the Board, stating the purpose of
such meeting.
1102.6 Quorum. 4 (four) members of the Board shall constitute a quorum for the
transaction of any and all business.
1102.7 Minutes. The Liaison shall serve as secretary to the board. The Liaison
shall keep minutes of the Boards proceedings, hearings, and records of its
investigations, and examinations of applicants for licenses, and file a copy of
same with the City of Reading, Clerks Office.
1102.8 Compensation of members. Board members will receive no compensation.
1102.9 Removal of members. Any member may be removed for misconduct or neglect
of duty or for other just cause by a majority vote of Council taken after the
member has received 15 days' advance notice of the intent to take such vote.
Failure of a member to attend three consecutive regular meetings of the Board
will constitute grounds for immediate removal from the Board by City Council.
Failure of a member to attend at least 50% of the regular meetings of the Board
in a calendar year will constitute grounds for immediate removal from the Board
by City Council. The Chairperson of the Board shall inform the City Clerk in
writing when a member has failed to comply with this attendance policy.
Following such notification, City Council may vote to remove the member and
seek applicants to fill the vacant position.
Section 1103, Procedures.
1103.1 Application for appeal. A person or contractor shall have the right to
appeal a decision of the Electrical Code Official to the Electrical Board. An
application for appeal shall be based on a claim that the:
   •   True intent of this code or the rules legally adopted there under, have
been incorrectly interpreted.
   •   The provisions of this code do not fully apply.
   •   An equally good or better form of construction is proposed.
The application shall be filed on a form obtained from the Electrical Code
Official within 20 (twenty) days after the notice was served.
1103.1.1 Fees. An application for appeal shall be accompanied with a fee
(Section 212) the appellant will also be responsible for all costs associated
with the hearing including the cost of the court reporter.
1103.2 Notice of meeting. The Electrical Code Official shall notify the
Electrical Board Chairman of the filing of an appeal The Board shall meet upon
notice from the chairman, within 20 (twenty) days of the filing of an appeal.
1.   Said hearing will take place in the presence of the Electrical Code
Official. A court reporter will be present to record the proceedings. The
written decision of the Board will be rendered within 20 (twenty) days.
2.   Any aggrieved by the decision of the aforementioned Electrical Board may
appeal to the Berks County Court of Common Pleas or other court of competent
jurisdiction.
1103.3 Open hearing. All hearings before the board shall be open to the public.
The appellant, the appellant's representative, and any person whose interests
are affected shall be given an opportunity to be heard.
1103.4 Rules of procedure. The board shall adopt and make available to the
public through the Liaison, rules of procedure under which a hearing will be
conducted. The procedures shall not require compliance with strict rules of
evidence, but shall mandate that only relevant information be received.
1103.5 Postponed hearing. Where 5 (five) members are not present to hear an
appeal, either the appellant or the appellant's representative shall have the
right to request a postponement of the hearing.
1103.6 Decisions. The board shall modify or reverse the decision of the
Electrical Code Official by a concurring vote of 4 (four) members.
1103.6.1 Resolution. The decision of the board shall be by resolution.
Certified copies shall be furnished to the appellant and to the Electrical Code
Official.
1103.6.2 Administration. The Electrical Code Official shall take immediate
action in accordance with the decision of the Electrical Board.
1103.7 Court review. Any person, whether or not a previous party of the appeal,
shall have the right to apply to the appropriate court for a writ of certiorari
to correct errors of law. Application for review shall be made in the manner
and time required by law following the filing of the decision in the office of
the chief appointing authority.
CHAPTER 12 ELECTRICAL PROVISIONS
Section 1201, General.
1201.1 Scope. This chapter governs the design and construction of premises
wiring systems, alternative energy systems, low voltage systems, and materials.
1201.1.1 Adoption. Premises wiring systems, alternative energy systems, low
voltage systems, and materials shall be designed and constructed in accordance
with the International Residential Code or NFPA 70 (NEC) as adopted by the
International Building Code as applicable, and as referenced in the
International Mechanical Code [M], the International Fuel Gas Code [FG], and
the International Fire Code [F], except as otherwise provided in this code.
Section 1202, Provisions.
1202.1 General. The provisions of this section shall apply to the design,
construction, installation, use and maintenance of electrical systems and
equipment. Where differences occur between provisions of this code and
referenced codes or standards, the provisions of this code shall apply.
1202.2 Nonmetallic-sheathed cable. The use of Type NM, NMC and NMS
(nonmetallic-sheathed/cable wiring methods shall not be limited based on
height, number of stories or construction type of the building or structure.
1202.3 Cutting, notching and boring. The cutting, notching and boring of wood
and steel framing members, structural members and engineered wood products
shall be in accordance with the International Building Code.
1202.4 Penetrations. Penetrations of walls, floors, ceilings and assemblies
required to have a fire-resistance rating, shall be protected in accordance
with the International Building Code. Where cables, conductors and raceways
penetrate fire blocking or draft stopping, such penetrations shall be protected
by filling the annular space with an approved fire blocking material.
[FG] 1202.5 Prohibited grounding electrode. Fuel gas piping shall not be used
as a grounding electrode.
[F] 1202.6 Emergency and standby power. Emergency and standby power systems
required by the NEC, International Building Code or International Fire Code
shall be installed in accordance with the International Building Code, the
International Fire Code, NEPA 70, NEPA 110, NEPA 111 and this code.
[F] 1202.7 Smoke control systems. Smoke control systems required by the
International Building Code or International Fire Code shall be supplied with 2
(two) sources of power. Primary power shall be the normal building power
systems. Secondary power shall be from an approved standby source complying
with this code. The standby power source and its transfer switches shall be in
a separate room from the normal power transformers and switch gear, and shall
be enclosed in a room constructed of not less than 1-hour fire-resistance-rated
fire barriers. ventilated directly to and from the exterior. Power distribution
from the two sources shall be by independent routes. Transfer to full standby
power shall be automatic and within 60 (sixty) seconds of failure of the
primary power.
[F] 1202.7.1 Power sources and power surges. Elements of the smoke management
system relying on volatile memories or the like shall be supplied with
uninterruptible power sources of sufficient duration to span 15 (fifteen)
minute primary power interruption. Elements of the smoke management system
susceptible to power surges shall he suitably protected by conditioners,
suppressors or other approved means.
[F] 1202.7.2 Wiring. In addition to meeting the requirements of this code, all
signal and control wiring for smoke control systems, regardless of voltage,
shall be fully enclosed within continuous raceways.
[F] 1202.8 Wiring in plenums. Combustible electrical or electronic wiring
methods and materials, optical fiber cable, and optical fiber raceway exposed
within plenums regulated by Section 602 of the International Mechanical Code
shall have a peak optical density not greater than 0.501 an average optical
density not greater than 0.15, and a flame spread not greater than 5 feet (1524
mm) when tested in accordance with NFPA 262. Only type OFNP (olenum-rated non-
conducive optical fiber cable) shall he installed in plenum-rated optical fiber
raceways. Wiring, cable and raceways addressed in this section shall he listed
and labeled as plenum rated and shall he installed in accordance with this
code.
[F] 1202.8.1 Combustible electrical equipment. Combustible electrical equipment
exposed within plenums regulated by Section 602 of the International Mechanical
Code shall have a peak rate of heat release not greater than 100 (one hundred)
kilowatts (kW) a peak optical density not greater than 0.50, and an average
optical density not greater than 0.15 when tested in accordance with UL 2043.
Combustible electrical equipment shall be listed and labeled.
[F] 1202.9 Engine and gas turbine-powered equipment and appliances. Permanently
installed equipment and appliances powered by internal combustion engines and
turbines shall be installed in accordance with the manufacturer's installation
instructions, the International Mechanical Code, International Fuel Gas Code
and NFPA37.
[F] 1202.10 Stationary fuel cell power systems. Stationary fuel cell power
systems having a power output not exceeding 10 (ten) MW shall he tested in
accordance with ANSI CSA America FCJ and shall be installed in accordance with
the manufacturer's installation instructions and NFPA 853.
[F] 1202.11 Boiler control requirements. The power supply to the electrical
control system for boilers shall he from a two-wire branch circuit that has a
grounded conductor or from an isolation transformer with a two-wire secondary.
Where an isolation transformer is provided, one conductor of the secondary
winding shall he grounded. Control voltage shall not exceed 150 volts nominal,
line to line. Control and limit devices shall interrupt the ungrounded side of
the circuit. A means of manually disconnecting the control circuit shall he
provided, and controls shall he arranged so that when de-energized, the burner
shall be inoperative. Such disconnecting means shall he capable of being locked
in the off position and shall he provided with ready access.
[F] 1202.12 Equipment and door labeling. Doors into electrical control panel
rooms shall he marked with a plainly visible and legible sign stating
ELECTRICAL ROOM or similar approved wording. The disconnecting means for each
service, feeder or branch circuit originating on a switchboard or panel hoard
shall he legibly and durably marked to indicate its purpose unless such purpose
is clearly evident.
[F] 1202.13 Smoke alarm power source. In new construction, required smoke
alarms shall receive their primary power from the building wiring where such
wiring is served from a commercial source and shall be equipped with a battery
backup. Smoke alarms shall emit a signal when the batteries are low. Wiring
shall he permanent and without a disconnecting switch other than as required
for overcurrent protection.
   Exception: Smoke alarms are not required to be equipped with battery backup
in Group R-1 where they are connected to an emergency electrical system.
[F] 1202.14 Smoke alarm interconnection. Where more than one smoke alarm is
required to be installed within an individual dwelling unit or sleeping unit in
Group R-2, R-3 or R-4, or within an individual sleeping unit in Group R-1, the
smoke alarms shall be interconnected in such a manner that the activation of
one alarm will activate all of the alarms in the individual unit. The alarm
shall be clearly audible in all bedrooms over background noise levels with all
intervening doors closed.
16.   Editor's Note: Amended during codification (see
Ch. 1, General Provisions, Part 2).
§ 180-703. State law and regulations.
[Amended 5-23-2022 by Ord. No. 45-2022]
In all matters that are regulated by the law of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania or by regulations of departments or agencies of the Commonwealth
promulgated by authority of law, such laws or regulations, or other ordinances
of the City of Reading, PA, as the case may be, shall control where the
requirements thereof are the same as or in excess of the provisions of this
Part. This code shall control in all cases where the State requirements, or the
requirements of other ordinances of this City, are not as strict as those
contained in this Part.
§ 180-704. Provisions to be continuation of existing regulations.
[Amended 5-23-2022 by Ord. No. 45-2022]
The provisions of this ordinance shall not affect any act done or liability
incurred, nor shall they affect any suit or prosecution pending or to be
instituted to enforce any right or penalty or to punish any offense under the
authority of the repealed ordinances.
§ 180-705. Publication.
[Amended 5-23-2022 by Ord. No. 45-2022]
The City Clerk is hereby ordered and directed to cause this Part to be
published as required by all applicable statutes, laws, regulations, charters
and ordinances.
§ 180-706. Name.
[Amended 12-28-2009 by Ord. No. 78-2009; 5-23-2022 by Ord. No. 45-2022]
This Part shall be known as the Electrical Code of the City of Reading.
§ 180-707. Enforcement.
[Amended 5-23-2022 by Ord. No. 45-2022]
The Electrical Code of the City of Reading shall be enforced by City of Reading
Building/Trades Division, including but not limited to the Electrical Code
Official thereof and/or City of Reading Fire Marshal or his/her designee of the
Fire Prevention Division of the City of Reading Department of Fire and Rescue
Services.
Part 8
International Building Code
[Adopted 12-11-2006 by Ord. No. 99-2006 (
Ch. 5, Part 1B, of the 2001 Code of Ordinances)]
§ 180-801. Adoption of International Building Code.
[Amended 12-28-2009 by Ord. No. 78-2009]
A certain document, three copies of which are on file in the office of the City
Clerk of the City of Reading, being marked and designated as the International
Building Code, 2009 Edition, including Appendix Chapters A, B, E, G and J (see
International Building Code, § 101.2.1, 2009 Edition), as published by the
International Code Council, be and is hereby adopted as the Building Code of
the City of Reading in the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania for regulating and
governing the conditions and maintenance of all property, buildings, and
structures; by providing the standards for supplied utilities and facilities
and other physical things and conditions essential to ensure that structures
are safe, sanitary and fit for occupation and use; and the condemnation of
building and structures unfit for human occupancy and use and the demolition of
such structures as herein provided; providing for the issuance of permits and
collection of fees therefor; and each and all of the regulations, provisions,
penalties, conditions and terms of said Building Code on file in the office of
the Code Official are hereby referred to, adopted, and made part hereof, as if
fully out in this Part 8, with the additions, insertions, deletions and
changes, if any, prescribed in §
180-802 of this Part 8.
§ 180-802. Amendments.
[Amended 9-24-2007 by Ord. No. 72-2007; 12-28-2009 by Ord. No. 78-2009; 5-10-
2010 by Ord. No. 18-2010; 9-27-2010 by Ord. No. 71-2010; 2-14-2022 by Ord. No.
11-2022]
The following sections of the International Building Code, 2009 Edition, a/k/
a Building Code for the City of Reading, is hereby amended, revised, deleted,
etc., as indicated:
   A.   
Chapter 1, Section 101.1, is amended by deleting the words "name of
jurisdiction" and the brackets surrounding that phrase and by inserting in
place thereof the words "the City of Reading."
   B.   
Chapter 1, Section 101.5, is amended by adding:
101.5 Liability insurance. Prior to the issuance of a permit to any contractor,
s/he shall deposit and execute with the Code Official a certificate of
insurance establishing that the contractor is currently covered by a reputable
insurance company, licensed to do business in the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania,
covering said contractor for property damages in the amount of not less than
$50,000 for any one claim and not less than $300,000 for more than one claim.
   C.   
Chapter 1, Section 102.4, is amended by deleting the words "the provisions of
this" and substituting the words "a more stringent."
   D.   
Chapter 1, Section 103.1, is hereby amended to read as follows: "The Codes
Services Division and Trades Group thereof, in conjunction with the Fire
Prevention Division of the City of Reading, Department of Fire and Rescue, by
and through the Fire Marshal or his designee, known herein as "Codes Division,"
is hereby established and the executive in charge shall be the Property
Improvement Division Manager. Where reference is made to the Code Official in
this Part 8, it shall be understood to refer to the Building Official or his
designee."
   E.   
Chapter 1, Section 103.3, is amended to read as follows: The executive in
charge shall appoint such number of officers, technical assistants, inspectors,
and other employees as shall be necessary for the administration of this code
and as authorized by the appointing authority.
   F.   
Chapter 1, Section 105.2, is amended by deleting No. 2, No. 6, and the words
"cabinets, countertops, and similar finish work" from No. 7. Delete in its
entirety "Electrical, Gas, Mechanical and Plumbing."
   G.   
Chapter 1, Section 105.3, is amended to add No. 8 as follows: "In the case of
repairs and/ or alterations, the contractor who will actually perform the work
as required to obtain the permit."
   H.   
Chapter 1, Section 109.2, is amended to add as follows: [Amended 9-12-2011 by
Ord. No. 42-201120]
109.2 All tradespersons shall pay permit fees based on labor and materials, as
provided in
Chapter 212, Fees, prior to commencing work or performing services in or upon
all premises within the City based upon aggregate cost of labor and materials:
Administrative fee
In addition to the aforesaid fee, all trade persons shall be required to pay an
administrative fee as provided in
Chapter 212, Fees, for each permit applied for and received. This fee is in
addition to the above-listed permit fee.
As built. Should it be determined that the job costs greatly differentiate from
the as-built costs to save monies on the fee for the permit, at the discretion
of the Codes Services Division - Building/Trades, said persons reserve the
right to undertake any and all appropriate and applicable methods including,
but not limited to, commencement of legal action to obtain the difference of
the fee submitted for a permit and estimated job costs and the as-built costs.
Consultation fee. In addition to the fee for a permit as set forth herein, a
fee per hour as provided in
Chapter 212, Fees, shall be charged for consultation either in person or via
telephone with the/any Building/Trades Inspector for consultation prior to
submission of plans for review and subsequent to approval of plans and issuance
of permit beyond one hour total time calculated by combining time of all
Building/Trades Inspector consulted on single project per above parameters.
Removal of placard. The Building Code Official, his designee or Code Official
shall remove the stop-work order placard whenever the defect or defects upon
which the stop- work order and placarding action were based have been
eliminated and with the payment of a fee as provided in
Chapter 212, Fees. Any person who conceals, covers, hides, defaces or removes a
stop-work order placard without the approval of the Building Code Official
shall be subject to the penalties provided by this code.
   I.   
Chapter 1, Section 108.4, is amended by deleting the words "a fee established
by the Building Official" and the brackets surrounding the same and in place
thereof inserting "100% of the usual permit fee."
   J.   
Chapter 1, Section 113, is amended by deleting the same and inserting in place
thereof:
Chapter 1, Section 113.0: 21
International Building/Fire Prevention Code
Board of Appeals
Rules of Procedures
Article 1. General Provisions
1.1   The International Building and Fire Code Board of Appeals of the City of
Reading, Pennsylvania, shall be governed by the provisions of the 2009
International Building Code and the 2009 International Fire Code, all related
amendments and by the rules of procedure.
1.2   The Board shall become familiar with all other ordinances under which it
may be expected to act as well as applicable state statutes such as the
Sunshine Law. 22
1.3   Nothing herein shall be construed to grant or give to the Board the power
or authority to alter or change the building, fire prevention or other related
ordinances, which authority is reserved to the governing body.
1.4   Within the limits of funds appropriated by the governing body, the Board
may employ or contract for secretaries, clerks, legal counsel, consultants, and
other technical and clerical services.
1.5   The legal counsel to the Board shall be consulted in cases where the
powers of the Board are not clearly defined.
Article 2. Membership
2.1   Chairman. The Board shall annually select one of its members to serve as
Chairman.
The Chairman shall perform all duties required by law, ordinances and these
rules; shall preside at all meetings of the Board; shall decide on all points
or order and procedure, subject to these rules, unless directed otherwise by a
majority of the Board.
2.2   Secretary. A qualified clerk shall serve as secretary to the Board. The
secretary shall file a detailed record of all proceedings.
2.3   Members. The Board of Appeals shall consist of seven members appointed by
the Mayor and confirmed by the Council of the City of Reading as follows: one
for five years, one for four years, one for three years, two for two years, and
two for one year. Thereafter, each new member shall serve for five years or
until a successor has been appointed. Members of the City of Reading HVAC,
Electrical Examining Board and Plumbing Board of Examiners may upon appointment
as provided for herein and confirmation may serve on the City of Reading
International Building/Fire Prevention Board of Appeals.
2.4   Qualifications. The Board of Appeals shall consist of the following
professions or disciplines:
   (a)   Registered design professional who is a registered architect; or a
builder or superintendent of building construction with at least ten years'
experience, five of which shall have been in responsible charge of work.
   (b)   Registered design professional with structural and architectural
experience.
   (c)   Registered design professional with mechanical or plumbing experience;
or a mechanical or plumbing contractor with at least ten years' experience,
five of which shall have been in charge of work.
   (d)   Registered design professional with electrical engineering experience;
or an electrical contractor with at least ten years' experience, five of which
shall have been in responsible charge of work.
   (e)   Registered design professional with fire protection engineering
experience; or a fire protection contractor with at least ten years'
experience, five of which shall have been in responsible charge of work.
   (f)   Members of the City of Reading HVAC, Electrical Examining Board and
Plumbing Board of Examiners may also serve on the City of Reading Building/Fire
Prevention Board of Appeals provided they have ten years of relevant
experience, five of which shall have been in responsible charge of work.
2.5   Alternates. The Mayor shall appoint and the Council of the City of
Reading shall confirm two alternate members who shall be called by the Board
Chairman to hear appeals during the absence or disqualification of a member.
Alternate members shall possess the qualifications required for Board
membership, and shall be appointed for five years or until a successor has been
appointed.
2.6   Removal of members. Any member may be removed for misconduct or neglect
of duty or for other just cause by a majority vote of Council taken after the
member has received 15 days' advance notice of the intent to take such vote.
Failure of a member to attend three consecutive regular meetings of the Board
will constitute grounds for immediate removal from the Board by City Council.
Failure of a member to attend at least 50% of the regular meetings of the Board
in a calendar year will constitute grounds for immediate removal from the Board
by City Council. The Chairperson of the Board shall inform the City Clerk in
writing when a member has failed to comply with this attendance policy.
Following such notification, City Council may vote to remove the member and
seek applicants to fill the vacant position.
Article 3. Meetings
3.1   Notice. The Board shall meet upon notice from the Chairman, within 30
days of the filing of an appeal, or at stated periodic meetings.
3.2   Public notice. The Board shall hold all meetings at specified times and
places, of which public notice shall be given.
         (a)   All hearings before the Board shall be open to the public.
         (b)   Public notice of each meeting shall be given in a newspaper of
general circulation within the community within 24 hours' notice prior to the
time of the hearing.
3.3   Quorum. The Board shall modify or reverse the decision of the Building
Fire Official by a concurring vote of three members.
3.4   Postponement. When five members are not present to hear an appeal, either
the appellant or the appellant's representative shall have the right to request
a postponement of the hearing.
3.5   Continuances. On its own motion, or on approval of requests by applicant,
appellants or their authorized agents, the Board may provide for later
continuances of cases on which hearings have begun. Such continuances shall be
permitted only for good cause, stated in the motion, and, unless time and place
is stated, shall require new public notice, with fees paid for by applicants if
continuances are at their request or result from their actions. A notice of the
place, date and time of the continued hearing shall also be posted prominently
at the municipal office where the hearing will be continued.
Article 4. Order of Business
4.1   Proceedings. All meetings of the Board shall proceed as follows:
         (a)   Meeting called to order.
         (b)   Roll call and declaration of quorum.
         (c)   Announcement of outstanding decisions.
         (d)   Hearing of new cases.
         (e)   Unfinished business.
         (f)   New business.
         (g)   Adjournment.
Article 5. Board's Function
5.1   Any person shall have the right to appeal to the Board of Appeals from a
decision of the Building/Fire Official refusing to grant a modification of this
code covering the manner of construction or materials to be used in the
erection, alteration or repair of the building or structure.
5.2   The Board shall have exclusive jurisdiction to hear and render final
adjudications based on a claim that the true intent of the Building and Fire
Prevention Codes or the rules legally adopted thereunder have been incorrectly
interpreted, the provisions of this code do not fully apply, or an equivalent
form of construction can be used.
5.3   Nothing herein shall be construed to grant or give to the Board the power
or authority to alter or change the Building/Fire Prevention, or other related
ordinances, which authority is reserved to the governing body.
Article 6. Hearings
6.1   Initiating action before the Board. All action before the Board shall be
initiated by a written application for hearing accompanied with a fee in an
amount provided in
Chapter 212, which shall be filed with the Building Official within 20 days of
the receipt of an order from the Building/Fire Official.
6.2   Hearing schedule. The Board will conduct hearings and make decisions. In
no instance will a hearing be scheduled later than 20 days from the date of the
applicant's request for a hearing, unless the applicant has agreed to an
extension of time in writing.
6.3   Notification of hearing.
         (a)   Whenever a hearing has been scheduled, public notice of each
meeting shall be given in a newspaper of general circulation within the
community within 24 hours' notice prior to the time of the hearing. Such notice
shall state the time and place of the hearing and the particular nature of the
matter to be considered.
         (b)   Written notice shall be given to the applicant and any person
who has made timely request for such notice.
6.4   Conduct of hearing. The hearing shall be conducted by the Board of
Appeals.
6.5   Order of hearing.
         (a)   Hearing called to order.
         (b)   Chairman's statement of reason for hearing.
         (c)   Chairman's statement of parties to hearing.
         (d)   Identification of other parties who wish to be heard.
         (e)   Outline of procedures to be followed during hearing.
         (f)   Applicant's presentation of their case.
         (i)   Objectors cross-examines applicant's witnesses.
         (ii)   Board cross-examines applicant's witnesses.
         (g)   Objector's presentation of their case.
         (i)   Applicant cross-examines objector's witnesses.
         (ii)   Board cross-examines objector's witnesses.
         (h)   Statement of the Building/Fire Official.
         (i)   Applicant's cross-examination.
         (ii)   Objector's cross-examination.
         (iii)   Board's cross-examination.
         (i)   Other testimony and evidence.
         (j)   Rebuttal by applicant.
         (k)   Rebuttal by objectors.
6.6   Records. The Board shall keep a record of the proceedings. The minutes of
the meeting and copies of graphic or written material received in evidence
shall be made available to any party at cost.
6.7   Parties. The parties to the hearing shall be the municipality, any person
affected by the application who has made a timely appearance of record before
the Board, and any other person including civic or community organizations
permitted to appear by the Board. All persons who wish to be considered parties
shall enter appearances in writing on forms provided to the Board for that
purpose.
6.8   Representation. All parties shall have the right to be represented by
counsel and shall be afforded the opportunity to respond and present evidence
and argument, and to cross- examine adverse witnesses on all relevant issues.
         (a)   For purposes of this subsection, the term "counsel" shall be
construed to mean a duly licensed attorney permitted to practice before the
Supreme Court of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
         (b)   Any person other than a duly licensed attorney (including, but
not limited to, architects, engineers and developers) shall present a power of
attorney or notarized letter executed by the party stating that the person so
appearing before the Board is permitted to do so.
6.9   Witnesses. All witnesses shall testify under oath.
6.10   Evidence. The Board shall not be bound by strict rules of evidence, but
it may exclude irrelevant, immaterial, incompetent, or unduly repetitious
testimony or evidence. The Chairman shall rule on all questions relating to the
admissibility of evidence, which may be overruled by a majority of the Board.
6.11   Communication. The Board shall not communicate directly or indirectly,
with any party or his representative in connection with any issue involved
except upon notice and opportunity for all parties to participate, shall not
take notice of any communication, reports, staff memoranda, or other materials
except advice from the International Building/Fire Prevention Board of Appeals
Solicitor, unless the parties are afforded an opportunity to contest the
material so noticed and shall not inspect the site or its surroundings after
the commencement of the hearings with any party or his representative unless
all parties are given an opportunity to be present.
6.12   Decisions.
         (a)   The Board shall render a written decision within 30 days after
the last hearing before the Board.
         (b)   The Board shall vote on all matters in public session at the
meeting in which evidence is concluded. The Board may deliberate upon any
matter in executive session provided that any vote is rendered at a public
session within the allotted thirty-day time limit.
         (c)   All matters shall be decided by roll call vote.
         (d)   The Board shall modify or reverse the decision of the Building/
Fire Official by a concurring vote of three members.
         (e)   The decision of the Board shall be by resolution. Certified
copies shall be furnished to the appellant and to the Building/Fire Official.
         (f)   No member of the Board shall vote on any matter in which he is
personally or financially interested. Said member shall not be counted by the
Board in establishing a quorum for such matters.
         (g)   No member of the Board shall vote on an adjudication of any
matter unless he has attended the public hearing thereon.
         (h)   A copy of the final decision shall be delivered to the applicant
personally or mailed to him not later than the day following the date of the
decision. The Board shall provide, by mail or otherwise, to all other persons
who have filed their name and address with the Board, a copy of the decision.
   K.   
Chapter 1, Section 114.4, is amended by deleting the same and substituting in
place thereof:
114.4. Penalties. Any person who shall violate a provision of the ordinance, or
who shall fail to comply with any of the requirements thereof or who shall
erect, construct, alter or repair a building or structure in violation of an
approved plan or directive of the Building Official, or of a permit or
certificate issued under the provisions of the ordinance or any amendments
thereof shall, upon conviction of a summary offense before any Magisterial
District Judge, be sentenced to pay a fine of not less than $500 nor more than
$1,000 plus restitution and costs, or in default of payment, to undergo
imprisonment in Berks County Prison for a period not exceeding 90 days for each
offense. Each day that a violation continues shall be deemed a separate
offense.
   L.   
Chapter 1, Section 116, Emergency Measures, is amended by adding:
116.1 Imminent danger. When, in the opinion of the Building Official, there is
imminent danger of failure or collapse of a building or structure or any part
thereof which endangers life, or when any structure or part of a structure has
fallen and life is endangered by the occupation of the building or structure,
the Building Official is hereby authorized and empowered to order and require
the occupants to vacate the same forthwith. The Building Official shall cause
to be posted at each entrance to such structure a notice reading as follows:
"This structure is unsafe and its occupancy had been prohibited by the Building
Official." It shall be unlawful for any person to enter such structure except
for the purpose of making the required repairs or of demolishing the same.
116.2 Temporary safeguards. When, in the opinion of the Building Official,
there is imminent danger due to an unsafe condition, the Building Official
shall cause the necessary work to be done to render such structure temporarily
safe, whether or not the legal procedure herein described has been instituted.
116.3 Closing streets. When necessary for public safety, the Building Official
shall temporarily close structures and close, or order the authority having
jurisdiction to close, sidewalks, streets, public ways and places adjacent to
unsafe structures, and prohibit the same from being used.
116.4 Emergency repairs. For the purposes of this section, the Building
Official shall employ the necessary labor and materials to perform the required
work as expeditiously as possible.
116.5 Costs of emergency repairs. Costs incurred in the performance of
emergency work shall be paid from the Treasury of the jurisdiction on approval
of the Building Official. The legal counsel of the jurisdiction shall institute
appropriate action against the owner of the premises where the unsafe structure
is or was located.
116.6 Unsafe equipment. Equipment deemed unsafe by the Building Official shall
not be operated after the date stated in the notice unless the required repairs
or changes have been made and the equipment has been approved, or unless an
extension of time has been secured by the Building Official in writing.
116.6.1.1 Authority to seal equipment. In the case of an emergency, the
Building Official shall have the authority to seal out of service immediately
an unsafe device or equipment regulated by this code.
116.6.2 Unlawful to remove seal. Any device or equipment sealed out of service
by the Building Official shall be plainly identified in an approved manner. The
identification shall not be tampered with, defaced or removed except by the
Building Official and shall indicate the reason for such sealing.
   M.   Chapter 4, Section 403, High Rise Buildings.
      (1)   Section 403.1, Applicability, is amended by deleting "75 feet
(22,860 mm)" and substituting in place thereof "65 feet."
      (2)   Section 403.15, Operable windows, is amended by adding: "At least
one operable window of at least 20 square feet per 50 linear feet of exterior
wall or one twenty- square-foot operable window per each habitable and
occupiable room not exceeding 2,000 square feet in area, or whichever is less,
shall be provided as approved by the Building/Fire Officials."
   N.   Chapter 4, Section 404, Atriums.
      (1)   Section 404.3, Automatic sprinkler system, is amended by deleting
"Exceptions."
   O.   Chapter 9, Section 901, General fire protection systems (new/change of
use).
      (1)   Section 901.6, Supervisory service, is amended by deleting the same
and substituting in place thereof:
901.6 Supervisory service. All new and existing fire protection systems (manual
or automatic fire detection or suppression systems) where required by City or
Pennsylvania State law, ordinance or order shall be connected to an approved
central station service according to NFPA 72-2002, § 8-2.
      (2)   Section 901.6.1, Automatic sprinkler systems, is amended by
deleting the same and substituting in place thereof:
901.6.1 Automatic sprinkler systems. All new and existing fire protections
systems (manual or automatic fire detection or suppression systems) where
required by City or Pennsylvania State law, ordinance or order shall be
connected to an approved central station service according to NFPA 72-2002, §
8-2.
      (3)   Section 901.6.2, Fire alarm systems, is amended by deleting the
same and substituting in place thereof:
901.6.2 Fire alarm systems. All new and existing fire protections systems
(manual or automatic fire detection or suppression systems) where required by
City or Pennsylvania State law, ordinance or order shall be connected to an
approved central station service according to NFPA 72-2002, § 8-2.
      (4)   Section 901.6.3, Group H, is amended by deleting the same and
substituting in place thereof:
901.6.3 Group H. All new and existing fire protections systems (manual or
automatic fire detection or suppression systems) where required by City or
Pennsylvania State law, ordinance or order shall be connected to an approved
central station service according to NFPA 72-2002, § 8-2.
   P.   Section 903, Automatic sprinkler systems (new/change of use).
      (1)   Section 903.2.14, Use Group "B" Business, is amended by adding:
Throughout all buildings in use Group "B" an automatic fire suppression system
shall be provided as follows:
   I.   When area exceeds 100,000 square feet; or
   II.   When the total combined area of all floors exceed 1,000 square feet;
or
   III.   When the floor level of the highest story is located more than 30
feet (9,144 mm) above the lowest level of fire department vehicle access.
      (2)   Section 903.4, Sprinkler system monitoring and alarms, is amended
by adding:
All new and existing fire protections systems (manual or automatic fire
detection or suppression systems) where required by City or Pennsylvania State
law, ordinance or order shall be connected to an approved central station
service according to NFPA 71-2002, § 8-2.
      (3)   Section 903.4.1, Signals, is amended by adding:
All new and existing fire protections systems (manual or automatic fire
detection or suppression systems) where required by City or Pennsylvania State
law, ordinance or order shall be connected to an approved central station
service according to NFPA 72-2002, § 8-2.
      (4)   Section 904.3.5, Monitoring, is amended by adding thereto:
   NFPA — 2002 Edition, § 8-2.
   Q.   Section 905, Standpipe systems (new/change of use).
      (1)   Section 905.11, Standpipe hose valve connections, is amended adding
this section:
905.11 Standpipe hose valve connections. At each floor level on the stair tower
side there shall be connected to each standpipe not more than five feet above
the floor level, a two-and- one-half-inch hose connection with one-and-one-
half-inch reducer with chain, cap, valves and threads conforming to the City of
Reading Department of Fire and Rescue standards.
   R.   Section 907, Fire alarm and detection systems (new/change of use).
      (1)   Section 907.2, Where required, is amended by deleting the words "§
907.2.23" and substituting in place "§ 907.2.26." This section is amended by
adding an additional paragraph which reads as follows:
In all buildings provided with an approved automatic sprinkler system, there
shall also be provided a complete manual fire alarm system and an automatic
system in all mechanical areas and all means of egress in addition to the
automatic detection systems required in
§§ 907.2.10.1 through and including 907.2.25.
      (2)   Section 907.2.9.1, Group R-2 detection systems - 10 or more
dwelling units, is amended by adding:
An automatic fire detection and manual alarm system shall be installed and
maintained in mechanical areas and means of egress in all buildings of use
group R-2 or 10 or more dwelling units.
      (3)   Section 907.2.12, High-rise buildings, is amended by deleting "75
feet (22,860 mm)" and substituting in place thereof "65 feet (19,812 mm)."
      (4)   Section 907.2.12.1, Automatic detection, is amended by deleting the
language in Subsection 1 thereof and inserting in place thereof:
In each mechanical room/equipment, electrical, transformer, telephone
equipment, elevator, machine room, elevator lobbies or similar room and stair
tower, exits, exit access and corridors.
      (5)   Section 907.2.12.3, Fire Department communication system, shall be
amended by adding: "mechanical rooms."
      (6)   Section 907.2.24, Height and area, is amended by adding this
section:
1. All buildings four or more stories in height or more than 30 feet in height
or 5,000 square feet or more in area shall have an automatic fire alarm/
detection system installed throughout the building, conforming to NFPA 72.
      (7)   Section 907.2.25, Hazardous areas, is amended by adding this
section:
Smoke detectors shall be installed in the following hazardous areas in addition
to a fire suppression system: trash rooms, painting rooms, laundry collection
rooms, furnace room, boiler room, mechanical/electrical rooms, and rooms of
similar use as determined by the Building/Fire Official.
      (8)   Section 907.2.26, Sprinklered buildings, is amended by adding this
section:
In all buildings provided with approved automatic sprinkler systems, a complete
manual fire alarm system and an automatic detection system shall be provided in
all means of egress and mechanical rooms in addition to the automatic fire
detections systems required in §§ 907.2.10.1 through and including 907.2.25.
      (9)   Section 907.14, Monitoring, is amended by deleting the language
therein and inserting in place thereof the following:
All new and existing fire protections systems (manual or automatic fire
detection or suppression systems) where required by City or Pennsylvania state
law, ordinance or order shall be connected to an approved central station
service according to NFPA 72-2002, § 8-2.
   S.   Chapter 10, Section 1020.1.7, is amended by deleting same and
substituting in place thereof:
1020.1.7 Smoke proof enclosures. All exit stairways serving occupants located
more than 65 feet above the lowest level of Fire Department vehicle access
shall be protected by smokeproof enclosures.
   T.   Chapter 11 is amended to allow the City of Reading Building Code
Official, certified as an accessibility specialist, to perform all
accessibility plan reviews and inspections pursuant to
§ 403.141(b) of the Uniform Construction Code. 23  A fee as provided in Chapter
212, Fees, shall be charged for all accessibility plan reviews and inspections.
[Added 9-12-2011 by Ord. No. 43-201124]
   U.   Chapter 16, Section 1612.3, is amended by inserting "City of Reading"
and "June 11, 2012." 25
   V.   Chapter 30, Section 3004.1, is amended by deleting "Exception No. 1."
   W.   Chapter 32, Section 3202.2.4, Mechanical equipment, is amended by
adding:
3202.2.4 Mechanical equipment. Mechanical equipment projecting into right-of-
way area shall have a minimum clearance of seven feet zero inches above the
sidewalk and 14 feet zero inches above the public roadway and shall project not
more than 14 inches into the right-of- way.
   X.   Chapter 33, Section 3303, Special Demolition Procedure, Site
Improvements and Technical Specifications.
SECTION 3303. SPECIAL DEMOLITION PROCEDURE, SITE IMPROVEMENTS AND TECHNICAL
SPECIFICATIONS
I. General scope.
This specification shall require, in addition to actual demolition, the
completion of necessary site improvements to insure and provide for the
structural soundness and weather-tightness of structures that abut the property
limits. Although no specific details or drawings are shown for properties with
party and/or independent walls, all work necessary to maintain the
aforementioned properties that have party walls or abutting walls, in at least
their present condition of repair and appearance and provide structurally sound
and adequately weathertight surfaces to new and existing exposed walls is
expected to be completed by the contractor. The intent of this specification
shall be to provide complete and finished abutting surfaces, and the contractor
shall be required to do all work to accomplish this need, whether specifically
described or not. Before commencing work, the contractor shall submit his
proposed methods for accomplishing the demolitions to the Building Official for
approval.
Archways and cellar ways between each building to be demolished and any
adjoining building must be retained in at least their present condition.
Any damage done to the adjacent buildings shall be repaired to match the
present design of said building.
The complete removal of foundation walls will be required where they are not
parts of foundation walls.
Independent walls will be maintained and/or reinforced to insure their
structural soundness.
All concrete basements and cellar floors shall be broken up and the debris
removed so there is no pooling or trapping of water in the cellar area that
might create a drainage nuisance to the adjacent properties that remain
standing.
The demolition contractor, before backfilling, shall clean and properly parge
adjacent foundation walls from the base of the footer to the proposed finished
grade area. Any additional work which may have to be done, once the foundation
walls are exposed, to protect adjacent property from any drainage nuisance
shall be completed.
If the contractor discovers any unsound condition or abnormal construction
technique(s) in any of the adjacent properties, he shall cease all demolitions
at once and immediately notify the Building Official. After an inspection is
made of the unsound or unusual condition, the Building Official shall make a
determination which shall be final and binding on the contractor.
All debris from said demolition of each property shall be removed in their
entirety from each project area by the contractor and dumped only at a state-
licensed dumping site.
II. Nonemergency demolition.
All nonemergency demolition shall require zoning review prior to issuance of an
City permit.
III. Permits.
All permits necessary to complete the work shall be properly obtained from the
City. No work shall begin without such permits. Any violation of the permit
provision may result in prosecution of the contractor by the City of Reading.
IV. Utilities.
   A.   General. The contractor must insure that all utilities have been turned
off, disconnected, capped, and backfilled prior to starting general demolition.
Fill shall be PennDOT 3A Modified Stone.
   B.   Electricity, telephone, gas. The affected utility company is
responsible for severing service to the building to be demolished and for
closing any street or sidewalk openings caused by such work. The demolition
contractor shall provide affected utilities with a written notice informing
them of the locations of all buildings scheduled for demolition. All utility
services to the buildings shall be completely and properly abandoned by the
appropriate utility companies before any demolition work begins. All demolition
work shall be performed in a manner that will preserve, in proper operating
condition, all active utilities abutting each demolition site. On partial
demolitions, the contractor shall engage a licensed electrician to cut
electricity.
   C.   Water. All of the water cutoffs will be accomplished prior to
demolition and paid for in full by the contractor.
   D.   Sewer. All sewer and drainage systems shall be disconnected at the curb
or property line (and the lateral properly sealed by the contractor) before any
demolition starts. The permit required for each sewer seal must be obtained
from the Building Official by a master plumber who is registered to work in the
City of Reading. The excavation for the sanitary sewer lateral may be performed
with power tools to a depth that will expose the sewer drain. From that point,
all excavation and removal of pipe shall be done by hand.
The pipe shall be removed to the street side of the running trap by the City of
Reading registered plumber, and the opening capped. After inspection and
approval by the Plumbing Inspector, backfilling shall be made in eight-inch
compacted layers with a pneumatic tamp to prevent settlement of the trench. On
partial demolitions, no water or sanitary line cutoffs are necessary.
V. Extermination.
In accordance with City Bill No. 37, a certificate of proof of extermination
for work performed by a qualified exterminator shall be obtained by the
contractor. The contractor must allow a minimum of four days to elapse after
baiting for rodent control before the sealing of any sanitary sewer is
undertaken, if the building is sewer connected.
VI. Cutoff cards.
Abandonment or proof-of-service cards shall be obtained from water, gas,
electric, telephone, and TV cable utilities. These cards and sewer capping
permits must be submitted to and approved by the Building Official located in
Room 1-30, City Hall, Reading, Pennsylvania, prior to the start of demolition.
VII. Demolition permits.
Upon submission of proof of the above-mentioned compliances, the Building
Official will issue the demolition permit(s) to the contractor only.
Immediately after receiving the permit(s), the contractor shall make out a
check made payable to the City of Reading in the full amount of said permit(s)
and give it to the City Treasurer Office. The demolition permit(s) shall then
be marked "Paid in Full" and dated. At that time, demolition shall proceed as
soon as possible.
VIII. Traffic control.
The contractor shall place around the demolition area such barriers,
barricades, lights and other signs as shall be necessary for the protection of
the public and the proper control of traffic. Whenever possible, demolition
trucks and/or equipment should avoid using streets where homes are still
occupied.
IX. Codes.
Chapter 17, all sections and all subsections, of the 2009 International
Building Code shall be strictly adhered to by the contractor and any
subcontractor.
X. Projection completion.
The demolition contractor will contact the City Building Code Official for each
property demolished after all work has been completed on that property. The
Building Official will then inspect the work and determine if said work has
been done in accordance with the technical specifications for each property. If
the Building Official approves the work, he will sign off on the demolition
permit.
TECHNICAL SPECIFICATIONS
I. Scope.
In accordance with the City of Reading Building Code, 2009 International
Building Code, with amendments, Ord. No. 78-2009, Section 3303, the work
required under this contract shall include the furnishing, by the contractor,
of all labor, material, equipment, tools and services required to completely
demolish:
   NOTE 1:
After all of the debris has been removed, the demolition area shall be
inspected by the Engineer, and given his approval, fill shall then be installed
in twelve-inch compacted layers to the finish grade.
The finish grade area shall be carefully sloped so that maximum protection will
be afforded adjacent properties with regard to drainage nuisances.
All fill material used shall be free from glass, metal, wood, organic, or
combustible material.
   A.   Hazard material abatement.
Due to structural failure and unsafe condition of the aforementioned
properties, no interior walkthrough inspection will be allowed. All contractors
be aware the possibility that asbestos may be present and must follow the
Pennsylvania Statutes and Regulations Administered by the Department of
Environmental Protection listed in Section VIII, Supplementary General
Conditions, Federal and State Statutes.
Any and all work pertaining to a historically significant property located
within a designated district must be performed in accordance with guidelines
for rehabilitating historic buildings.
   B.   Brick work.
i)   Scope. The exposed brick walls or concrete walls abutting the properties
shall all remain.
ii)   Material. Brick used shall be common, red, hard-burned shale brick, and
shall be laid up in common running bond. Courses shall be laid plumb, level and
square. Cold weather precautions shall be adhered to, and accepted engineering
practices shall prevail such as the use of re-tempered mortar, calcium
chloride, proper concern for rising and falling temperatures, mortar mixtures,
etc.
A header course shall be installed every seventh course.
Brick patching of joist holes and corner wall toothing shall be done in a neat
manner, with watertight concave joints in a full bed of mortar. Care shall be
taken not to break existing brick where they are exposed to view; these exposed
bricks, if broken, shall be properly replaced. Existing chimneys shall be
repaired as required, to provide a tight, draft-producing facility. The
contractor will be held entirely responsible for the condition of finished
work.
   C.   Stucco.
i)   Scope. Prior to commencing stuccoing, the contractor shall remove all the
plaster and any other material from the existing exposed walls to provide a
clean surface for the application of stucco.
Work shall consist of toothing out and patching the remaining standing party
walls of the above-mentioned buildings. This patching shall consist of patching
joist holes and any other openings in the party walls which may be uncovered
during the demolition and after the removal of the plaster. Permastone or
stucco that is damaged on the remaining abutting buildings shall be repaired as
close as possible to meet their present design.
Once the plaster has been removed from the exposed party wall(s) of the
aforementioned buildings and the toothing out and patching is complete, the
walls shall then be covered with an approved metal lath and three coats of
approved exterior cement sand plaster. Expansion joints must be installed
horizontally and vertically, not to exceed 600 square feet.
Section 2501.1 of the 2009 International Building Code, as amended by the City
of Reading, and all subsections, shall be strictly adhered to.
ii)   Materials. The portion of the walls to be stuccoed shall be covered with
an approved galvanized metal lath, equal to 3.4 pounds, per square yard. The
metal lath shall be nailed with galvanized nails. The contractor shall install
galvanized steel or zinc- leveled edge expansion flange to stop stucco at
front, back and top of the wall.
Mortar shall be mixed in the proportion of the 100 pounds of Portland cement to
250 pounds of sand, to which shall be added an approved water repellent such as
2 1/2 quarts of Ipanex®, or its approved equal, to each coat of mortar that is
applied.
Sand shall be washed bar sand conforming with the requirement of ASTM
Specification C35 and C897.
Ipanex® shall be as manufactured by IPA Systems, Inc., 2745 North Amber Street,
Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19134, or approved equal.
Finish stucco mortar shall be soft gray or cement gray in color unless an
alternate color is approved by the Engineer for aesthetic purposes. An
accelerator such as calcium chloride will be permitted in quantities not to
exceed 2% by weight.
iii)   Application. After the party or independent walls are exposed and
properly prepared with regard to all openings, chimneys and any other holes or
projections, scaffolding shall be erected and the plaster removed from the
walls to provide a clean prepared surface for the application of stucco. Upon
these surfaces, galvanized metal lath shall be installed with galvanized nails,
twelve-inch on center. The metal lath shall be lapped at least one inch in each
direction, and the joints of the metal lath shall be staggered. The wall shall
then be moistened and two successive coats of mortar applied for a total
thickness of at least one inch. The first coat (base or scratch coat) shall be
applied to the dampened surface and shall be not less than 3/8 of an inch
thick. The base coat shall be applied with sufficient pressure, and the stucco
shall be sufficiently plastic to provide a good bond to the masonry surface.
The base coat shall be scored with a metal scariffer and be allowed to dry or
temper for approximately two days.
The wetness of the base coat shall be sufficient to control suction, another
two days shall pass between the time the brown coat and the time the final or
finish coat is applied. The final coat shall be a smooth or sand finish. The
final coat shall be kept moist for three days. All precautions for cold weather
applications shall be strictly adhered to. The stucco shall extend from the top
of the existing asphaltic damproofing at the basement level to the underside of
the roof flashing. The final coat shall be either a float finish or a fine
pushup finish. The contractor shall spray a silicon waterproofing material over
the finish coat of stucco after waiting a minimum of 24 hours for the finish
coat to dry.
Areas on adjoining party walls that do not abut must also be stuccoed according
to the technical specifications.
All necessary steps must be taken by the contractor to insure a watertight
stuccoed wall. Expansion joints shall be inserted into the party walls to be
stuccoed so as to divide the wall into four equal sections vertically and
horizontally.
The contractor or his subcontractor shall have available at all times
sufficient stuccoing crews in order to comply with the provisions of this
contract on a timely basis.
The contractor shall maintain each site in a neat condition and upon completion
shall clean up each site leaving same in as good a condition as existed at the
start of his work.
   D.   Carpentry.
i)   Scope. Carpentry work shall cover all phases of rough and finish carpentry
required to provide complete, first-class weathertight structures abutting the
demolition area, and shall include, but not be limited to, the cutting back of
joists, the removal of roofing, sheathing, rafter, cornice, barge boards and
similar items of finish work.
ii)   Materials. Framing lumber and blocking shall be construction grade for
meeting the grading standards of the West Coast Lumberman's Association.
Trim lumber, such as fascia, barge boards and finish cornice, shall be No. 2
white pine, graded according to Western White Pine Association. Plywood shall
be 5/8-inch exterior grade (Marine) plywood Construction Grade One according to
American Plywood Association.
iii)   Construction. Rough framing and finish work shall be done in a first-
class manner.
The nailing schedule in § 2304.9 and Table 2304.9.1 of the 2009 International
Building Code shall be strictly adhered to. After any frame buildings are
demolished and the abutting frame walls exposed jack studs shall be installed
where necessary to provide adequate blocking for the installation of the
plywood. Fascia and cornice ends shall be installed where necessary to provide
weathertight structures.
Any trim work associated with this wall completion must be completed as per
specs.
   E.   Roofing and flashing.
i)   Scope. There are various types of roofing requiring reconstruction.
Roofing shall, in all cases, be extended to present an extension of the
existing roof, properly flashed and caulked with an elastic caulking material
or roofing cement as appropriate.
ii)   Materials. Existing roof covering materials, in most cases, cannot be
properly identified. However, where interlocking shingles are found, the same
type of shingles with the closest color match shall be used; other materials to
match existing roofing construction, as close as is practically possible, shall
be furnished and placed.
Roll roofing paper shall be placed as a base cover for all roofing that is
damaged and must be replaced; the roll roofing shall be thirty-pound felt,
properly lapped and nailed.
Flashing shall be 16 gauge aluminum roll flashing or drip edge flashing, and
shall extend continuously along the edge of the wall or roof, securely nailed
and the splices coated with asphaltic roof cement.
iii)   Construction. After all carpentry repairs have been completed, the roof
areas shall be covered with thirty-pound felt with edges lapped and nailed.
Aluminum flashing shall be extended around the roof edge and bent over the face
of the wall, a reasonable and proper distance or drip edge shall be installed,
whichever is proper for a particular situation. Where any openings appear, they
shall be mucked with an asphalt roofing cement and the finish roofing applied.
The box gutters, where they have been disturbed or extended, shall be
constructed with sheet metal, with all joints soldered and the surface given a
coat of high-quality roofing paint. The color of the paint shall conform as
close as possible to the existing color of the undisturbed roof.
The rain conductors that are remaining shall be extended from the pavement area
to the roof area. The joints shall be soldered or riveted and held in place
with standoffs and drives.
All seam or joints between wood framing and masonry joints shall be caulked
with a color-matching elastic caulking compound such as Butyl or Thiokol® or
its approved equal.
   F.   Paint.
All exposed wood surfaces shall be given two coats of paint with first-class
Glidden® or equivalent exterior paint, or an approved equal, in addition to a
previous primer. All knots shall be shellacked between the primer and the first
coat.
   G.   Cleanup.
All sites.
Upon completion of all work items, the contractor shall clean up and remove
from the site all debris, excess material, tools and equipment in preparation
for final inspection. The City shall be informed when these preparations have
been made and the premises are ready for such inspection.
Due to the fact that several areas of the adjacent properties could not be
inspected, any conditions that are not mentioned in the specifications that are
necessary to complete a job which is satisfactory to the Engineer in every way
shall be done at no cost to the City of Reading.
   H.   Mechanical improvements - not applicable.
   I.   Backfilling and grading.
The lot shall be graded in such manner that no ponding of water shall occur and
at no time shall any water drain onto the back, front, or sides of adjacent
properties. All outside steps shall be removed from the properties to be
demolished. Sidewalk at rear of property to be removed. All concrete basement
floors shall be punched open as to allow for water drainage and nonponding of
water. After all debris has been removed and the demolition area inspected by
the Engineer, all excavations shall be backfilled, with clean fill, such as
fine-crushed shale or its approved equivalent, in twelve-inch compacted layers,
i.e., free from glass, metal, wood, organic or combustible material. Each area
will then be spread four inches over with 2A Modified Stone.
   J.   Parging.
i) Scope. After demolition and proper cleaning out of the cellar areas of:
The foundation walls of the above-mentioned adjacent properties are exposed,
they shall be cleaned of loose dirt, lime white wash, or any other debris on
the walls as much as is practically possible. The adjacent foundation walls
shall be properly cemented parged from the base of the footer to the proposed
finished grade area.
ii)   Then the cement shall be applied and left to dry for at least one day.
Then a foundation sealer shall be applied and left to dry for an additional
day.
iii)   Materials. The damp-proofing shall be done with a number one grade
foundation coating which is impervious to water.
iv)   After the second coat is properly dried, the cellar areas of the above-
mentioned properties shall be properly backfilled to the proposed finish grade,
only after being inspected by the Engineer.
Any additional work which may have to be done when the foundation walls are
exposed which is necessary to protect the adjacent property(ies) from any
drainage nuisance shall be paid for entirely by the demolition contractor.
Intent. The intent of this section on parging of foundation walls is to prevent
moisture from oozing through the foundation walls of the remaining adjacent
properties.
The responsibility to see that this parging is done completely and
satisfactorily in every respect, whether specifically described or not, will be
the obligation of the successful contractor.
The City of Reading and its employees shall be held harmless and relieved from
any responsibility whatsoever by the contractor from lawsuits, etc., regarding
damage of any kind to adjacent properties.
   K.   Sidewalks and curbs.
These properties require the sewer and water lines to be cut off at the street
and then patch in two sidewalk squares measuring approximately four feet by
four feet each.
It is the intent of this provision of the contract that all existing sidewalks
and curbing abutting the structures being demolished shall be left in at least
their present condition of repair and appearance. Once demolition and site
clearance have been accomplished, any sidewalks and curbing damaged beyond
present condition shall be repaired, if necessary, in conformance with
standards adopted by the City of Reading, as determined by the Engineer for
this contract. Any openings in the pavement of properties to be demolished
shall be filled in with 2A modified stone and a layer of four inches of
concrete applied on top, flush with level of existing sidewalk.
   L.   Trees - not applicable.
   M.   Grocer's alley.
The party wall abutting the grocer's alley shall be left standing in order to
retain the cellarway between the two properties. A roof shall be constructed
over the grocer's alley in such manner that it conforms with the roofing and
flashing requirements of Section D, Technical Specifications. The roof shall be
constructed with a slope which assures proper runoff. The cement walk in the
grocer's alley shall be repaired or replaced as necessary as per the project
engineer. Some attention to existing stress cracks may warrant tiebacks or
pinning to be installed.
   N.   Chimneys.
Where party chimneys exist, the brick in the entire chimney shall be repaired
so as to assure weather-tightness, and then the entire chimney stuccoed as per
the stucco specifications in Section C.
   O.   Reinforcing rods.
When demolition under this contract involves properties with party walls, then
the contractor shall reinforce the structural stability of all party walls as
follows: run all 3/4-inch threaded steel-reinforcing rods through a minimum of
three floor joists, or attach the rods to the floor joists by hanger, a
distance of every four feet apart at the second and third floor levels. Solid
blocking shall be placed in between each joist that is tied with reinforcing
rods; eight-inch-by-eight-inch fishplates shall be installed on both ends of
all reinforcing rods. All installations must be inspected and approved by the
Engineer prior to closing up wall or floor area.
   P.   Asbestos - See Section A, Hazard material abatement.
   Q.   Garage - not applicable.
   R.   Fencing.
Fencing requirements will be determined at the on-site inspections of the pre-
bid.
   S.   Party wall - not applicable.
   T.   Fire escape - not applicable.
   V.   Securing of demolition site.
The contractor shall demolish the structure in a safe and suitable manner to
the general public. The site must be secured from public entry by a six-foot to
eight-foot high chain- link fence or solid barrier as approved by the Building
Inspector.
   W.   DEP and EPA approvals.
Contractor is responsible to obtain all DEP and EPA permits at contractor's
expense.
   Y.   Chapter 34, Section 3410.2. Insert "1978."
20. Editor's Note: Added during codification (see
Ch. 1, General Provisions, Part 2).
21. Editor's Note: Amended during codification (see
Ch. 1, General Provisions, Part 2).
22. Editor's Note: See 65 Pa.C.S. § 701 et seq.
23. Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 7210.141(b).
24. Editor's Note: Amended during codification (see
Ch. 1, General Provisions, Part 2).
25. Editor's Note: Amended during codification (see
Ch. 1, General Provisions, Part 2).
§ 180-803. State law and regulations.
In all matters that are regulated by the law of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania or by regulations of departments or agencies of the commonwealth
promulgated by authority of law, such laws or regulations, or other ordinances
of the City of Reading, Pennsylvania, as the case may be, shall control where
the requirements thereof are the same as or in excess of the provisions of this
Part. This code shall control in all cases where the state requirements, or the
requirements of other ordinances of this City, are not as strict as those
contained in Part.
§ 180-804. Provisions to be continuation of existing regulations.
[Amended 12-28-2009 by Ord. No. 78-2009]
Nothing in this Part or in the 2009 International Building Code, also known as
the "Building Code for the City of Reading," as hereby adopted, shall be
constructed to affect any suit or proceeding impending in any court, or any
rights acquired, or liability incurred, or any cause or causes of action
acquired or existing; under any act or ordinance as repealed by this Part; nor
shall any just or legal right or remedy of any character be lost, impaired or
affected by this Part.
§ 180-805. Publication.
The City Clerk is hereby ordered and directed to cause this Part to be
published as required by all applicable statutes, laws, regulations, charters
and ordinances.
§ 180-806. Title.
[Amended 12-28-2009 by Ord. No. 78-2009]
This Part shall be known as the "2009 International Building Code" and as the
"Building Code" for the City of Reading.
§ 180-807. Enforcement.
The Building Code of the City of Reading shall be enforced by City of Reading
Codes Service Division - Building/Trades and/or City of Reading Fire Marshal or
his/her designee of the Fire Prevention Division of the City of Reading
Department of Fire and Rescue.
Part 9
International Plumbing Code
[Adopted 12-26-2006 by Ord. No. 106-2006 (
Ch. 5, Part 2, of the 2001 Code of Ordinances)]
§ 180-901. Adoption of International Plumbing Code.
[Amended 12-28-2009 by Ord. No. 78-2009]
A certain document, three copies of which are on file in the office of the City
Clerk of the City of Reading, being marked and designated as the International
Plumbing Code, 2009 Edition, as published by the International Code Council, be
and is hereby adopted as the Plumbing Code of the City of Reading in the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania for the purpose of regulating and controlling the
design, construction, quality of materials, erection, installation, alteration,
repair, location, relocation, replacement, addition to, use or maintenance of
plumbing, heating, and cooling systems and installing appliances and fire
sprinkler systems in the City of Reading; providing for administration,
enforcement, licensing, collection of fees, penalties for violation and
amendment of the standards set forth in said Code, as published by the
International Code Council, Inc., save and except such portions as are
hereinafter deleted, modified or amended, if any, prescribed in §
180-902.
§ 180-902. Amendments.
[Amended 9-24-2007 by Ord. No. 72-2007; 12-28-2009 by Ord. No. 78-2009; 3-22-
2010 by Ord. No. 11-2010; 5-10-2010 by Ord. No. 18-2010; 8-9-2010 by Ord. No.
51-2010; 12-27-2010 by Ord. No. 106-2010]
The following sections of the International Plumbing Code, 2009 Edition, a/k/
a Plumbing Code for the City of Reading, is hereby amended, revised, deleted,
etc., as indicated:
   A.   Administration.
      (1)   ADM 101.1, Title, is amended to read as follows:
This code shall be known and may be cited as the "Plumbing Code of the City of
Reading, Pennsylvania," hereinafter referred to as "this code."
      (2)   ADM 101.5, is amended to read as follows:
         101.5 Jurisdiction. The jurisdiction of this code shall commence at
the curbline or property line into and through the property including all lots,
dwellings, etc., within the City of Reading.
         Exception. The jurisdiction shall be extended to include all work
performed in the street and/ or right-of-way performed by a plumber within the
City of Reading.
      (3)   Section 103, Department of Plumbing Inspector.
         (a)   ADM 103.2A Plumbing Inspector, is amended to include as follows:
         103.2A Plumbing Inspector. The Plumbing Inspector shall be designated
as the Code Official.
         (a)   Eligibility. The Department of Plumbing Inspection is
established under the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania Legislation [Par. Amended
Jan. 18, 1952 (1951), PL 2092, No. 592]. The Mayor of said City is hereby
authorized and required to appoint a practical plumber of at least 10 years'
experience and not engaged or connected directly or indirectly with the
plumbing business as Plumbing Inspector, whose duty it shall be to supervise,
superintend and inspect all plumbing, house and building drainage, in
conformity with the provisions of this Act.
         (b)   It shall be the duty of the City of Reading Plumbing Inspector
to administer and enforce the provisions of the City of Reading Plumbing
Ordinance. 26
         (c)   The City of Reading Plumbing Inspector shall, in order to be
eligible for appointment, have had not less than 10 years' practical experience
as a master plumber in the City of Reading.
         (d)   The Plumbing Inspector or his assign shall serve as chief
proctor for conducting tests and examinations for all classes of licenses
herein described.
         (e)   Shall not engage in any activities contrary to the provision of
this code, nor shall engage in any activities creating a conflict of interest.
      (4)   Section 104, Duties and powers of the Code Official.
         (a)   ADM 104.3.1 Licenses, is amended to read as follows:27
         104.3.1 Licenses. All persons engaged in plumbing, heating and
cooling, appliance contractor and installer and fire sprinkler contractor and
installer work as defined and covered by this Part are required to be licensed
and shall operate within the limitations imposed by their respective licenses.
It shall be unlawful without license for any person, firm or corporation to, or
cause to, install, construct, erect, alter, repair, improve, convert, move, use
or maintain any plumbing system within the City.
         (a)    General license information. License fees for the following
shall be as provided in
Chapter 212, Fees:
         Master plumber
         Journeyman plumber
         Appliance contractor plumbing
         Appliance installer plumbing
         Sprinkler contractor
         Sprinkler installer
            1.   All licenses covered under this code shall be issued annually
and shall expire on December 31.
            2.   All licenses may be renewed upon timely application. If the
holder of a license fails to renew said license within a five-year period, the
full fee must be paid for the years that the license was not renewed before a
license shall be issued. Any holders renewing the license after the fifth
consecutive year of nonrenewal shall be required to pass an examination
administered by the Plumbing Board.
            3.   All license and examination fees must be paid to the City of
Reading, Pennsylvania, prior to the issuance of said license or examination and
are nonrefundable.
            4.   Application for an initial license of whatever class shall be
made in writing and shall furnish such information as the Plumbing Board may
require. License applicants must be 18 years of age or older.
            5.   Applicants for an initial license of whatever class shall pass
with a grade of 70% an examination administered by the Plumbing Board.
         (b)   Qualifications for obtaining a license.
            1.   Master Plumber License.
            All applicants for a master plumber's license shall:
               A.   Hold a valid journeyman plumber license.
               B.   Shall have been employed as a journeyman plumber by a
registered master plumber for at least two years.
            2.   Journeyman Plumber License.
            All applicants for a journeyman plumber's license shall be employed
by a registered master plumber and registered with the Pennsylvania Bureau of
Apprenticeship Training, Department of Labor. He shall have completed at least
four years of approved apprenticeship training, been instructed in subjects
related to the trade not less than 216 hours per year during the four-year
apprenticeship and have been approved by the Local Apprenticeship Committee
according to National Apprenticeship Standards, or while employed by a
registered master plumber and registered with an apprenticeship training
program comparable to the foregoing program, he shall have completed at least
four years of approved apprenticeship training in such program, or he shall
have served an apprenticeship of not less than eight years under the
supervision of a registered master plumber.
            3.   Apprentice plumber.
            Apprentice plumbers shall be employed by a registered master
plumber and shall be registered with the Pennsylvania Bureau of Apprenticeship
Training, United States Department of Labor. Apprentice plumbers shall not be
permitted to install plumbing, heating or house drainage work unless under the
supervision of a registered plumber.
            4.   Appliance contractor license.
            All applicants for an appliance contractor license shall have
served at least two years as a registered appliance installer.
            Appliance contractors are limited to installation of the following:
domestic clothes-washing machines (water connections only), water conditioners,
domestic hot water heaters, garbage disposals (replacement only), icemakers,
coffee urns, etc., provided there is no installation of, or modification to,
the existing plumbing and drainage process. All plumbing-connected appliances
shall require indirect waste piping only and shall comply with City of Reading
Plumbing Code regulations.
            5.   Appliance installer license.
            All applicants for an appliance installer license shall be in the
employ of a registered appliance contractor.
            6.   Fire sprinkler contractor license.
            All applicants for a fire sprinkler contractor license shall obtain
a certificate of fitness from the Fire Marshal of the City of Reading.
            7.   Fire sprinkler installer license.
            All applicants for a fire sprinkler installer license shall obtain
a certificate from the AFSA (American Fire Sprinkler Association) or the NFSA
(National Fire Sprinkler Association), and be in the employ of a licensed fire
sprinkler contractor.
         (c)   Reciprocal license.
            A reciprocal license may be issued if the applicant holds an
equivalent license from a first, second, or third class city of the United
States, issued by an equivalent board of examiners, whose qualifications and
standards are equal to that of the City of Reading, Pennsylvania, and shall
have paid the prescribed fee pursuant to a written application.
         (d)   Retired license.
            (a)   All licensees, upon retirement from business, shall surrender
said license to the Code Service Division of the City of Reading, Pennsylvania.
Upon written request to the Plumbing Board, a license covered under this code
may be fully reinstated within a period of five years of retirement without
reexamination.
            (b)   If the holder of a retired license wishes to reactivate a
retired licensed within a five-year period, the full fee must be paid for the
years that the license was retired. All requests for reactivation must be made
in writing to the Plumbing Board.
            (c)   All persons reactivating a retired license after the fifth
year of retirement shall be required to pass an examination administered by the
Plumbing Board.
            (e)   Conditions and provisions for maintaining a license.
               1.   Applicant shall secure a license within 30 days of
examination result notification.
               2.   It is prohibited for any licensee to allow the use of said
license by any other person or to obtain a permit for work to be performed by
an unlicensed person.
               3.   All persons licensed under this code shall give immediate
notice of any change in address or place of business.
               4.   Prior to the issuance of a master plumber license,
appliance contractor license or a fire sprinkler contractor license, the
applicant shall submit to the Code Service Division, City of Reading, a
certificate of insurance establishing that the master plumber is currently
insured by a reputable insurance company acceptable to the Code Service
Division, City of Reading, covering said master plumber for property damages in
the amount of not less than $50,000 for any one claim, and not less than
$100,000 for multiple claims arising from the same undertaking, as well as
public liability insurance in the amount of not less than $100,000 from any one
claim and not less than $300,000 for more than one claim arising from the same
undertaking. The Pennsylvania League of Cities and Municipalities requirements
go into effect on August 31, 1993. Act 44 requires the submission to the
municipality of "proof of workers' compensation insurance" or an affidavit that
insurance is not required before issuing a permit. Said certificate shall be
for continuous coverage unless cancelled by said insurance company, at which
time, the Code Service Division, City of Reading, shall be notified in writing
by said insurance company.
               5.   All vehicles used for plumbing work in the City shall have
lettered or imprinted with letters and numbers no less than two inches high on
the driver's door the plumbing license number issued by this City and preceded
by the letters "MP."
               6.   Every appliance contractor engaged in said business of
appliance contracting in the City of Reading, and using a truck in that
business, shall have printed on the left side door (driver's side), the letters
ACP (Appliance Contractor Plumbing) along with the permanent license number
issued, and the name of the person, firm or corporation, and a legend depicting
that he is a registered appliance contractor in clearly visible letters no less
than two inches high.
            (f)   Suspension and revocation of license.
               1.   The Plumbing Board of Examiners and Standards may suspend
or revoke any license issued in conformity with this code in the event said
license was partially or wholly procured by or through nondisclosure,
misstatement or misrepresentation, or repeated violations of this code or if a
previously imposed penalty shall not have met with full compliance. "Repeated
violations" is hereby defined as a minimum of three separate offenses under
this code within a calendar year for which the licensee or offender has either
pleaded guilty or has been found guilty by a Magisterial District Judge or
other court of competent jurisdiction.
               2.   The Plumbing Board of Examiners, prior to invoking a
suspension or revocation of a license, shall first cause to be served upon said
licensee by a personal service or certified mail, a written notice of
suspension or revocation of license as the case may be, setting forth in
specific terms and language the nature of the repeated violations, the times
thereof and places of occurrence. Said written notice shall also set forth a
place, date and time where the licensee may appear at a hearing before the
Board, with counsel if desired, to hear sworn testimony as to the repeated
violations the licensee is alleged to have committed and for which his license
is subject to suspension or revocation as the case may be.
               3.   Licensee or his counsel shall be permitted to examine any
witness giving testimony against him as well as being given the privilege of
offering testimony or other proof or exhibits as a defense or rebuttal to
allegations. The hearing before the Board shall not require recordation, shall
be informal in nature, and shall not occur less than 30 days nor more than 90
days from the date of service of the written notice upon the licensee. The
decision of the Board shall be rendered in writing, not more than 30 days from
the conclusion of the hearing and shall be served upon licensee in the same
manner provided herein for service of the written notice of hearing. In the
event licensee or counsel fail to appear at the place, date and time fixed for
a hearing, the Board shall nevertheless convene for the purpose of hearing
evidence and/or testimony in order to arrive at its determination pursuant to
the within provisions. Notice of the Board's decision shall be served upon the
licensee as hereinabove set for just as if he and/or his counsel had appeared
at the hearing.
         (b)   ADM 104.5, Right of entry, is amended to read as follows:
            104.5 Right of entry.
            (a)   Entry by Code Official. In the discharge of his duties, the
Code Official or his authorized representative shall have the authority to
enter, at any reasonable hour, any building, structure or premises in the
jurisdiction to enforce the provisions of this code.
            (b)   Notice of inspection. When entry by the Code Official to any
building, structure or premises has not been possible, a notice of inspection
shall be issued to the property owner or representative of the owner.
            (c)   Rescheduling of inspections. If the owner or representative
of the owner cannot be available at the proposed time, said owner or
representative shall provide no less than twenty-four-hour written notice to
the Code Service Division Office. Upon failure to give such written notice or
upon failure to gain entry, an administrative fee as provided in
Chapter 212, Fees, will be assessed the owner or representative of the owner
for failing to supply written notice or to appear. For each rescheduling beyond
the second rescheduling, an administrative fee as provided in
Chapter 212, Fees, shall be assessed in all cases.
            (d)   Refusal of entry. If any owner, occupant or other person in
charge of a structure subject to the provision of this code refuses, impedes,
inhibits, interferes with, restricts or obstructs entry and free access to
every part of the structure or premises where inspection authorized by this
code is sought, the administrative authority shall promptly apply for a search
or inspection warrant to a court of competent jurisdiction and shall supply all
necessary affidavits and testimony to indicate that there is reasonable or
probable cause to conduct an inspection. For the purposes of this section, a
reasonable or probable cause to gain access for an inspection shall include
without being limited to the following:
               1.   That the inspection of the area is part of a planned
routine inspection being conducted pursuant to a systematic or concentrated
code enforcement program in that portion of the City.
               2.   That the Code Official, after investigation or upon
information received, has knowledge, information or a reasonable belief that a
violation of this code or other codes and ordinances of the City exist.
               3.   That such entry is for the purpose of inspecting a previous
notice of violation.
               4.   That the Code Official has received a complaint concerning
a violation on or within the premises.
               5.   That such entry is necessary to determine if the building,
structure, premises, dwelling, or dwelling units meet code standards.
         (c)   ADM 104.9, Administrative authority, is amended to read as
follows:
            104.9 Administrative authority. The administrative authority shall
be the City of Reading Plumbing Inspector, and the City of Reading Plumbing
Board of Standards and Examiners duly appointed by the jurisdiction and having
authority to administer and enforce the provisions of this code as adopted or
amended. The City of Reading Plumbing Inspector shall be the Code Official of
this code.
      (5)   Section 106, Permits.
         (a)   ADM 106.3 Applications for permits, is amended to read as
follows:28
            106.3 Applications for permits.
            Application for permits shall be made by a person holding a current
master plumber's license issued by the Code Service Division of the City of
Reading. Each shop must a have a master plumber assigned to apply for permits
from Codes Service Division for the City of Reading. There can be only one
master plumber in any one shop to pull permits. All shops shall give immediate
notice of any change in person holding master licensed authorized to apply for
permits for that shop. Every master plumber shall be permitted to apply for/
pull permits from the Codes Services Division for only one shop. A master
plumber shall not be permitted to apply for/pull permits for more than one shop
at any given time.
         (b)   ADM 106.3.1, Plans, is amended to read as follows:
            106.3.1 Plans.
            One or more sets of plans shall be submitted with each permit
application. The plans shall contain all the engineering calculations,
drawings, diagrams, and other data as required for approval. The administrative
authority may also require that the plans, drawings, diagrams and calculations
be designed by an engineer and/or architect licensed by the state in which the
work is to be performed.
            Except that the administrative authority may waive the submission
of plans and other data, provided it is determined that the nature of the work
covered by the permit does not require plan review to obtain code compliance.
         (c)   ADM 106.5.3, Permit expiration, is deleted and the section and
amended to read:
            106.5.3 Permit expiration. Every permit issued by the Code Official
in accordance with provisions of this code shall expire and become null and
void when such work authorized by the permit has not commenced within six
months from the date of issuance or if such work is incomplete or abandoned for
a period of 180 days after commencement of such work. In order for such work to
recommence, a new permit shall be obtained. The Code Official may grant an
extension of time to any permit providing the request is in writing by the
permit holder and time frame does not exceed one year from the date of
issuance.
         (d)   ADM 106.6.2, Fees schedule, is amended to read as follows:
[Amended 9-12-2011 by Ord. No. 42-201129]
            106.6.2 Fees schedule.
            Permit and license fees shall be determined by City Council.
            All tradespersons shall pay permit fees based on labor and
materials as provided in
Chapter 212, Fees, prior to commencing work or performing services in or upon
all premises within the City based upon aggregate cost of labor and materials:
            Penalties. Commencement of a project without a permit or in excess
of a permit will result in a charge of 100% of usual permit fee in addition to
normal fee (or doubling of the cost of the permit fee).
            Administrative fee. In addition to the aforesaid fee, all
tradespersons shall be required to pay an administrative fee as provided in
Chapter 212, Fees, for each permit applied for and received. This fee is in
addition to the above-listed permit fee.
            As-built. Should it be determined that the job costs greatly
differentiate from the as- built costs to save monies on the fee for the permit
at the discretion of the Codes Services Division - Building/Trades, said person
reserves the right to undertake any and all appropriate and applicable methods
including, but not limited to, commencement of legal action to obtain the
difference of the fee submitted for a permit and estimated job costs and the
as-built costs.
            Consultation fee. In addition to the fee for a permit as set forth
herein, a fee per hour as provided in
Chapter 212, Fees, shall be charged for consultation either in person or via
telephone with the any Building/Trades Inspector for consultation prior to
submission of plans for review and subsequent to approval of plans and issuance
of permit beyond one hour total time calculated by combining time of all
Building/Trades Inspector consulted on single project per above parameters.
            Removal of placard. The Building Code Official, his designee or
Code Official shall remove the stop-work order placard whenever the defect or
defects upon which the stop-work order and placarding action were based have
been eliminated and with the payment of a fee as provided in
Chapter 212, Fees. Any person who conceals, covers, hides, defaces or removes a
stop-work order placard without the approval of the Building Code Official
shall be subject to the penalties provided by this code.
         (e)   ADM 106.6.3, Refunds, is amended to read as follows:
            2.   Is amended by deleting the word "percentage" and the brackets
surrounding the phrase and by inserting in place thereof the language "80% of
the permit fee, excluding the $2 administrative fee."
            3.   Is amended by deleting the word "percentage" and the brackets
surrounding the phrase and by inserting in place thereof the language "0% (no
refund shall be issued for plan review)."
         (f)   ADM 106.6.4, Homeowner clause, to read as follows:
            106.6.4 Homeowner clause. Notwithstanding anything contrary to the
provisions of this code, a permit may be issued to the qualified owner-occupant
of a single-family dwelling in the City of Reading, used exclusively for the
living purposes, provided that the person is the bona fide owner and that said
owner will personally perform all labor in connection therewith said permit,
provided there is no modification or alteration to the sanitary sewer system or
effect upon or alteration of the house drainage system.
            The scope of work is limited to water piping (inside only) and rain
leaders only, and shall be in full compliance with the City of Reading Plumbing
Code regulations. 30
            A permit shall be secured from the Codes Service Deptartment and
approved by the Plumbing Inspector prior to commencing work, and an inspection
shall be performed prior to concealment.
      (6)   Section 108, Violations.
         (a)   ADM 108.4, Penalties. Delete section and amend to include as
follows:
            108.4 Penalties. Any person who shall violate any provision of this
code shall, upon conviction thereof, be guilty of a summary offense, sentenced
to pay a fine of not less than $500 and not exceeding $1,000 for the first two
offenses, and not more than $5,000 for the third and successive offenses, plus
costs and restitution, or in default of payment, to imprisonment for a term not
to exceed 30 days. One fine per month per violation shall be assessed, except
that continual and uncorrected violations that pose a threat to the public and
violate the same subsection of an ordinance for the same property can be
assessed at one citation per five calendar days.
         (b)   ADM 108.7.1, Authority to condemn, is amended to include as
follows:
            108.7.1 Authority to condemn.
            Any order or notice issued pursuant to the provisions stated in
this code may be served personally upon the person, partnership or corporation
to whom or to which it is addressed, or may be served by mailing the same in a
sealed envelope with postage prepaid, directed, in the cast of the holder of
any license, to the address furnished by him to the department of his business
address and, in the case of other person, partnership or corporation, to the
premises where the defects recited in such order are alleged to exist and by
the posting in a conspicuous place on such premises of a copy of such notice or
order. The service as above described by mailing and posting, shall be the
equivalent of personal service.
            If the notice of violation is not complied with within the time
therein specified or within a reasonable time determined by the Code Official
or his nominee, the Code Official or nominee shall cause to be instituted an
appropriate proceeding at law or in equity to restrain, correct, or abate such
alleged violation as provided herein or elsewhere according to law or to
require the removal or termination of the use of any plumbing system in
violation of the provisions of this code or of the order or direction given or
made pursuant thereto.
      (7)   Section 109, Means of Appeal.
         (a)   ADM 109.1A, Appeal, is amended to read as follows:31
            109.1A Appeal. Any person aggrieved by the decision of the Plumbing
Inspector may appeal in writing within 20 days to the Plumbing Board for a
review of said decision. A fee in the amount provided in
Chapter 212, Fees, shall be payable for each appeal and is due at the time of
submission of application for appeal. The Board Chairman shall afford the
person a hearing within 20 days and shall give written notice of the time and
place of said hearing.
         (b)   ADM 109.2A, Plumbing Board, to read as follows:
            109.2A Plumbing Board. There is hereby established a Plumbing Board
of Standards and Examiners whose members shall be appointed by the Mayor and
approved by City Council. The Plumbing Inspector shall serve as liaison officer
to the Plumbing Board and attend all meetings.
            (a)   Membership. The Plumbing Board shall consist of seven
members, of whom all shall be master plumbers. Except that, one may be from a
related industry. In the event of a failure to appoint a successor after the
expiration of any member's term, such member shall continue to serve until a
successor(s) is duly appointed.
            (b)   Term of office. The appointed members of the Board shall
serve for a term of six years in such a manner of original appointment that the
terms of three members shall expire December 31 of year one and the terms of
the other four members shall expire December 31 of year three.
            (c)      Meetings of the Board. The Plumbing Board shall hold its
first meeting not later than 30 days after the effective date of this Part, and
thereafter, the Board shall meet at such intervals as may be necessary for the
performance of its duties; providing, however, that normal meeting dates shall
be the second Wednesday of January, April, July, and October of each calendar
year.
            (d)   Function of the Board. The Plumbing Board of Standards and
Examiners shall make all reasonable rules and regulations pertaining to the
National Standard Plumbing Code to the City of Reading Plumbing Inspector for
Council's adoption. They shall make reasonable rules and regulations governing
its procedures, and similarly establish standards and procedures for the
qualifications, examination and licensing of master plumbers, journeyman
plumbers, appliance contractors and installers and fire sprinkler installers
and recommend qualified applicants for issuance of license to the Plumbing
Inspector. In addition, said Board shall convene at the instance of the Board
Chairman for the purpose of holding hearings concerning the suspension and/or
revocation of licenses hereinafter provided. There shall be a quorum of four
members in attendance in order for the Plumbing Board to conduct business.
            (e)   Removal of members. Any member may be removed for misconduct
or neglect of duty or for other just cause by a majority vote of Council taken
after the member has received 15 days' advance notice of the intent to take
such vote. Failure of a member to attend three consecutive regular meetings of
the Board will constitute grounds for immediate removal from the Board by City
Council. Failure of a member to attend at least 50% of the regular meetings of
the Board in a calendar year will constitute grounds for immediate removal from
the Board by City Council. The Chairperson of the Board shall inform the City
Clerk in writing when a member has failed to comply with this attendance
policy. Following such notification, City Council may vote to remove the member
and seek applicants to fill the vacant position.
         (c)   ADM 109.4, Hearing, is amended to include as follows:
            109.4 Hearing. Any person aggrieved by a decision of the Code
Official or a notice or order issued under this code shall request in writing a
hearing before the Plumbing Inspector within 10 days of receipt of the notice
or order. The Plumbing Inspector shall schedule a hearing to take place within
15 days and shall give written notice of the time and place of said hearing.
   B.   Chapter 3, General Regulations.
      (1)   Section 301.9, Water closets (existing work only). No water closets
may be installed to an existing unvented house drain or soil and waste drain
unless all of the following conditions are present: 32
         (a)   Provisions to be continuation of existing regulations. The
provisions of this Part, as far as they are the same as those or ordinances
and/or codes in force immediately prior to the enactment of this Part, are
intended as a continuation of such ordinances and codes and not as new
enactments. The installation marked provisions for a future vent.
         (b)   The outlet for the water closet will not be more than eight feet
from the house drain.
         (c)   The invert of the branch is at least three-fourths the size of
the house drain above the invert of the house drain.
         (d)   The branch will not be taken off the house drain within three
feet of the downstream side of the soil and waste stack, nor within the eight
feet of the main house trap, nor extended beyond the end of the existing house
drain.
      (2)   Section 301.10, Full bath-basement-cellar areas. The requirements
for this type installation shall be the same as for water closet additions,
with the exception that the maximum distance for a bathtub or lavatory shall
not exceed 12 feet from the house drain.
      (3)   Section 301.11, Traps and vents; traps. Anti-siphon or resealing
traps for use in connection with repairs or alterations of existing buildings
may be used if the combined total length of the waste line does not exceed 30
feet and enters the soil line on the same floor level at which the fixture is
connected; the exception to this ruling where the total developed length is not
to exceed 12 feet.
      (4)   Section 301.12, Handicap fixtures, is amended to include as
follows:
         Plumbing fixtures for the handicapped shall conform to the
requirements of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, Department of Labor and
Industry, Regulations for Buildings and Facilities Usable by the Physically
Handicapped, Americans With Disabilities Act.
      (5)   Section 301.13, Cast iron, is amended to include as follows:
         The use of cast iron to plastic back to cast iron is prohibited.
      (6)   Section 301.14, Sinks, is amended to include as follows:
         All food establishments must have a three-bay sink, interceptor trap
and hand sink (no exceptions any size business, small or large).
      (7)   Section 301.15, Toilets facilities, is amended to include as
follows:
         All food establishments that have table and chairs must have male and
female toilet facilities (each table counts as four).
      (8)   Section 305, Protection of pipes and plumbing system components.
         305.6.1 Sewer depth. Insert "42 inches water" and "48 inches sewer,"
respectively.
      (9)   Section 312, Inspections, is amended to include as follows:
         312.1.2 For a required morning inspection, please call the Codes
Services Division by 9:00 a.m. at 610-655-6312.
         312.1.3 For a required afternoon inspection, please call the Codes
Services Division by 1:00 p.m. at 610-655-6312.
   C.   Chapter 4, Fixture standards.
      (1)   Section 420.3, Water closet seats, is amended to read as follows:
         420.3 Water closet seats. Seats for water closets shall be of smooth,
nonabsorbent (white only in commercial premises) materials and be properly
sized to fit the water closet bowl, and seats match color of fixture. Except in
dwelling units, seats shall comply with ANSI 124.5.
   D.   
Chapter 5, Water heaters.
      (1)   Section 502, Installation.
         (a)   Section 502.5, Water heaters, amended to read as follows:
            502.5 Water heaters. All water heaters must have cement pads under
them (everywhere) except if they have legs on two inches or more, pad must be
installed.
   E.   Chapter 6, Water supply and distribution.
      (1)   Section 601, General.
         (a)   Section 601.5, Water supply to buildings, to read as follows:
            601.5 Water supply to buildings. No building designed for human
occupancy shall be occupied prior to the setting of the water meter as per City
of Reading Water Authority regulations. Only City of Reading water can be used
on any property with in the City of Reading (no wells are permitted).
         (b)   Section 601.6, Emergency domestic water supply, to read as
follows:
            601.6 Emergency domestic water supply.
            (a)   Building agents requesting emergency water supply shall first
comply the Bill 53, City of Reading Water Authority regulations, enacted
December 31, 1975, or updated version stating:
               No consumer, excepting with the written consent of the City of
Reading Water Authority, previously obtained, will be allowed to furnish water
to other persons or to suffer such other persons to take it themselves;
provided, however, that water may be supplied without such written consent in
order temporarily to relieve consumers having frozen or broken water pipes, or
whose supply may be cut off by similar emergencies.
            (b)   An emergency water supply serving a distressed building shall
be protected against backflow or back-siphonage by two spring-activated check
valves or equal. Emergency piping shall consist of rigid steel, at 150 psi and
160° working conditions. Emergency service shall be connected to a source made
available by the City of Reading Water Authority.
      (2)   Section 603, Water service.
         (a)   Section 603.1.1, Water service piping, to read as follows:
[Amended 3-23-2015 by Ord. No. 14-2015]
            603.1.1 Water service piping. Water service pipe to point of
entrance to the building shall be made of brass pipe, copper tube, type K
minimum with flare fitting, cast iron water pipe or galvanized steel pipe (no
plastic piping for water service or meter setup). All threaded ferrous pipe and
fittings shall be galvanized or cement-lined and when used underground in
corrosive soil or filled ground, shall be coal-tar enamel coated and threaded
joints shall be coated and wrapped when installed. No curb or meter box for
water service shall be located in any driveway or ramp area.
            (a)   PEX or plastic water type piping may be installed consistent
with the provisions of the Pennsylvania Uniform Construction Code and the
Building and Trades Department Guidelines for the installation of PEX or
plastic type piping which are attached as Exhibit 3 33  to this section.
      (3)   Section 605, Materials, joints and connections.
         (a)   Section 605.3A, Water service pipe. Insert:
            605.3A Water service pipe. Only type L copper or galvanized pipe
may be used in existing buildings. CPVC, type L copper pipe can be used on new
construction.
   F.   Chapter 7, Sanitary drainage piping.
      (1)   Section 702.1, Soil and waste piping aboveground in buildings, is
amended to read as follows:
         702.1 Soil and waste piping aboveground in buildings. All soil and
waste piping aboveground in buildings shall be of brass pipe, copper pipe,
copper tube DWV weight or heavier, cast iron soil pipe, galvanized steel pipe,
ABS or PVC DWV plastic pipe, schedule 40 minimum.
      (2)   Section 702.2, Underground building sanitary drains, is amended to
read as follows:
         702.2 Underground building sanitary drains. All underground building
drains shall be cast iron soil pipe, or PVC DWV plastic pipe, schedule 40
minimum. All PVC-type piping shall be laid in six-inch minimum sand or
screening bed and covered with twelve-inch minimum screening or sand. No-hub
piping shall not be used underground
      (3)   Section 702.3, Building sanitary sewer (private property mains), is
amended to read as follows:
         702.3 Building sanitary sewer (private property mains). Sewer pipe
material shall be cast iron, concrete; ABS or PVC, schedule 40 minimum. Joints
underground shall be watertight and rustproof.
   G.   Chapter 9, Vent piping.
      (1)   Section 901.
         (a)   Section 901.7, Aboveground, to read as follows:
            901.7 Aboveground. Vent piping aboveground in buildings shall be of
brass pipe, copper pipe, copper tube DWV weight or heavier, cast iron soil
pipe, galvanized steel pipe, or PVC DWV plastic pipe, schedule 40 minimum.
         (b)   Section 901.8, Underground, to read as follows:
            901.8 Underground. All underground vent piping shall be cast iron
soil pipe, hard temper copper tube type DWV or heavier, or PVC plastic pipe,
schedule 40 minimum. All PVC type piping shall be laid in six-inch minimum sand
or screening bed and covered with twelve-inch minimum screening or sand. No-hub
piping shall not be used underground.
      (2)   Section 904, Vent terminals.
         (a)   Section 904.1, Extensions through roofs, is amended to read as
follows:
            904.1 Extensions through roofs. Extensions of vent pipes through a
roof shall be terminated at least 12 inches above it. Where a roof is used for
other than weather protection, the vent extensions shall run at least seven
feet above the roof.
      (3)   Section 917. Delete entire section and amend to read as follows:
         (a)   Section 917.1, Air admittance valves, is amended to read as
follows:
            917.1 Air admittance valves. The use of any automatic plumbing vent
is hereby prohibited, as said vent does not provide circulation of air
throughout the sanitary system, and is contrary to the basic principles of the
model plumbing code.
   H.   Chapter 10, Building traps.
      (1)   Section 1002.1, Fixture traps, is amended to read as follows:
         1002.1 Fixture traps. Every building designed for human occupancy
shall have at least one four-inch basement floor drain installed. Floor drains
shall have a minimum water seal of two inches and shall be provided with
removal strainers. The floor drain shall be so constructed that it can be
readily cleaned, and the drain inlet shall be easily accessible at all times.
Floor drains subject to backflow shall be protected by a backwater valve. Floor
drains shall be of a size to serve efficiently the purpose for which they are
intended. Any floor drain subject to evaporation, proper maintenance of deep
seal traps shall be applied or a trap primer shall be used.
      (2)   Section 1002.6, Building traps, is amended to read as follows:
         1002.6 Building traps. The building house sewer shall be provided with
an approved manufactured horizontal trap made of cast iron which shall be set
at curbline where possible, which shall be provided with a fresh air inlet on
the house side, and a cleanout on the sewer side, both extended to finish grade
level and fitted with adjustable boxes if placed in ground, slip type if placed
in concrete, having place, with brass screws. The building's house trap shall
not be installed in any driveway or ramp area.
   I.   Chapter 11, Storm drainage piping.
      (1)   Section 1103.1, Building Storm Sewer/Main Trap, is amended to
include as follows:
         No building storm sewer where a house trap is required shall be
located in any driveway or ramp area.
      (2)   Section 1104.4, Interior conductors, to read as follows:
         1104.4 Interior conductors. Interior conductors installed aboveground
in buildings shall be of aluminum DWV pipe, brass pipe, copper tube DWV weight
or heavier, cast iron soil pipe, galvanized steel pipe or ABS or PVC DWV
plastic pipe, schedule 40 minimum.
      (3)   Section 1104.5, Underground building storm drains, to read as
follows:
         1104.5 Underground building storm drains. All underground storm drains
shall be cast iron soil pipe or PVC DWV plastic pipe, schedule 40 minimum. All
PVC type piping shall be laid in six-inch minimum sand or screening bed and
covered with twelve-inch minimum screening or sand. No-hub piping shall not be
used underground.
      (4)   Section 1104.6, Building storm sewer, to read as follows:
         1104.6 Building storm sewer. The building storm sewer shall be of:
cast iron soil pipe, concrete, type DWV, or PVC schedule 40 minimum.
      (5)   Section 1111.2, Subsoil drain, to read as follows:
         1111.2 Subsoil drain. Subsoil drain shall be solid pipe only, no flex
allowed.
   J.   
Chapter 14, entitled "Regulations Governing Individual Sewage Disposal Systems
for Homes and Other Establishments Where Public Sewage Systems Are Not
Available," to include as follows:
Chapter 14
Regulations Governing Individual Sewage Disposal Systems for Homes and Other
Establishments Where Public Sewage Systems Are Not Available
The provisions and requirements for individual sewage disposal systems shall be
in accordance with the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania Department of Environmental
Protection regulations enforced by the City Engineer, Reading, Pennsylvania.
Plans for any individual sewage disposal system shall have the approval of the
City Engineer, Reading, Pennsylvania, prior to commencing construction of any
building within the jurisdiction of this code.
26. Editor's Note: See Part 9, International Plumbing Code.
27. Editor's Note: Amended during codification (see
Ch. 1, General Provisions, Part 2).
28. Editor's Note: Original Subsection A(5)(a), ADM 106.4 Process of Obtaining
Licenses and Permits, which immediately preceded this subsection, was repealed
during codification (see
Ch. 1, General Provisions, Part 2).
29. Editor's Note: Amended during codification (see
Ch. 1, General Provisions, Part 2).
30. Editor's Note: See Part 9, International Plumbing Code.
31. Editor's Note: Amended during codification (see
Ch. 1, General Provisions, Part 2).
32. Editor's Note: Original Subsection B(1), Section 301.8, Existing work,
which immediately preceded this subsection, was repealed during codification
(see
Ch. 1, General Provisions, Part 2).
33. Editor's Note: Exhibit 3 is on file in the City offices.
§ 180-903. State law and regulations.
In all matters that are regulated by the law of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania or by regulations of departments or agencies of the commonwealth
promulgated by authority of law, such laws or regulations, or other ordinances
of the City of Reading, Pennsylvania, as the case may be, shall control where
the requirements thereof are the same as or in excess of the provisions of this
Part. This code shall control in all cases where the state requirements, or the
requirements of other ordinances of this City, are not as strict as those
contained in this Part.
§ 180-904. Provisions to be continuation of existing regulations.
The provisions of this Part shall not affect any act done or liability
incurred, nor shall they affect any suit or prosecution pending or to be
instituted to enforce any right or penalty or to punish any offense under the
authority of the repealed ordinances.
§ 180-905. Publication.
The City Clerk is hereby ordered and directed to cause this Part to be
published as required by all applicable statutes, laws, regulations, charters
and ordinances.
§ 180-906. Name.
[Amended 12-28-2009 by Ord. No. 78-2009]
This Part shall be known as the "2009 International Plumbing Code" and as the
"Plumbing Code" for the City of Reading.
§ 180-907. Enforcement.
The Plumbing Code of the City of Reading shall be enforced by City of Reading
Codes Service Division - Building/Trades including, but not limited to, the
Plumbing Inspector thereof and/or City of Reading Fire Marshal or his/her
designee of the Fire Prevention Division of the City of Reading Department of
Fire and Rescue Services.
Part 10
International Fuel Gas Code
[Adopted 12-26-2006 by Ord. No. 107-2006 (
Ch. 5, Part 12, of the 2001 Code of Ordinances)]
§ 180-1001. Adoption of International Fuel Gas Code.
[Amended 12-28-2009 by Ord. No. 78-2009]
A certain document, three copies of which are on file in the office of the City
Clerk of City of Reading, being marked and designated as the International Fuel
Gas Code, 2009 Edition, including Appendix Chapters (A, B, C, and D) (see
International Fuel Gas Code, § 101.3, 2009 Edition), as published by the
International Code Council, be and is hereby adopted as the Fuel Gas Code of
the City of Reading, in the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, regulating and
governing fuel gas systems and gas-fired appliances as herein provided;
providing for the issuance of permits and collection of fees therefor; and each
and all of the regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of said
Fuel Gas Code on file in the office of City Clerk for the City of Reading are
hereby referred to, adopted, and made a part hereof, as if fully set out in
this Part, with the additions, insertions, deletions and changes, if any,
prescribed in §
180-1002 of this Part.
§ 180-1002. Amendments.
The following sections are hereby revised:
   A.   Section 101.1 is amended by deleting the words "name of jurisdiction"
and the brackets surrounding that phrase and by inserting in place thereof the
words "the City of Reading."
   B.   Section 106.5.2 is amended by deleting the words "appropriate schedule"
and the brackets surrounding that phrase and by inserting in place thereof the
words "Same as All Trades."
   C.   Section 106.5.3(2) is amended by deleting the words "insert percentage"
and the brackets surrounding the phrase and by inserting in place thereof the
language "80% of the permit fee, excluding the $2 administrative fee."
   D.   Section 106.5.3(3) is amended by deleting the words "insert percentage"
and the brackets surrounding the phrase and by inserting in place thereof the
language "0% (no refund shall be issued for plan review)."
   E.   Section 108.4 is amended by:
      (1)   Deleting the words "specify offense" and the brackets surrounding
that phrase and by inserting in place thereof the words "summary offense."
      (2)   Deleting the word "amount" and the brackets surrounding that phrase
and by inserting in place thereof "$500 to $1,000."
      (3)   Deleting the words "number of days" and the brackets surrounding
that phrase and by inserting in place thereof "90 days."
   F.   Section 108.5 is amended by inserting amounts of "$500 to $1,000."
§ 180-1003. State law and regulations.
In all matters that are regulated by the law of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania or by regulations of departments or agencies of the Commonwealth
promulgated by authority of law, such laws or regulations, or other ordinances
of the City of Reading, Pennsylvania, as the case may be, shall control where
the requirements thereof are the same as or in excess of the provisions of this
Part. This code shall control in all cases where the state requirements, or the
requirements of other ordinances of this City, are not as strict as those
contained in this Part.
§ 180-1004. Provisions to be continuation of existing regulations.
Nothing in this Part or in the Fuel Gas Code hereby adopted shall be
constructed to affect any suit or proceeding impending in any court, or any
rights acquired, or liability incurred, or any cause or causes of action
acquired or existing, under any act or ordinance as repealed by this Part; nor
shall any just or legal right or remedy of any character be lost, impaired or
affected by this Part.
§ 180-1005. Publication.
The City Clerk is hereby ordered and directed to cause this Part to be
published as required by all applicable statutes, laws, regulations, charters
and ordinances.
§ 180-1006. Title.
This Part shall be known as the "International Fuel Gas Code" and "Fuel Gas
Code" of the City of Reading.
§ 180-1007. Enforcement.
The Fuel Gas Code of the City of Reading shall be enforced by City of Reading
Codes Service Division - Building/Trades and/or City of Reading Fire Marshal or
his/her designee of the Fire Prevention Division of the City of Reading
Department of Fire and Rescue.
Part 11
International Energy Conservation Code
[Adopted 12-26-2006 by Ord. No. 108-2006 (
Ch. 5, Part 13, of the 2001 Code of Ordinances)]
§ 180-1101. Adoption of International Energy Conservation Code.
[Amended 12-28-2009 by Ord. No. 78-2009]
A certain document, three copies of which are on file in the office of the City
Clerk of City of Reading, being marked and designated as the International
Energy Conservation Code, 2009 Edition, as published by the International Code
Council, be and is hereby adopted as the Energy Conservation Code of the City
of Reading, in the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania regulating and governing energy
efficient building envelopes and installation of energy efficient mechanical,
lighting and power systems as herein provided; providing for the issuance of
permits and collection of fees therefor; and each and all of the regulations,
provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of said Energy Conservation Code on
file in the office of City Clerk for the City of Reading are hereby referred
to, adopted, and made a part hereof, as if fully set out in this Part, with the
additions, insertions, deletions and changes, if any, prescribed in §
180-1102 of this Part.
§ 180-1102. Amendments.
The following section is hereby revised:
   A.   Section 101.1 is amended by deleting the words "name of jurisdiction"
and the brackets surrounding that phrase and by inserting in place thereof the
words "the City of Reading."
§ 180-1103. State law and regulations.
In all matters that are regulated by the law of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania or by regulations of departments or agencies of the commonwealth
promulgated by authority of law, such laws or regulations, or other ordinances
of the City of Reading, Pennsylvania, as the case may be, shall control where
the requirements thereof are the same as or in excess of the provisions of this
Part. This code shall control in all cases where the state requirements, or the
requirements of other ordinances of this City, are not as strict as those
contained in this Part.
§ 180-1104. Provisions to be continuation of existing regulations.
Nothing in this Part or in the Energy Conservation Code hereby adopted shall be
constructed to affect any suit or proceeding impending in any court, or any
rights acquired, or liability incurred, or any cause or causes of action
acquired or existing, under any act or ordinance as repealed by this Part; nor
shall any just or legal right or remedy of any character be lost, impaired or
affected by this Part.
§ 180-1105. Publication.
The City Clerk is hereby ordered and directed to cause this Part to be
published as required by all applicable statutes, laws, regulations, charters
and ordinances.
§ 180-1106. Name.
This Part shall be known as the "International Energy Conservation Code" and
"Energy Conservation Code" of the City of Reading.
§ 180-1107. Enforcement.
The Energy Conservation Code of the City of Reading shall be enforced by City
of Reading Codes Service Division - Building/Trades and/or City of Reading Fire
Marshal or his/her designee of the Fire Prevention Division of the City of
Reading Department of Fire and Rescue Services.
Part 12
Property Maintenance Rules and Regulations
[Adopted 6-28-2010 by Ord. No. 28-2010 (Ch. 5, Part 14, of the 2001 Code of
Ordinances) ; Amended 1-25-2021 by Ord. No. 7-2021]
§ 180-1201. Purpose.
Lack of maintenance of properties, littering, improper storage of trash and
rubbish, storage of inoperable/nonregistered vehicles, vendor operations
without permits and accumulation of snow and ice are costly problems that
contribute to the deterioration of property values and general disorder in a
community. These problems degrade the physical appearance of the City, which
reduce business and tax revenue, inhibiting economic development. The quality
of life and community pride of the citizens of Reading are negatively impacted
by the occurrences and existence of these activities. Recognizing these are
community problems, the purpose of this Part is to promote the health, safety
and general welfare of the City by helping to create a clean environment for
the citizens of Reading.
§ 180-1202. Definitions.
[Amended 1-25-2021 by Ord. No. 7-2021]
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this Part, shall be
defined as follows, unless context clearly indicates otherwise:
DEBRIS - Any material upon the premises that is a residue of structural
demolition, or any other material that is not neatly stored, stacked or piled
in such a manner so as not to create a nuisance or become a harboring place or
food supply for insects and rodents.
HOUSEHOLD HAZARDOUS WASTE (HHW) - See Chapter
496-201, “Solid Waste.”
ILLEGAL DUMPING - The unauthorized depositing, placing, throwing or dumping of
solid waste or recyclable materials on public or private property or at any
location other than a permitted disposal or processing facility.
INDOOR FURNITURE - Any and all pieces of furniture which are made for only
inside use including, but not limited to, upholstered chairs and sofas, etc.
JUNKED VEHICLE -
   A.   Any vehicle which presents a hazard or danger to the public or is a
public nuisance by virtue of its state or condition of disrepair.
   B.   The following conditions, if present, are examples of a state or
condition of disrepair:
      (1)   Rusted and/or jagged metal on or protruding from the body of the
vehicle.
      (2)   Broken glass or windows on or in the vehicle.
      (3)   Leaking of any fluids from the vehicle or deflated or flat tire(s).
      (4)   Unsecured and/or unlocked doors, hood or trunk.
      (5)   Storage or placement of the vehicle in an unbalanced condition, on
concrete blocks or other similar apparatus.
      (6)   Harboring of rodents, insects or other pests.
   C.   The foregoing examples are not inclusive of all conditions which may
constitute a state or condition of disrepair. See also "motor vehicle
nuisance."
LITTER - Any solid waste or recyclable material improperly discarded,
deposited, or abandoned. Litter can be intentional or unintentional. It can
come from a person, vehicle, or other source. Litter can occur anywhere but is
often found on streets, sidewalks, in parks, and near abandoned properties or
empty lots.
LITTER RECEPTACLE - A permanent or semi-permanent receptacle placed on public
or private property for the purpose of preventing litter by collecting small
amounts of waste material from passersby.
LOCAL RESPONSIBLE AGENT - Any person residing or working within the County of
Berks designated to accept service on behalf of a legal owner or operator of a
rental dwelling unit.
MOBILE VENDOR - A vendor or seller of food and/or goods from a vehicle or other
conveyance upon the public streets or alleys of the City that does not
typically remain stationary for more than approximately 10 minutes each hour.
MOTOR VEHICLE - Any type of mechanical device, capable or at one time capable
of being propelled by a motor, in which persons or property may be transported
upon public streets or highways, and including trailers or semitrailers pulled
thereby.
MOTOR VEHICLE NUISANCE - A motor vehicle with one or more of the following
defects:
   A.   Broken windshields, mirrors or other glass, with sharp edges.
   B.   Broken headlamps, tail lamps, bumpers or grills with sharp edges.
   C.   Any body parts, truck, firewall or floorboards with sharp edges or
large holes resulting from rust.
   D.   Protruding sharp objects from the chassis.
   E.   Missing doors, windows, hood, trunks or other body parts that could
permit animal harborage.
   F.   One or more open tires or tubes which could permit animal harborage.
   G.   Any vehicle suspended by blocks, jacks or other such materials in a
location which may pose a danger to the public property owners visitors or
residents of the property on which said vehicle is found.
   H.   Any excessive fluids leaking from vehicle which may be harmful to the
public or the environment.
   I.   Disassembled body or chassis parts stored in on or about the vehicle.
   J.   Vehicles that do not display a current valid license and registration.
   K.   Such other defects which the Fire Department determines to be a danger
to the general public or property.
   L.   Motor vehicles parked, drifted or otherwise located which may interfere
with flow of pedestrian or automobile traffic or impede emergency efforts.
MUNICIPAL WASTE - See Chapter
496-201, “Solid Waste.”
NOTICE OF VIOLATION - A written document issued to a person in violation of a
City ordinance which specifies the violation and contains a directive to take
corrective action within a specified time frame or face further legal action.
NUISANCE - Any condition, structure or improvement which constitutes a danger
or potential danger to the health, safety or welfare of citizens of the City or
causes a blighting effect in City neighborhoods. See also "public nuisance."
PERSON - Any individual, partnership, corporation, association, institution,
cooperative enterprise, municipal authority, federal government or agency,
state institution and agency, or any other legal entity whatsoever which is
recognized by law as being subject to such rights and duties.
PLANTER STRIP - The non-concrete space in the sidewalk area filled with dirt
and/or grass.
PRIVATE PROPERTY - Any land and the improvements thereon owned by any person
and includes front, side and rear yards; vacant lots, buildings and other
structural improvement; walkways and alleyways; and parking areas, designed or
used either wholly or in part for private residential, industrial or commercial
purposes, whether inhabited or temporarily or continuously uninhabited or
vacant, including any yard, grounds, walk, driveway, porch, steps, vestibule or
mailbox belonging or appurtenant to such dwelling, house, building or other
structure.
PUBLIC NUISANCE - Any condition or premises which is unsafe or unsanitary.
PUBLIC OFFICER - Any police officer, authorized inspector, or public official
designated by the Mayor to enforce the City ordinances.
PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY - The total width of any land used, reserved or dedicated
as a street, alley, driveway, sidewalk or utility easement, including curb and
gutter areas.
RECYCLABLE MATERIAL - See Chapter
496-201, “Solid Waste.”
RESIDUAL WASTE - See Chapter
496-201, “Solid Waste.”
SHADE TREE - Unless otherwise specified, includes all trees, shrubs, and woody
vegetation in the public right-of-way.
SIDEWALK AREA - The public right-of-way between the property line and the
curbline or the established edge of the roadway.
SOLID WASTE - See Chapter
496-201, “Solid Waste.”
STORAGE - The containment of any solid waste or recyclable material on a
temporary basis in such a manner as not to constitute disposal of said waste,
and it shall be presumed that the containment of any solid waste or recyclable
material in excess of three months constitutes disposal.
TREEWELL - The non-concrete area surrounding a shade tree planted in a sidewalk
area.
VEGETATION - Any planting that is cultivated and managed for edible or
ornamental purposes such as vegetable gardens, trees, shrubs, hedges, flowers,
etc.
VIOLATION TICKET - A form issued by a police officer or public officer to a
person who violates a provision of this Part. The violation ticket is an offer
by the City of Reading extended to a person to settle a violation by paying the
fine in lieu of a citation being issued against the violator.
WEEDS -
   A.   Shall be defined as all grasses, annual plants and vegetation, which
meet any of the following criteria:
      (1)   Exceed six inches in height.
      (2)   Exhale unpleasant noxious odors or pollen such as ragweed,
dandelion and miscellaneous other vegetation commonly referred to as "weeds" or
"brush."
      (3)   May conceal filthy deposits or serve as breeding places for
mosquitoes, other insects or vermin.
      (4)   May cause a public nuisance.
   B.   Weeds shall not include cultivated and managed vegetation planted for
edible or ornamental purposes such as vegetable gardens, trees, shrubs,
flowers, etc.
YARD - An open space on the same lot with a structure.
§ 180-1203. Quality of life (QOL) violations.
[Amended 9-12-2011 by Ord. No. 39A-2011; 11-28-2011 by Ord. No. 56-2011; 4-23-
2012 by Ord. No. 38-2012; 1-25-2021 by Ord. No. 7-2021]
   A.   QOL.001 Accumulation of waste. All exterior property and the interior
of every structure shall be free from any accumulation of solid waste or
recyclable material.
   B.   QOL.002 Animal maintenance and waste/feces cleanup. People owning,
harboring or keeping an animal within the City of Reading shall not permit any
waste matter/feces from the animal to collect and remain on the property so as
to cause or create an unhealthy, unsanitary, dangerous or offensive living
condition. All waste from animals must be cleaned up on a daily basis.
   C.   QOL.003 Improper disposal or dumping of waste. Improper disposal of
solid waste or recyclable material or dumping of said material on vacant,
unoccupied, or other property.
   D.   QOL.004 High weeds, grass or plant growth. All premises and exterior
property shall be maintained free from weeds or plant growth in excess of six
inches (152.4 mm). All noxious weeds shall be prohibited. Weeds shall be
defined as all grasses, annual plants and vegetation. Cultivated flowers,
gardens, trees and shrubs shall not be included as a violation of this Part.
   E.   QOL.005 Littering or scattering waste. No person shall throw, dump,
place, sweep or dispose of anysolid waste or recyclable material upon any
public sidewalk, alley, street, bridge, public passageway, public parking area
or on any public property.
   F.   QOL.006 Motor vehicles. It shall be unlawful to store, park or place
any unregistered, uninspected, inoperative, unlicensed or nuisance motor
vehicle on any premises. No vehicle shall, at any time, be in a state of major
disassembly, disrepair, or in the process of being stripped or dismantled.
Painting of vehicles is prohibited unless conducted inside an approved spray
booth.
   G.   QOL.007 Operating a food cart illegally. It shall be unlawful to
operate any food cart without the proper permits and/or inspections. It shall
also be unlawful to operate any food cart while any portion of the cart is
inoperable.
   H.   QOL.008 Operating or vending without the proper permit/license. It
shall be unlawful for any person, business, partnership or entity to operate,
including but not limited to any business, vending cart, store or establishment
without the proper permits.
   I.   QOL.009 Outside placement of indoor appliances/furniture. It is
prohibited to store or place any/all appliances or furniture, including but not
limited to ranges, refrigerators, air conditioners, ovens, washers, dryers,
microwaves, dishwashers, mattresses, recliners, sofas, interior chairs or
interior tables on the exterior of any property for the purpose of sale or any
other reason except for the temporary purpose to perform maintenance in said
property.
   J.   QOL.010 Ownership presumption of waste. It shall be the responsibility
of every owner and/or occupant to dispose of their solid waste and recyclable
materials in a proper manner. Any business or person who is unable to show
proof that they have legally disposed of any solid waste or recyclable
materials will be in violation of this Part. Should any person or business use
an unlicensed hauler to dispose of said materials, said person or business
shall be in violation of this Part. Upon request of the Property Maintenance
Manager or his/her designee, any owner or occupant must show proof of their
appropriate solid waste or recyclable hauler. For any material found within any
container or any loose trash/waste found that displays the name and/or address
of a person and/or persons, that material shall be presumed to be the property
of such person and/or persons. It shall be unlawful for any person, business,
partnership or entity to remove or haul solid waste or recyclable material
without the proper approval or license. Any solid waste or recyclable material
found not to be disposed of in accordance with this Part, will be a violation
of this Part.
   K.   QOL.011 Placement or littering by private advertising matter. No person
shall throw, place, sweep or dispose of litter or private advertising matter
upon any public sidewalk, alley, street, bridge, public passageway, public
parking area or any public property. No person, group, organization or entity
will hang, place or advertise on any public property in any manner. No person,
group, organization or entity will hang, place or advertise on any property
that they do not have any ownership rights without written approval of said
owner.
   L.   QOL.012 Snow and ice removal from sidewalks. Every owner, tenant,
occupant, lessee, property agent or any other person who is responsible for any
property within the City of Reading is required to remove any snow or ice from
their sidewalk. Any property located along Penn Street, Washington Street and/
or Court Street or along Second Street, Third Street, Fourth Street, Fifth
Street, Sixth Street, Seventh Street, Eighth Street and Ninth Street, between
Penn Street and Washington Street, shall have all snow or ice removed within
two hours of the cessation of said snow and ice falling. Furthermore, the
entire sidewalk must be free of all snow and ice in these areas. Any other
property within the City of Reading shall have all snow and ice removed within
four hours of the cessation of said snow and ice falling and must create a
path, free from any snow or ice, of three feet on said sidewalk. Should any
property be a place of business within the City of Reading, all snow and ice
must be removed within four hours of the cessation of said snow and ice
falling. For any property deemed a business, the entire sidewalk must be free
from any snow and ice. If/when the snow and/or ice cessation happens during the
hours of darkness, the time limit of removal of all snow and ice begins at
daybreak. [Amended 12-9-2013 by Ord. No. 72-2013]
   M.   QOL.013 Storage containers for solid waste or recyclable material. The
owner of every premises shall supply containers forsolid waste and recyclable
materials that meet the specifications in
Chapter 496  “Solid Waste” as well as be responsible for the removal of all
waste from the property. All containers that store solid waste or recyclable
material shall be durable, watertight and made of metal or plastic. Containers
must have tight-fitting covers and must be kept clean and odor free at all
times. Any containers provided free of charge by the City shall remain the
property of the City and the property owner where the container is received
shall be responsible for securing and maintaining said container. City-provided
containers may not be permanently modified, except by the City or its
designees, and shall only be used for their intended purpose. All containers
must be stored such that said containers are not visible from the public right-
of-way. Storage containers may only be placed in front of any property for
collection after 5:00 p.m. the day before the scheduled collection. Containers
shall be returned to an appropriate storage location no later than 7:00 a.m. on
the day after the scheduled collection. (Example: Jim Smith's trash collection
day is Wednesday. Jim Smith may place his trash containers out front of his
property on Tuesday night, after 5:00 p.m. Jim Smith must place his trash
containers in the rear of his yard before 7:00 a.m. on Thursday morning.)
[Amended 12-9-2013 by Ord. No. 72-2013]
   N.   QOL.014 Storing or discarding of appliances. Refrigerators and similar
equipment, including but not limited to washers, dryers, dishwashers and ranges
not in operation, shall not be discarded, stored or abandoned on any premises
without first removing the doors.
   O.   QOL.015 Storing of hazardous material. It shall be unlawful for any
person, business or entity to store combustible, flammable, explosive or other
hazardous waste or household hazardous waste, including but not limited to
paints, volatile oils and cleaning fluids or combustible rubbish, including but
not limited to wastepaper, boxes or rags unless the storage of said materials
is stored in compliance with the applicable Building Codes.
   P.   QOL.016Separation and collection of recyclable materials. It shall be
the responsibility of the owner of all residential, commercial and industrial
properties to provide for the storage, collection and processing of all
recyclable material, as defined in
Chapter 496, “Solid Waste,” from their property.
   Q.   QOL.017 Storing or serving of potentially hazardous food. No person,
business, partnership or entity shall store or serve potentially hazardous
food, including but not limited to out-of-date food, food being stored above or
below the appropriate temperature, food being stored directly on a flooring
surface, infestation problems at the location or serving food that had
previously been open are considered a violation of this Part.
   R.   QOL.018 Swimming pools. Swimming pools shall be maintained in good
repair at all times. They shall also be kept clean, safe, covered and sanitary
as well.
   S.   QOL.019 Violating the terms of any vending license. It shall be
unlawful to violate any term, part, portion or in total, any vending license.
Any person, business, partnership or entity violating their vending license
shall be in violation of this Part.
   T.   QOL.020 Historic District violation. It shall be the responsibility of
the owner of a property located in a Historic District, so designated by City
ordinance, to obtain a certificate of appropriateness from the Preservation
Officer or the Historic Architecture Review Board before making any alteration,
including paint, to the exterior of a structure visible from a public right-of-
way. Failure to produce a bona fide certificate of appropriateness upon request
by a Codes official shall constitute a violation of this Part.
   U.   QOL.021 Visible Satellite Dish in Historic District. It shall be the
responsibility of the owner of a property located in a Historic District, so
designated by City ordinance, to obtain a certificate of appropriateness from
the Preservation Officer or the Historic Architecture Review Board before
installing or retaining any satellite dish visible from a public right-of-way.
   V.   QOL.022 Registered waste hauler(s) required. It shall be the
responsibility of the owner of every property to retain active and appropriate
solid waste and recycling collection services from a licensed waste hauler at
all times and submit documentation of said service(s) to the City according to
the provisions in
Chapter 496, "Solid Waste."
   W.   QOL.023 Temporary dumpster permit. Each temporary dumpster, whether
placed on private property or in a public right-of-way, shall display a valid
permit issued by the City of Reading.
   X.   QOL.024 Temporary dumpster maintenance. Each temporary dumpster must
meet all requirements identified in
chapter 496 “Solid Waste.” Temporary dumpsters containing solid waste must be
covered from 6:00 p.m. to 6:00 a.m. or during all periods on non-use.
   Y.   QOL.025 Improper use of litter receptacle. A litter receptacle is
placed on public property by the City, private property by the property owner,
or within the public right of way by the city or adjacent property owner for
use by the public to deposit small quantities of handheld trash, but not
household or commercial waste. No person shall place household or commercial
waste, trash bags, tires, bulky waste, or large quantities of other materials
in or around a litter receptacle.
§ 180-1204. Authority for issuance of violation ticket.
Upon finding a quality of life violation, any City of Reading Property
Maintenance Inspector appointed by the Property Maintenance/Codes Administrator
of the City of Reading may issue quality-of-life violation tickets to the owner
and/or occupant of the property at issue or to the individual known to have
violated this Part.
§ 180-1205. Enforcement.
   A.   The provisions of this Part shall be enforced by police officers, or
any other public officer authorized to enforce ordinances.
   B.   Any violation of the provisions of this Part may be cause for a
citation, a violation ticket and/or a notice of violation to be issued to the
violator.
§ 180-1206. Service.
A violation ticket shall be served upon a violator by handing it to the
violator, by handing it at the residence of the person to be served to an adult
member of the household or other person in charge of the residence, by leaving
or affixing the notice or violation ticket to the property where the violation
exists, by handing it at any office or usual place of business of the violator,
to his/ her agent or to the person for the time being in charge thereof, or by
mailing the notice to the violator's address of record.
§ 180-1207. Separate offense.
Each day a violation continues or is permitted to continue may constitute a
separate offense for which a separate fine may be imposed.
§ 180-1208. Regulations.
The Property Maintenance/Codes Administrator is hereby authorized to promulgate
rules and regulations to implement and supplement the provisions of this Part.
§ 180-1209. Abatement of violation.
[Amended 1-25-2021 by Ord. No. 7-2021]
   A.   Any person or business violating this Part is hereby directed to
satisfy the City of Reading and its citizens, upon issuance of a quality of
life ticket, by correcting the violation in question.
   B.   The City reserves the right to abate the violation if it has not been
corrected within 24 hours from the time the violation was issued. The City
further reserves the right to abate the violation immediately if the violation
poses an imminent risk to public health and safety. The City may abate the
violation itself or utilize a contractor and will provide an invoice for
abatement, including both direct and indirect costs and any expenses incurred,
and the cost thereof may be charged to the owner of the property or offending
party. The invoice will be paid separate from and in addition to the quality of
life ticket.
   C.   If the City abates the violation directly, it will perform abatement
work at a maximum rate of $60 per hour per man and forward the cost of any
materials or services necessary for the abatement. The City reserves the right
to charge an additional 20% on all material purchases to cover all
miscellaneous expenses such as wear and tear on equipment.
   D.   If the City assigns a contractor to perform abatement, the contractor
will submit an invoice for said work to the City and the City will forward
these costs to the violator. The City reserves the right to add a processing
fee up to 30% to the amount billed by the contractor.
§ 180-1210. Violations and penalties.
[Amended 9-12-2011 by Ord. No. 39A-2011; 11-28-2011 by Ord. No. 56-2011; 4-23-
2012 by Ord. No. 38-2012; 1-25-2021 by Ord. No. 7-2021]
A.   Violation ticket fines.
   (1)   For the first of a violation of this Part within a twelve-month
period, violation tickets shall be issued in the amounts of $25 or $50 as set
forth on the chart below.
   (2)   For the second offense of a violation of this Part within a twelve-
month period, violation tickets shall be issued in the amounts of $50 or $100
as set forth on the chart below.
   (3)   For the third and subsequent offense of a violation of this Part
within a twelve-month period, violation tickets shall be issued in the amounts
of$100 or $250 as set forth on the chart below.
   (4)   Any person who receives a violation ticket for any violation of this
Part may, within 15 days, admit the violation, waive a hearing and pay the fine
in full satisfaction.
   (5)   Any person violating this Part shall pay a fine as set forth herein
for each offense plus all direct and indirect costs incurred by the City for
the clean up and abatement of the violation.
Violation Number for   Brief Description of
Quality of Life Ticket Violations for Quality Fine 1 Fine 2 Fine for Third and
Ordinance              of Life Ticket                       Subsequent Instance
                       Ordinance
Violation Number for   Brief Description of
Quality of Life Ticket Violations for Quality Fine 1 Fine 2 Fine for Third and
Ordinance              of Life Ticket                       Subsequent Instance
                       Ordinance
QOL.001                Accumulation of waste  $25    $50    $100
QOL.002                Animal maintenance and $25    $50    $100
                       waste/feces cleanup
QOL.003                Improper disposal or   $25    $50    $100
                       dumping of waste
QOL.004                High weeds, grass or   $25    $50    $100
                       plant growth
QOL.005                Littering or           $25    $50    $100
                       scatteringwaste
QOL.006                Motor vehicles         $25    $50    $100
QOL.007                Operating a food cart  $25    $50    $100
                       illegally
                       Operating or vending
QOL.008                without the proper     $25    $50    $100
                       permit/ license
                       Outside placement of
QOL.009                indoor appliances/     $25    $50    $100
                       furniture
QOL.010                Ownership presumption  $50    $100   $250
                       of waste
                       Placement or littering
QOL.011                by private advertising $25    $50    $100
                       matter
QOL.012                Snow and ice removal   $25    $50    $100
                       from sidewalks
                       Storing containers for
QOL.013                solid waste and        $25    $50    $100
                       recyclable material
QOL.014                Storing or discarding  $25    $50    $100
                       of appliances
QOL.015                Storing of hazardous   $50    $100   $250
                       material
                       Separation and
QOL.016                collection of          $25    $50    $100
                       recyclable materials
                       Storing or serving of
QOL.017                potentially hazardous  $50    $100   $250
                       food
QOL.018                Swimming pools         $25    $50    $100
QOL.019                Violating the terms of $25    $50    $100
                       any vending license
QOL.020                Historic District      $25    $50    $100
                       violation
QOL.021                Satellite dishes in    $25    $50    $100
                       Historic Districts
QOL.022                Registered waste       $25    $50    $100
                       hauler required
QOL.023                Temporary dumpster     $25    $50    $100
                       permit
QOL.024                Temporary dumpster     $25    $50    $100
                       maintenance
QOL.025                Improper use of litter $25    $50    $100
                       receptacle
 
   B.   Violation ticket penalties.
      (1)   If the person in receipt of a $25 violation ticket does not pay the
fine or request a hearing within 15 days, the person will be subject to a $10
penalty for days 16 through 30.
      (2)   If the person in receipt of a $50 violation ticket does not pay the
fine or request a hearing within 15 days, the person will be subject to a $25
penalty for days 16 through 30.
      (3)   If the person in receipt of a $100 or higher violation ticket does
not pay the fine or request a hearing within 10 days, the person will be
subject to a $50 penalty for days 16 through 30.
      (4)   Failure of the person to make payment or request a hearing within
30 days of a violation ticket shall make the person subject to a citation for
failure to pay.
      (5)   If violations continuous or egregious, the code official has right
to issue citation without first issuing ticket provided notice has been given.
Upon issuance of four tickets for same violation, right is reserved for code
official to issue citation for fifth and subsequent offenses.
   C.   Citation fines. Any person, firm or corporation who shall fail, neglect
or refuse to comply with any of the terms or provisions of this Part, or of any
regulation or requirement pursuant hereto and authorized hereby shall, upon
conviction, be ordered to pay a fine not less than $100, not more than $1,000
on each offense or imprisoned no more than 90 days, or both.
   D.   Restitution. The Magisterial District Judge may order the violator to
make restitution to said real or personal property owner.
§ 180-1211. Appeal.
[Amended 1-24-2011 by Ord. No. 2-2011; 4-23-2012 by Ord. No. 38-2012]
   A.   Administrative appeal.
      (1)   A person in receipt of a violation ticket may appeal to the
Property Maintenance/ Codes Administrator by filing a request with the Property
Maintenance Division in writing within 15 calendar days of date of the
violation ticket.
      (2)   In order for an appeal to be deemed valid and a hearing date/time
to be set, the following must be performed by the alleged violator requesting
the appeal within 15 calendar days of the date that the quality-of-life ticket
was issued:
         (a)   All paperwork, including the appropriate appeal form, for the
appeal must be submitted and complete.
         (b)   Payment of the fine must be paid in full, which will be refunded
within 30 calendar days should the alleged violator win the appeal.
      (3)   The appeal hearing will be held before the Property Maintenance/
Codes Administrator or his/her designee. The Administrator or his/her designee
may uphold the appeal, deny the appeal, or may modify the violation ticket and/
or any associated costs, fines or penalty amounts as he/she sees appropriate.
   B.   Subsequent appeals. Any subsequent appeal shall be filed to the Berks
County Court of Common Pleas pursuant to 2 Pa.C.S.A. §§ 751 and 752.
§ 180-1212. Collections.
[Added 2-28-2011 by Ord. No. 11-2011]
At the discretion of the City of Reading, all tickets for which payment is not
received within 45 days of issuance of a ticket for which an appeal is not
taken and 45 days from denial of appeal and monies paid by the City of Reading
for abatement of a violation not paid within 45 days of billing may be turned
over by the City to a collections agency for receipt.
§ 180-1213. Liens.
[Added 2-28-2011 by Ord. No. 11-2011]
At the discretion of the City of Reading, liens may be placed upon a property
against which tickets were issued for which payment is not received within 45
days of issuance of a ticket for which an appeal is not taken and 45 days from
denial of appeal and monies paid by the City of Reading for abatement of a
violation and not paid within 45 days of billing.
§ 180-1214. Nonexclusive remedies.
[Amended 2-28-2011 by Ord. No. 11-2011]
The penalty, lien and collection provisions of this section shall be
independent, non-mutually exclusive separate remedies, all of which shall be
available to the City of Reading as may be deemed appropriate for carrying out
the purposes of this Part. The remedies and procedures provided in this Part
for violation hereof are not intended to supplant or replace to any degree the
remedies and procedures available to the City in the case of a violation of any
other City of Reading Code or Codified Ordinances, whether or not such other
code or ordinance is referenced in this Part and whether or not an ongoing
violation of such other code or ordinance is cited as the underlying ground for
a finding of a violation of this Part.
Part 13
International Property Maintenance Code
[Adopted 2-27-2012 by Ord. No. 20-2012; amended 10-10-2022 by Ord. No. 115-
2022; 11-10-2025 by Ord. No. 72-2025]
§ 180-1301. Adoption of International Property Maintenance Code.
 
he City of Reading hereby adopts and amends the International Property
Maintenance Code of the International Code Council, 2018 Edition, as deleted,
modified or amended as set forth to create a revised City of Reading Property
Maintenance Code establishing minimum regulations governing the conditions and
maintenance of all property, buildings and structures, by providing the
standards supplied utilities and facilities and other physical things and
conditions essential to ensure that structures are safe, sanitary and fit for
occupation and use and the condemnation of buildings and structures unfit for
human occupancy and the demolition of such structures as attached as follows.34
34. Editor's Note: See also
Ch. 23, Part 9, Blighted Property Review Committee.
   Chapter 1
   Scope and Administration
   PART 1 - SCOPE AND APPLICATION
   SECTION 101
   GENERAL
[A] 101.1 Title.
These regulations shall be known as the PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE OF CITY OF
READING, PENNSYLVANIA, hereinafter referred to as "this code."
[A] 101.2 Scope.
The provisions of this code shall apply to all existing residential and
nonresidential structures and all existing premises and constitute minimum
requirements and standards for premises, structures, equipment and facilities
for light, ventilation, space, heating, sanitation, protection from the
elements, a reasonable level of safety from fire and other hazards, and for a
reasonable level of sanitary maintenance; the responsibility of owners, an
owner's authorized agent, operators and occupants; the occupancy of existing
structures and premises, and for administration, enforcement and penalties.
   101.2.1 Reporting.
   It is the right of every tenant and resident to report any presumed
violations of this code to the Property Maintenance Division (PMD) or a
representative of this Division. A landlord cannot evict a tenant or tenants in
retaliation for the reporting of alleged code violations.
[A] 101.3 Intent.
This code shall be construed to secure its expressed intent, which is to ensure
public health, safety and welfare insofar as they are affected by the continued
occupancy and maintenance of structures and premises. Existing structures and
premises that do not comply with these provisions shall be altered or repaired
to provide a minimum level of health and safety as required herein.
[A] 101.4 Severability.
If a section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase of this code is, for any
reason, held to be unconstitutional, such decision shall not affect the
validity of the remaining portions of this code.
   SECTION 102
   APPLICABILITY
[A] 102.1 General.
Where there is a conflict between a general requirement and a specific
requirement, the specific requirement shall govern. Where differences occur
between provisions of this code and the referenced standards, the provisions of
this code shall apply. Where, in a specific case, different sections of this
code specify different requirements, the most restrictive shall govern.
102.2 Maintenance.
Equipment, systems, devices and safeguards required by this code or a previous
regulation or code under which the structure or premises was constructed,
altered or repaired shall be maintained in good working order. An owner,
owner's authorized agent, operator or occupant shall not cause any service,
facility, equipment or utility that is required under this section to be
removed from, shut off from or discontinued for any occupied dwelling, except
for such temporary interruption as necessary while repairs or alterations are
in progress. The requirements of this code are not intended to provide the
basis for removal or abrogation of fire protection and safety systems and
devices in existing structures. Except as otherwise specified herein, the owner
or the owner's authorized agent shall be responsible for the maintenance of
buildings, structures and premises.
[A] 102.3 Application of other codes.
Repairs, additions or alterations to a structure, or changes of occupancy,
shall be done in accordance with the procedures and provisions of the effective
International Existing Building Code, International Building Code,
International Existing Building Code, International Energy Conservation Code,
International Fire Code, International Fuel Gas Code, International Mechanical
Code, International Residential Code, International Plumbing Code and NFPA 70
and the Pennsylvania Uniform Construction Code as adopted by the City of
Reading. Nothing in this code shall be construed to cancel, modify or set aside
any provision of the International Zoning Code.
[A] 102.4 Existing remedies.
The provisions in this code shall not be construed to abolish or impair
existing remedies of the jurisdiction or its officers or agencies relating to
the removal or demolition of any structure that is dangerous, unsafe and
insanitary.
[A] 102.5 Workmanship.
Repairs, maintenance work, alterations or installations that are caused
directly or indirectly by the enforcement of this code shall be executed and
installed in a workmanlike manner and installed in accordance with the
manufacturer's instructions.
[A] 102.6 Historic buildings.
The provisions of this code shall not be mandatory for existing buildings or
structures designated as historic buildings where such buildings or structures
are judged by the code official to be safe and in the public interest of
health, safety and welfare.
[A] 102.7 Referenced codes and standards.
The codes and standards referenced in this code shall be those that are listed
in Chapter 8 and considered part of the requirements of this code to the
prescribed extent of each such reference and as further regulated in Sections
102.7.1 and 102.7.2.
   Exception: Where enforcement of a code provision would violate the
conditions of the listing of the equipment or appliance, the conditions of the
listing shall apply.
   [A] 102.7.1 Conflicts.
   Where conflicts occur between provisions of this code and the referenced
standards, the provisions of this code shall apply.
   [A] 102.7.2 Provisions in referenced codes and standards.
   Where the extent of the reference to a referenced code or standard includes
subject matter that is within the scope of this code, the provisions of this
code, as applicable, shall take precedence over the provisions in the
referenced code or standard,
[A] 102.8 Requirements not covered by code.
Requirements necessary for the strength, stability or proper operation of an
existing fixture, structure or equipment, or for the public safety, health and
general welfare, not specifically covered by this code, shall be determined by
the code official.
[A] 102.9 Application of references.
References to chapter or section numbers, or to provisions not specifically
identified by number,
shall be construed to refer to such chapter, section or provision of this code.
[A] 102.10 Other laws.
The provisions of this code shall not be deemed to nullify any provisions of
local, state or federal law.
   PART 2 - ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
   SECTION 103
   DEPARTMENT OF PROPERTY MAINTENANCE INSPECTION
[A] 103.1 General.
The Authority for the enforcement of this code shall rest with the Manager of
the Property Maintenance Division, hereinafter referred to as the "code
official."
[A] 103.2 Appointment.
The code official shall be hired, appointed or retained in accordance with the
City of Reading Codified Ordinances.
[A] 103.3 Deputies.
In accordance with the prescribed procedures of this jurisdiction and with the
concurrence of the appointing authority, the code official shall have the
authority to appoint a deputy(s). Such employee(s) shall have powers as
delegated by the code official.
[A] 103.4 Liability.
The code official, member of the board of appeals or employee charged with the
enforcement of this code, while acting for the jurisdiction, in good faith and
without malice in the discharge of the duties required by this code or other
pertinent law or ordinance, shall not thereby be rendered civilly or criminally
liable personally, and is hereby relieved from all personal liability for any
damage accruing to persons or property as a result of an act or by reason of an
act or omission in the discharge of official duties.
   [A] 103.4.1 Legal defense.
   Any suit or criminal complaint instituted against any officer or employee
because of an act performed by that officer or employee in the lawful discharge
of duties and under the provisions of this code shall be defended by the legal
representative of the jurisdiction until the final termination of the
proceedings. The code official or any subordinate shall not be liable for costs
in an action, suit or proceeding that is instituted in pursuance of the
provisions of this code.
[A] 103.5 Fees.
The fees for activities and services performed by the Property Maintenance
Division shall be in accordance with the fee schedule duly adopted by ordinance
by the City of Reading.
103.6 Conflicts of interests.
An official or employee connected with the enforcement of this code, except one
whose only connection is that of a member of the board of appeals established
under provisions of Section 111, shall not be engaged in, or directly or
indirectly connected with, the furnishing of labor, materials or appliances for
the construction, alteration or maintenance of a building, or the preparation
of construction documents thereof, unless that person is the owner of the
building; nor shall such officer or employee engage in any work that conflicts
with official duties or interests of the department.
   SECTION 104
   DUTIES AND POWERS OF THE CODE OFFICIAL
[A] 104.1 General.
The code official is hereby authorized and directed to enforce the provisions
of this code. The code official shall have the authority, subject to approval
of the appointing authority, to render interpretations of this code and to
adopt policies and procedures in order to clarify the application of its
provisions. Such interpretations, policies and procedures shall be in
compliance with the intent and purpose of this code. Such policies and
procedures shall not have the effect of waiving requirements specifically
provided for in this code.
[A] 104.2 Inspections.
The code official shall make all of the required inspections, or shall accept
reports of inspection by approved agencies or individuals. Reports of such
inspections shall be in writing and be certified by a responsible officer of
such approved agency or by the responsible individual. The code official is
authorized to engage such expert opinion as deemed necessary to report on
unusual technical issues that arise, subject to the approval of the appointing
authority.
[A] 104.3 Right of entry.
Where it is necessary to make an inspection to enforce the provisions of this
code, or whenever the code official reasonable cause to believe that there
exists in a structure or upon a premises a condition in violation of this code,
the code official is authorized to enter the structure or premises at
reasonable times to inspect or perform the duties imposed by this code,
provided that if such structure or premises is occupied the code official shall
present credentials to the occupant and request entry. If such structure or
premises is unoccupied, the code official shall first make a reasonable effort
to locate the owner, owner's authorized agent or other person having charge or
control of the structure or premises and request entry. If entry is refused,
the code official shall have recourse to the remedies provided by law to secure
entry.
[A] 104.4 Identification.
The code official shall carry proper identification when inspecting structures
or premises in the performance of duties under this code.
   104.4.1 Refusal of entry.
   If any owner, occupant or other person in charge of a structure subject to
the provision of this code refuses, impedes, inhibits, interferes with,
restricts or obstructs entry and free access to every part of the structure or
premises where inspection authorized by this code is sought, the administrative
authority may promptly apply for a search or inspection warrant to a court of
competent jurisdiction and shall supply all necessary affidavits and testimony
to indicate that there is a reasonable or probable cause to conduct an
inspection. For the purpose of this section, a reasonable or probable cause to
gain access for an inspection shall include without being limited to the
following:
      1.   That the inspection of the area is part of a planned routine
inspection being conducted pursuant to a systematic or concentrated code
enforcement program in that portion of the City; or
      2.   That the Property Maintenance Division, after investigation or upon
information received, has knowledge, information or a reasonable belief that a
violation of this code or other codes and ordinances of the City exist; or
      3.   That such entry is for the purpose of inspecting a previous notice
of violation; or
      4.   That the Property Maintenance Division has received a complaint
concerning a violation on or within the premises; or
      5.   That such entry is necessary to determine if the building,
structure, premises, dwelling or dwelling units meet the standards of this code
and building, fire, and health codes and for the safety and welfare of the
public.
   104.4.2 Right of entry by owner.
   Every occupant of a dwelling unit, building, structure or premises shall
give the owner thereof, or his agent or employee access to any part of such
dwelling, dwelling unit, building, structure or premises, at all reasonable
times for the purpose of conducting inspections to determine whether or not
violation of the code may exist, or for the purpose of making such repairs or
alterations as are necessary to effect compliance with the provisions of this
code or with any lawful rule or regulation adopted or any lawful order issued
pursuant to the provisions of this code.
   104.4.3 Notification to tenants.
   Every owner of a dwelling unit, building, structure or premises shall give
the tenants thereof notice of an inspection and obtain their authorization to
grant a code official entry to their unit. If the tenant(s) object(s) to entry
by the code official, the owner shall so notify the code official.
[A] 104.5 Notices and orders.
The code official shall issue all necessary notices or orders to ensure
compliance with this code.
[A] 104.6 Department records.
The code official shall keep official records of all business and activities of
the department specified in the provisions of this code. Such records shall be
retained in the official records for the period required for retention of
public records and/or authorized by City of Reading ordinance.
104.7 Rulemaking authority.
The code official or his/her designee shall have authority, with the approval
of the appointing authority, as necessary in the interest of public health,
safety, and general welfare, to adopt and promulgate rules and procedures; to
interpret and implement the provisions of this code; to secure the intent
thereof; and to designate requirements applicable because of local climatic or
other conditions. Such rules shall not have the effect of waiving structural or
fire performance requirements specifically provided for in this code, or of
violating accepted engineering methods involving public safety.
104.8 Coordination of inspections.
Whenever in the enforcement of this code or another code or ordinance the
responsibility of more than one code official of the jurisdiction is involved,
it shall be the duty of the code officials involved to coordinate their
inspections and administrative orders as fully as practicable so that the
owners and occupants of the structure shall not be subjected to visits by
numerous inspectors or multiple or conflicting orders. Whenever an inspector
from any agency or department observes an apparent or actual violation of some
provision of some law, ordinance or code not within the inspector's authority
to enforce, the inspector shall report the findings to the code official having
jurisdiction.
104.9 Compliance.
If upon any inspection the codes official determines that the violations are
corrected in compliance with the provisions of this code, he/she shall note
this determination in the file together with the date of such inspection.
   SECTION 105
   APPROVAL
[A] 105.1 Modifications.
Whenever there are practical difficulties involved in carrying out the
provisions of this code, the code official shall have the authority to grant
modifications for individual cases upon application of the owner or owner's
authorized agent, provided that the code official shall first find that special
individual reason makes the strict letter of this code impractical, the
modification is in compliance with the intent and purpose of this code and that
such modification does not lessen health, life and fire safety requirements.
The details of action granting modifications shall be recorded and entered in
the department files.
[A] 105.2 Alternative materials, design and methods of construction and
equipment.
The provisions of this code are not intended to prevent the installation of any
material or to prohibit any design or method of construction not specifically
prescribed by this code, provided that any such alternative has been approved.
An alternative material, design or method of construction shall be approved
where the code official finds that the proposed design is satisfactory and
complies with the intent of the provisions of this code, and that the material,
method or work offered is, for the purpose intended, not less than the
equivalent of that prescribed in this code in quality, strength, effectiveness,
fire resistance, durability and safety. Where the alternative material, design
or method of construction is not approved, the code official shall respond in
writing, stating the reasons why the alternative was not approved.
[A] 105.3 Required testing.
Whenever there is insufficient evidence of compliance with the provisions of
this code or evidence that a material or method does not conform to the
requirements of this code, or in order to substantiate claims for alternative
materials or methods, the code official shall have the authority to require
tests to be made as evidence of compliance without expense to the jurisdiction.
   [A] 105.3.1 Test methods.
   Test methods shall be as specified in this code or by other recognized test
standards. In the absence of recognized and accepted test methods, the code
official shall be permitted to approve appropriate testing procedures performed
by an approved agency.
   [A] 105.3.2 Test reports.
   Reports of tests shall be retained by the code official for the period
required for retention of public records.
[A] 105.4 Used material and equipment.
Materials that are reused shall comply with the requirements of this code for
new materials. Materials, equipment and devices shall not be reused unless such
elements are in good repair or have been reconditioned and tested where
necessary, placed in good and proper working condition and approved by the code
official.
[A] 105.5 Approved materials and equipment.
Materials, equipment and devices approved by the code official shall be
constructed and installed in accordance with such approval.
[A] 105.6 Research reports.
Supporting data, where necessary to assist in the approval of materials or
assemblies not specifically provided for in this code, shall consist of valid
research reports from approved sources.
   SECTION 106
   VIOLATIONS
[A] 106.1 Unlawful acts.
It shall be unlawful for a person, firm or corporation to be in conflict with
or in violation of any of the provisions of this code.
[A] 106.2 Notice of violation.
The code official shall serve a notice of violation or order in accordance with
Section 107.
[A] 106.3 Prosecution of violation.
Any person failing to comply with a notice of violation or order served in
accordance with Section 107 shall be deemed guilty of a summary offense, and
the violation shall be deemed a strict liability offense. If the notice of
violation is not complied with, the code official shall institute the
appropriate proceeding at law or in equity to restrain, correct or abate such
violation, or to require the removal or termination of the unlawful occupancy
of the structure in violation of the provisions of this code or of the order or
direction made pursuant thereto. Any action taken by the authority having
jurisdiction on such premises shall be charged against the real estate upon
which the structure is located and shall be a lien upon such real estate.
[A] 106.4 Violation penalties.
Any person who shall violate a provision of this code shall, upon conviction
thereof in a summary proceeding, be sentenced to pay a fine of not less than
$75 and not exceeding $500 for the first two continual and uncorrected
violations of the same subsection on the same property and not less than $150
nor more than $1,000 for the third and subsequent continual and uncorrected
violation of the same subsection of the code on the same property, plus costs
and restitution, or in default of payment, may be sentenced to imprisonment for
a term not to exceed 90 days. East section of this code that is violated shall
constitute a separate offense punishable by a separate fine as set forth
herein. Each day that a violation continues after due notice has been served
shall be deemed a separate offense punishable by a separate fine as set forth
herein.
   106.4.1 Neighborhood mitigation penalty.
   In addition to the foregoing fines, fees, penalties and/or restitution in PM
106.4, upon conviction of any violation of a provision of this code, an
additional Neighborhood Mitigation Penalty (NMP) shall be levied in the amount
of $50. All such NMPs levied and collected by any division of the unified
judicial system existing under Section 1 of Article V of the Pennsylvania
Constitution and 42 Pa.C.S.A. § 301, shall be remitted to the City of Reading
for deposit into the Neighborhood Mitigation Fund for the purpose of funding
mitigation exercises performed by the City on private properties, including but
not limited to demolitions, cleanups, light repairs, abandoned vehicle towing,
removal of trash and/or cutting of grass and weeds, etc. If any fine is paid on
installments, the proportionate amount of the NMP shall be remitted on each
installment.
[A] 106.5 Abatement of violation.
The imposition of the penalties herein prescribed shall not preclude the legal
officer of the jurisdiction from instituting appropriate action to restrain,
correct or abate a Violation, or to prevent illegal occupancy of a building,
structure or premises, or to stop an illegal act, conduct, business or
utilization of the building, structure or premises.
106.6 Extensions.
Upon application, an extension of time beyond that given on the correction
order to bring the violations set forth on the inspection into compliance with
this code may be granted for a reasonable cause. An application for extension
shall include:
   (a)   Name, address and phone number of applicant;
   (b)   Address of property referenced on correction order; and
   (c)   Violation(s) referenced on correction order for which an extension is
being requested.
   SECTION 107
   NOTICES AND ORDERS
107.1 Notice to person responsible.
Whenever the code official determines that there has been a violation of this
code or has grounds to believe that a violation has occurred, notice shall be
given in the manner prescribed in Sections 107.2 and 107.3 to the person
responsible for the violation as specified in this code. Notices for
Condemnation procedures shall comply with Section 108.3.
   EXCEPTIONS:
      1.   Open and unsecure. Notice is not required whenever a property is
open and unsecure and the code official has determined that the property shall
be secured. The code official may order the structure secured.
      2.   Administrative fee. Whenever an administrative fee is due under this
code, the bill therefor shall be the notice.
      3.   Transfer of property. Notice shall not be required for violation of
Section 107.5.
[A] 107.2 Form.
Such notice prescribed in Section 107.1 shall be in accordance with all of the
following:
   1.   Be in writing.
   2.   Include a description of the real estate sufficient for identification.
   3.   Include a statement of the violation or violations and why the notice
is being issued.
   4.   Include a correction order allowing a reasonable time to make the
repairs and improvements required to bring the dwelling unit or structure into
compliance with the provisions of this code.
   5.   Inform the property owner or owner's authorized agent of the right to
appeal in accordance with Section 111.1.
   6.   Include a statement of the right to file a lien in accordance with
Section 106.3.
[A] 107.3 Method of service.
   1.   Delivered personally by hand delivery or
   2.   Sent by certified or first-class mail addressed to the last known
address and/or posted at a conspicuous place on the property.
107.4 Unauthorized tampering.
Signs, tags or seals posted or affixed by the code official shall not be
mutilated, destroyed or tampered with, or removed without authorization from
the code official.
107.5 Penalties.
Penalties for noncompliance with orders and notices shall be as set forth in
Section 106.4.
107.6 Transfer of ownership.
It shall be unlawful for the owner of any dwelling unit or structure who has
received a compliance order or upon whom a notice of violation has been served
to sell, transfer, mortgage, lease or otherwise dispose of such dwelling unit
or structure to another until the provisions of the compliance order or notice
of violation have been complied with, or until such owner or the owner's
authorized agent shall first furnish the grantee, transferee, mortgagee or
lessee a true copy of any compliance order or notice of violation issued by the
code official and shall furnish to the code official a signed and notarized
statement from the grantee, transferee, mortgagee or lessee, acknowledging the
receipt of such compliance order or notice of violation and fully accepting the
responsibility without condition for making the corrections or repairs required
by such compliance order or notice of violation. Failure to comply with this
section constitutes an offense of this code punishable as set forth in Section
106.4.
   SECTION 108
   UNSAFE STRUCTURES AND EQUIPMENT
108.1 General.
When a structure or equipment is found by the code official to be unsafe, or
when a structure is found unfit for human occupancy, or is found unlawful, such
structure shall be condemned pursuant to the provisions of this code.
   108.1.1 Unsafe structures.
   An unsafe structure is one that is found to be dangerous to the life,
health, property or safety of the public or the occupants of the structure by
not providing minimum safeguards to protect or warn occupants in the event of
fire, or because such structure contains unsafe equipment or is so damaged,
decayed, dilapidated, structurally unsafe or of such faulty construction or
unstable foundation, that partial or complete collapse is possible.
   108.1.2 Unsafe equipment.
   Unsafe equipment includes any boiler, heating equipment, elevator, moving
stairway, electrical wiring or device, flammable liquid containers or other
equipment on the premises or within the structure that is in such disrepair or
condition that such equipment is a hazard to life, health, property or safety
of the public or occupants of the premises or structure.
   108.1.3 Structure unfit for human occupancy.
   A structure is unfit for human occupancy whenever the code official finds
that such structure is unsafe, unlawful or, because of the degree to which the
structure is in disrepair or lacks maintenance, is insanitary, vermin or rat
infested, contains filth and contamination, or lacks ventilation, illumination,
sanitary or heating facilities or other essential equipment required by this
code, or because the location of the structure constitutes a hazard to the
occupants of the structure or to the public.
      [A] 108.1.3.1 Blighted property and public nuisance.
      Definitions.
      For the purpose of this Part, all words used in present tense include the
future tense. All words in the plural number include the singular number and
all words in the singular number include the plural number, unless the natural
construction of the word clearly indicates otherwise. The word "shall" is
mandatory and not discretionary. The word "used" includes designated, intended,
built, or arranged to be used.
      A.   Single property. Blighted property shall include:
         (1)   Any premises which because of physical condition or use is
regarded as a public nuisance at common law, or has been declared a public
nuisance in accordance with the local housing, building, plumbing, fire and
related codes.
         (2)   Any premises which because of physical condition, use or
occupancy is considered an attractive nuisance to children, including but not
limited to abandoned wells, shafts, basements, excavations, and unsafe fences
or structures.
         (3)   Any dwelling which because of its dilapidated, unsanitary,
unsafe, vermin-infested or lacking in the facilities and equipment required by
the housing or building codes of the municipality, has been designated by the
department responsible for enforcement of the code as unfit for human
habitation.
         (4)   Any structure which is a fire hazard, or is otherwise dangerous
to the safety of persons or property.
         (5)   Any structure from which utilities, plumbing, heating, sewerage
or other facilities have been disconnected, destroyed, removed, or rendered
ineffective so that the property is unfit for its intended use.
         (6)   Any vacant or unimproved lot or parcel of ground in a
predominantly built-up neighborhood, which by reason of neglect or lack of
maintenance has become a place for accumulation of trash and debris, or a haven
for rodents or other vermin.
         (7)   Any unoccupied property which has been tax delinquent for a
period of two years prior to the effective date of this act, and those in the
future having a two-year tax delinquency.
         (8)   Any property which is vacant, but not tax delinquent, and which
has not been rehabilitated within one year of the receipt of notice to
rehabilitate from the appropriate code enforcement agency.
         (9)   Any abandoned property. A property shall be considered abandoned
if: (a) It is a vacant or unimproved lot or parcel of ground on which a
municipal lien for the cost of demolition of any structure located on the
property remains unpaid for a period of six months;
            (a)   It is a vacant property or vacant or unimproved lot or parcel
of ground on which the total of municipal liens on the property for tax or any
other type of claim of the municipality are in excess of 150% of the fair
market value of the property as established by anybody with legal authority to
determine the taxable value of the property; or
            (b)   The property has been declared abandoned by the owner,
including an estate that is in possession of the property.
            (c)   The property has been declared abandoned by the owner,
including an estate that is in possession of the property.
         (10)   A property which has defective or unusual conditions of title
or no known owners, rendering title unmarketable.
         (11)   A property which has environmentally hazardous conditions,
solid waste pollution or contamination in a building or on the land which poses
a direct and immediate threat to the health, safety and welfare of the
community.
         (12)   A property having three or more of the following
characteristics:
            (a)   Has unsafe or hazardous conditions that do not meet current
use, occupancy or fire codes;
            (b)   Has unsafe external and internal access-ways;
            (c)   Is being served by an unsafe public street or right-of-way;
            (d)   Violates the applicable property maintenance code adopted by
a municipality and is an immediate threat to public health and safety;
            (e)   Is vacant;
            (f)   Is located in a redevelopment area with a density of at least
1,000 people per square mile or a redevelopment area with more than 90% of the
units of property being nonresidential or a municipality with a density of at
least 2,500 people per square mile.
      B.   Multiple properties. Blighted property shall include:
         (1)   A majority of the units of property meet any of the requirements
under Subsection A and represent a majority of the geographical area; or
         (2)   Properties representing a majority of the geographical area meet
one or more of the conditions set forth in Subsection A(1) through (11) or
satisfy the conditions of
            Subsection A(12) that are necessary for a declaration of blight
under Subsection A and at least 1/3 of the units of property meet two or more
of the requirements under Subsection A(1) through (11) or satisfy the
conditions of Subsection A(12) and one or more of the requirements under
Subsection A(1) through (11).
   [A] 108.1.3.2 Notice blighted property and public nuisance.
   In addition to any notices provided for in this part for violation thereof,
notice of any property determined to be blighted and/or a public nuisance shall
be served to the owner of the property or an agent designated by him for the
receipt of service with notice of the determination that the property is
blighted and/or a public nuisance, together with an appropriate order to
eliminate the conditions causing blight and/or a nuisance and notification that
failure to do so may render the property subject to condemnation and recording
of a Declaration of Blight or Public Nuisance shall be recorded with the Berks
County Recorder of Deeds and attaching the notice to the deed of the certified
property which shall be constructive notice to all purchasers and other persons
who are responsible for the property.
   [A] 108.1.4 Unlawful structure.
   An unlawful structure is one found in whole or in part to be occupied by
more persons than permitted under this code, or was erected, altered or
occupied contrary to ordinance.
   [A] 108.1.5 Dangerous structure or premises.
   For the purpose of this code, any structure or premises that has any or all
of the conditions or defects described below shall be considered dangerous:
      1.   Any door, aisle, passageway, stairway, exit or other means of egress
that does not conform to the approved building or fire code of the jurisdiction
as related to the requirements for existing buildings.
      2.   The walking surface of any aisle, passageway, stairway, exit or
other means of egress is so warped, worn loose, torn or otherwise unsafe as to
not provide safe and adequate means of egress.
      3.   Any portion of a building, structure or appurtenance that has been
damaged by fire, earthquake, wind, flood, deterioration, neglect, abandonment,
vandalism or by any other cause to such an extent that it is likely to
partially or completely collapse, or to become detached or dislodged.
      4.   Any portion of a building, or any member, appurtenance or
ornamentation on the exterior thereof that is not of sufficient strength or
stability, or is not so anchored, attached or fastened in place so as to be
capable of resisting natural or artificial loads of 1 1/2 the original designed
value.
      5.   The building or structure, or part of the building or structure,
because of dilapidation, deterioration, decay, faulty construction, the removal
or movement of some portion of the ground necessary for the support, or for any
other reason, is likely to partially or completely collapse, or some portion of
the foundation or underpinning of the building or structure is likely to fail
or give way.
      6.   The building or structure, or any portion thereof, is clearly unsafe
for its use and occupancy.
      7.   The building or structure is neglected, damaged, dilapidated,
unsecured or abandoned so as to become an attractive nuisance to children who
might play in the building or structure to their danger, becomes a harbor for
vagrants, criminals or immoral persons, or enables persons to resort to the
building or structure for committing a nuisance or an unlawful act.
      8.   Any building or structure has been constructed, exists or is
maintained in violation of any specific requirement or prohibition applicable
to such building or structure provided by the approved building or fire code of
the jurisdiction, or of any law or ordinance to such an extent as to present
either a substantial risk of fire, building collapse or any other threat to
life and safety.
      9.   A building or structure, used or intended to be used for dwelling
purposes, because of inadequate maintenance, dilapidation, decay, damage,
faulty construction or arrangement, inadequate light, ventilation, mechanical
or plumbing system, or otherwise, is determined by the code official to be
unsanitary, unfit for human habitation or in such a condition that is likely to
cause sickness or disease.
      10.   Any building or structure, because of a lack of sufficient or
proper fire-resistance-rated construction, fire protection systems, electrical
system, fuel connections, mechanical system, plumbing system or other cause, is
determined by the code official to be a threat to life or health.
      11.   Any portion of a building remains on a site after the demolition or
destruction of the building or structure or whenever any building or structure
is abandoned so as to constitute such building or portion thereof as an
attractive nuisance or hazard to the public.
108.2 Closing of vacant structures.
If the structure is vacant, open and unsecure, and unfit for human habitation
and occupancy, and is not in danger of structural collapse, the code official
is authorized to post a placard of condemnation on the premises and order the
structure closed up so as not to be an attractive nuisance. Upon failure of the
owner or owner's authorized agent to close up the premises within the time
specified in the order, the code official shall cause the premises to be closed
and secured through any available public agency or by contract or arrangement
by private persons and the cost thereof shall be charged against the real
estate upon which the structure is located and shall be a lien upon such real
estate and shall be collected by any other legal resource.
   108.2.1 Authority to disconnect service utilities.
   The code official shall have the authority to authorize disconnection of
utility service to the building, structure or system regulated by this code and
the referenced codes and standards set forth in Section 102.7 in case of
emergency where necessary to eliminate an immediate hazard to life or property
or where such utility connection has been made without approval. The code
official shall notify the serving utility and, whenever possible, the owner or
owner's authorized agent and occupant of the building, structure or service
system of the decision to disconnect prior to taking such action. If not
notified prior to disconnection the owner, owner's authorized agent or occupant
of the building structure or service system shall be notified in writing as
soon as practical thereafter. Service utilities shall be discontinued in vacant
buildings except any utility services required for the operation of Fire
Protection Systems.
108.3 Notice.
Whenever the code official has condemned a structure or equipment under the
provisions of this section, notice shall be posted in a conspicuous place in or
about the structure affected by such notice and served on the owner, owner's
authorized agent or the person or persons responsible for the structure or
equipment in accordance with Section 107.3. If the notice pertains to
equipment, it shall be placed on the condemned equipment. The notice shall be
in the form prescribed in Section 107.2. In addition, a condemnation order on a
property may be recorded with the Office of Recorder of Deeds of the County of
Berks and if recorded, the condemnation order shall be constructive notice to
all purchasers and other persons who are responsible for the property.
108.4 Placarding.
Upon failure of the owner, owner's authorized agent or person responsible to
comply with the notice provisions within the time given, the code official
shall post on the premises or on defective equipment a placard bearing the word
"Condemned" and a statement of the penalties provided for occupying the
premises, operating the equipment or removing the placard.
   108.4.1 Placard removal.
   The code official shall remove the condemnation placard whenever, upon
inspection, the defect or defects upon which the condemnation and placarding
action were based have been eliminated and payment has been received by the
City of Reading in accordance with the fee schedule duly adopted by the City of
Reading. Any person who defaces or removes a condemnation placard without the
approval of the code official shall be subject to the penalties provided by
this code.
108.5 Prohibited occupancy.
Any occupied structure condemned and placarded by the code official shall be
vacated as ordered by the code official. Any person who shall occupy a
placarded premises or shall operate placarded equipment, and any owner, owner's
authorized agent or person responsible for the premises who shall let anyone
occupy a placarded premises or operate placarded equipment shall be liable for
the penalties provided by this code.
108.6 Abatement methods.
The owner, owner's authorized agent, operator or occupant of a building,
premises or equipment deemed unsafe by the code official shall abate or cause
to be abated or corrected such unsafe conditions either by repair,
rehabilitation, demolition or other approved corrective action.
108.7 Record.
The code official shall cause a report to be filed on an unsafe condition. The
report shall state the occupancy of the structure and the nature of the unsafe
condition.
   SECTION 109
   EMERGENCY MEASURES
109.1 Imminent danger.
When, in the opinion of the code official, there is imminent danger of failure
or collapse of a building or structure that endangers life, or when any
structure or part of a structure has fallen and life is endangered by the
occupation of the structure, or when there is actual or potential danger to the
building occupants or those in the proximity of any structure because of
explosives, explosive fumes or vapors or the presence of toxic fumes, gases or
materials, or operation of defective or dangerous equipment, the code official
is hereby authorized and empowered to order and require the occupants to vacate
the premises forthwith. The code official shall cause to be posted at each
entrance to such structure a notice reading as follows: "This Structure Is
Unsafe and Its Occupancy Has Been Prohibited by the Code Official." It shall be
unlawful for any person to enter such structure except for the purpose of
securing the structure, making the required repairs, removing the hazardous
condition or of demolishing the same.
109.2 Temporary safeguards.
Notwithstanding other provisions of this code, whenever, in the opinion of the
code official, there is imminent danger due to an unsafe condition, the code
official shall order the necessary work to be done, including the boarding up
of openings, to render such structure temporarily safe whether or not the legal
procedure herein described has been instituted; and shall cause such other
action to be taken as the code official deems necessary to meet such emergency.
109.3 Closing streets.
When necessary for public safety, the code official shall temporarily close
structures and close, or order the authority having jurisdiction to close,
sidewalks, streets, public ways and places adjacent to unsafe structures, and
prohibit the same from being utilized.
109.4 Emergency repairs.
For the purposes of this section, the code official shall employ the necessary
labor and materials to perform the required work as expeditiously as possible.
109.5 Costs of emergency repairs.
Costs incurred in the performance of emergency work shall be paid by the
jurisdiction. The legal counsel of the jurisdiction shall institute appropriate
action against the owner of the premises or owner's authorized agent where the
unsafe structure is or was located for the recovery of such costs.
109.6 Hearing.
Any person ordered to take emergency measures shall comply with such order
forthwith. Any affected person shall thereafter, upon petition directed to the
appeals board, be afforded a hearing as described in this code.
   SECTION 110
   DEMOLITION
110.1 General.
The code official shall order the owner or owner's authorized agent of any
premises upon which is located any structure, which in the code official's or
owner's authorized agent judgment after review is so deteriorated or
dilapidated or has become so out of repair as to be dangerous, unsafe,
insanitary or otherwise unfit for human habitation or occupancy, and such that
it is unreasonable to repair the structure, to demolish and remove such
structure; or if such structure is capable of being made safe by repairs, to
repair and make safe and sanitary, or to board up and hold for future repair or
to demolish and remove at the owner's option; or where there has been a
cessation of normal construction of any structure for a period of more than two
years, the code official shall order the owner or owner's authorized agent to
demolish and remove such structure, or board up until future repair. Boarding
the building up for future repair shall not extend beyond one year, unless
approved by the building official. Demolition shall be in accordance with the
Pennsylvania Uniform Construction Code as adopted by the City of Reading.
110.2 Notices and Orders.
Notices and orders shall comply with Section 107.
110.3 Failure to comply.
If the owner of a premises or owner's authorized agent fails to comply with a
demolition order within the time prescribed, the code official or his/her
designee shall request the building official to cause the structure to be
demolished and removed, either through an available public agency or by
contract or arrangement with private persons, and the cost of such demolition
and removal shall be charged against the real estate upon which the structure
is located and shall be a lien upon such real estate.
110.4 Salvage materials.
Where an structure has been ordered demolished and removed, the codes official
shall notify the Artifacts Bank of the City, which may offer a bid on any
materials of value contained in said structure. The City shall, after
consideration, accept or deny the aforesaid Artifact Bank's bid.
   SECTION 111
   MEANS OF APPEAL
[A] 111.1 Application for appeal. [Amended 7-24-2017 by Ord. No. 65-2017]
Any person directly affected by a decision of the code official or a notice or
order issued under this code, including an emergency order requiring immediate
evacuation of all occupants, shall have the right to appeal to the board of
appeals, provided that a written application for appeal is filed within 20 days
after the day the decision, notice or order was served. An application for
appeal shall be based on a claim that the true intent of this code or the rules
legally adopted thereunder have been incorrectly interpreted, the provisions of
this code do not fully apply, or the requirements of this code are adequately
satisfied by other means, except that an appeal of an emergency order requiring
evacuation shall be based on a claim that there is no competent evidence that a
true threat to safety existed during any period that any occupants were
required to vacate their dwelling. If the Code and License Appeals Board
approves the appeal, the appeal fee shall be refunded.
[A] 111.2 Membership of board.
The board of appeals shall consist of not less than three members who are
qualified by experience and training to pass on matters pertaining to property
maintenance, building and trades and fire prevention, and who are not employees
of the jurisdiction. The code official shall be an ex-officio member but shall
not vote on any matter before the board. The board shall be appointed by the
City of Reading Council, and shall serve staggered and overlapping terms.
   [A] 111.2.1 Alternate members.
   The chief appointing authority shall appoint not less than two alternate
members who shall be called by the board chairman to hear appeals during the
absence or disqualification of a member. Alternate members shall possess the
qualifications required for board membership.
   [A] 111.2.2 Chairman.
   The board shall annually select one of its members to serve as chairman.
   [A] 111.2.3 Disqualification of member.
   A member shall not hear an appeal in which that member has a personal,
professional or financial interest.
   [A] 111.2.4 Secretary.
   The chief administrative officer shall designate a qualified person to serve
as secretary to the board. The secretary shall file a detailed record of all
proceedings in the office of the chief administrative officer.
   [A] 111.2.5 Compensation of members.
   Compensation of members shall be determined by law.
[A] 111.3 Notice of meeting.
The board shall meet upon notice from the chairman, within 20 days of the
filing of an appeal, or at stated periodic meetings.
[A] 111.4 Open hearing.
Hearings before the board shall be open to the public. The appellant, the
appellant's representative, the code official and any person whose interests
are affected shall be given an opportunity to be heard. A quorum shall consist
of not less than two-thirds of the board membership.
   [A] 111.4.1 Procedure.
   The board shall adopt and make available to the public through the secretary
procedures under which a hearing will be conducted. The procedures shall not
require compliance with strict rules of evidence, but shall mandate that only
relevant information be received.
[A] 111.5 Postponed hearing.
When the full board is not present to hear an appeal, either the appellant or
the appellant's representative shall have the right to request a postponement
of the hearing.
[A] 111.6 Board decision.
The board shall modify or reverse the decision of the code official only by a
concurring vote of a majority of the total number of appointed board members.
   [A] 111.6.1 Records and copies.
   The decision of the board shall be recorded. Copies shall be furnished to
the appellant and to the code official.
   [A] 111.6.2 Administration. [Amended 7-24-2017 by Ord. No. 65-2017]
   The code official shall take immediate action in accordance with the
decision of the board.
[A] 111.7 Court review.
Any person, whether or not a previous party of the appeal, shall have the right
to apply to the appropriate court for a writ of certiorari to correct errors of
law. Application for review shall be made in the manner and time required by
law following the filing of the decision in the office of the chief
administrative officer.
[A] 111.8 Stays of enforcement. [Amended 7-24-2017 by Ord. No. 65-2017]
Appeals of notice and orders (other than Imminent Danger notices) shall stay
the enforcement of the notice and order until the appeal is heard by the
appeals board.
   SECTION 112
   STOP-WORK ORDER
[A] 112.1 Authority.
Stop-work orders shall be governed by the Pennsylvania Uniform Construction
Code as adopted by the City of Reading.
   Chapter 2
   Definitions
   SECTION 201
   GENERAL
201.1 Scope.
Unless otherwise expressly stated, the following terms shall, for the purposes
of this code, have the meanings shown in this chapter.
201.2 Interchangeability.
Words stated in the present tense include the future; words stated in the
masculine gender include the feminine and neuter; the singular number includes
the plural and the plural, the singular.
201.3 Terms defined in other codes.
Where terms are not defined in this code and are defined in the International
Building Code, International Existing Building Code, International Fire Code,
International Fuel Gas Code, International Mechanical Code, International
Plumbing Code, International Residential Code, International Zoning Code or
NFPA 70, such terms shall have the meanings ascribed to them as stated in those
codes.
201.4 Terms not defined.
Where terms are not defined through the methods authorized by this section,
such terms shall have ordinarily accepted meanings such as the context implies.
201.5 Parts.
Whenever the words "dwelling unit," "dwelling," "premises," "building,"
"rooming house," "rooming unit," "housekeeping unit" or "story" are stated in
this code, they shall be construed as though they were followed by the words
"or any part thereof."
   SECTION 202
   GENERAL DEFINITIONS
ACCESSORY STRUCTURE. A building which is incidental to that of the main
building and which is located on the same lot.
ANCHORED. Secured in a manner that provides positive connection.
[A] APPROVED. Approved by the code official.
BASEMENT. That portion of a building which is partly or completely below grade.
BATHROOM. A room containing plumbing fixtures including a bathtub or shower.
BEDROOM. Any room or space used or intended to be used for sleeping purposes in
either a dwelling or sleeping unit.
[A] CODE OFFICIAL. The official who is charged with the administration and
enforcement of this code, or any duly authorized representative.
CONDEMN. To adjudge unfit for occupancy.
COST OF SUCH DEMOLITION OR EMERGENCY REPAIRS. The costs shall include the
actual costs of the demolition or repair of the structure less revenues
obtained if salvage was conducted prior to demolition or repair. Costs shall
include. but not be limited to, expenses incurred or necessitated related to
demolition or emergency repairs, such as asbestos survey and abatement if
necessary; costs of inspectors, testing agencies or experts retained relative
to the demolition or emergency repairs; costs of testing; surveys for other
materials that are controlled or regulated from being dumped in a landfill;
title searches; mailing(s); postings; recording; and attorney fees expended for
recovering of the cost of emergency repairs or to obtain or enforce an order of
demolition made by a code official, the governing body or board of appeals.
DETACHED. When a structural element is physically disconnected from another and
that connection is necessary to provide a positive connection.
DETERIORATION. To weaken, disintegrate, corrode, rust or decay and lose
effectiveness.
[BG] DWELLING UNIT. A single unit providing complete, independent living
facilities for one or more persons, including permanent provisions for living,
sleeping, eating, cooking and sanitation.
[Z] EASEMENT. That portion of land or property reserved for present or future
use by a person or agency other than the legal fee owner(s) of the property.
The easement shall be permitted to be for use under, on or above said lot or
lots.
EQUIPMENT SUPPORT. Those structural members or assemblies of members or
manufactured elements, including braces, frames, lugs, snuggers, hangers or
saddles, that transmit gravity load, lateral load and operating load between
the equipment and the structure.
EXTERIOR PROPERTY. The open space on the premises and on adjoining property
under the control of owners or operators of such premises.
EXTERMINATION. The control and elimination of insects, rats or other pests by
eliminating their harborage places; by removing or making inaccessible
materials that serve as their food; by poison spraying, fumigating, trapping or
by any other approved pest elimination methods.
GARBAGE. The animal or vegetable waste resulting from the handling,
preparation, cooking and consumption of food.
[BE] GUARD. A building component or a system of building components located at
or near the open sides of elevated walking surfaces that minimizes the
possibility of a fall from the walking surface to a lower level.
[BG] HABITABLE SPACE. Space in a structure for living, sleeping, eating or
cooking. Bathrooms, toilet rooms, closets, halls, storage or utility spaces,
and similar areas are not considered habitable spaces.
HEATING FACILITY. A fixed, nonportable heating equipment or unit.
HOTEL. Any building containing six or more guestrooms, intended or designed to
be used, or which are used, rented or hired out to be occupied or which are
occupied for sleeping purposes of guests.
HISTORIC BUILDING. Any building or structure that is one or more of the
following:
   1.   Listed or certified as eligible for listing, by the State Historic
Preservation Officer or the Keeper of the National Register of Historic Places,
in the National Register of Historic Places.
   2.   Designated as historic under an applicable state or local law.
   3.   Certified as a contributing resource within a National Register or
state or locally designated historic district.
HOUSEKEEPING UNIT. A room or group of rooms forming a single habitable space
equipped and intended to be used for living, sleeping, cooking and eating that
does not contain, within such a unit, a toilet, lavatory and bathtub or shower.
IMMINENT DANGER. A condition which could cause serious or life-threatening
injury or death at any time.
INFESTATION. The presence, within or contiguous to, a structure or premises of
insects, rodents, vermin or other pests.
INOPERABLE MOTOR VEHICLE. A vehicle that cannot be driven upon the public
streets for reason including but not limited to being unlicensed, wrecked,
abandoned, in a state of disrepair, or incapable of being moved under its own
power.
[A] LABELED. Equipment, materials or products to which have been affixed a
label, seal, symbol or other identifying mark of a nationally recognized
testing laboratory, approved agency or other organization concerned with
product evaluation that maintains periodic inspection of the production of the
above-labeled items and whose labeling indicates either that the equipment,
material or product meets identified standards or has been tested and found
suitable for a specified purpose.
LAVATORY. A fixed washbowl with running water and drainpipe (sink).
LET FOR OCCUPANCY or LET. To permit, provide or offer possession or occupancy
of a dwelling, dwelling unit, rooming unit, building, premise or structure by a
person who is or is not the legal owner of record thereof, pursuant to a
written or unwritten lease, agreement or license, or pursuant to a recorded or
unrecorded agreement of contract for the sale of land.
MIXED-USE PROPERTY. A building occupied for two or more uses not included in
the same use group.
MOTEL. An establishment of attached rental bedroom units with individual
entrances from the exterior of the building to each unit, operated as a
business for the purpose of providing lodging to transient guests.
NEGLECT. The lack of proper maintenance for a building or structure.
[A] OCCUPANCY. The purpose for which a building or portion thereof is utilized
or occupied.
OCCUPANT. Any individual living or sleeping in a building, or having possession
of a space within a building.
OPENABLE AREA. That part of a window, skylight or door which is available for
unobstructed ventilation and which opens directly to the outdoors.
OPERATOR. Any person who has charge, care or control of a structure or premises
that is let or offered for occupancy.
[A] OWNER. Any person, agent, operator, firm or corporation having legal or
equitable interest in the property; or recorded in the official records of the
state, county or municipality as holding title to the property; or otherwise
having control of the property, including the guardian of the estate of any
such person, and the executor or administrator of the estate of such person if
ordered to take possession of real property by a court.
PERSON. An individual, corporation, partnership or any other group acting as a
unit.
PEST ELIMINATION. The control and elimination of insects, rodents or other
pests by eliminating their harborage places; by removing or making inaccessible
materials that serve as their food or water; by other approved pest elimination
methods.
PLUMBING. Refers to water pipes, waste pipes, water closets, sinks, installed
dishwashers, lavatories, bath tubs, shower baths, installed clothes-washing
machines, catch basins, drains, garbage disposal units, as well as gas pipes,
and gas-burning equipment, water heating facilities and vents and other similar
supply fixtures, together with all connections to water, sewer and gas lines.
[A] PREMISES. A lot, plot or parcel of land, easement or public way, including
any structures thereon.
[A] PUBLIC WAY. Any street, alley or other parcel of land that: is open to the
outside air; leads to a street; has been deeded, dedicated or otherwise
permanently appropriated to the public for public use; and has a clear width
and height of not less than 10 feet (3048 mm).
ROOMING HOUSE. A building arranged or occupied for lodging, with or without
meals, for compensation and not occupied as a one- or two-family dwelling.
ROOMING UNIT. Any room or group of rooms forming a single habitable unit
occupied or intended to be occupied for sleeping or living, but not for cooking
purposes.
RUBBISH. Combustible and noncombustible waste materials, except garbage; the
term shall include the residue from the burning of wood, coal, coke and other
combustible materials, paper, rags, cartons, boxes, wood, excelsior, rubber,
leather, tree branches, yard trimmings, tin cans, metals, mineral matter,
glass, crockery and dust and other similar materials.
[BG] SLEEPING UNIT. A room or space in which people sleep, which can also
include permanent provisions for living, eating and either sanitation or
kitchen facilities, but not both. Such rooms and spaces that are also part of a
dwelling unit are not sleeping units.
SOLID WASTE. Any waste, including but not limited to, municipal, residual or
hazardous wastes, including solid, liquid, semisolid or contained gaseous
materials, as well as any rubbish and garbage. The term does not include any of
the following: (1) Coal ash. (2) Drill cuttings.
STRICT LIABILITY OFFENSE. An offense in which the prosecution in a legal
proceeding is not required to prove criminal intent as a part of its case. It
is enough to prove that the defendant either did an act which was prohibited,
or failed to do an act which the defendant was legally required to do.
[A] STRUCTURE. That which is built or constructed.
TENANT. A person, corporation, partnership or group, whether or not the legal
owner of record, occupying a building or portion thereof as a unit.
TOILET ROOM. A room containing a water closet or urinal but not a bathtub or
shower.
ULTIMATE DEFORMATION. The deformation at which failure occurs and that shall be
deemed to occur if the sustainable load reduces to 80 percent or less of the
maximum strength.
[M] VENTILATION. The natural or mechanical process of supplying conditioned or
unconditioned air to, or removing such air from, any space.
WATER CLOSET. A compartment or room for defecation and urination into a toilet
bowl.
WORKMANLIKE. Executed in a skilled manner; e.g., generally plumb, level,
square, in line, undamaged and without marring adjacent work.
[Z] YARD. An open space on the same lot with a structure.
   Chapter 3
   General Requirements
   SECTION 301
   GENERAL
301.1 Scope.
The provisions of this chapter shall govern the minimum conditions and the
responsibilities of persons for maintenance of structures, equipment and
exterior property.
301.2 Responsibility.
The owner of the premises shall maintain the structures and exterior property
in compliance with these requirements, except as otherwise provided for in this
code. A person shall not occupy as owner-occupant or permit another person to
occupy premises that are not in a sanitary and safe condition and that do not
comply with the requirements of this chapter. Occupants of a dwelling unit,
rooming unit or housekeeping unit are responsible for keeping in a clean,
sanitary and safe condition that part of the dwelling unit, rooming unit,
housekeeping unit or premises they occupy and control.
301.3 Vacant structures and land.
Vacant structures and premises thereof or vacant land shall be maintained in a
clean, safe, secure and sanitary condition as provided herein so as not to
cause a blighting problem or adversely affect the public health or safety.
   301.3.1 Exterior conditions.
   The exterior of every vacant structure or accessory structure shall be
maintained free of broken windows, loose or deteriorating shingles, siding or
decorative features or building materials, crumbling stone or brick, or
excessive peeling paint.
301.4 Compliance with other ordinance.
Every owner of every dwelling, in addition to the provisions set forth herein,
shall comply with the provisions (sections) of all other applicable City
ordinances, including but not limited to the Solid Waste Ordinance, Health
Ordinance and acceptable engineering principles and practices regarding their
property.
   SECTION 302
   EXTERIOR PROPERTY AREAS
302.1 Sanitation.
Exterior property and premises shall be maintained in a clean, safe and
sanitary condition. The occupant shall keep that part of the exterior property
that such occupant occupies or controls in a clean and sanitary condition.
302.2 Grading and drainage.
Premises shall be graded and maintained to prevent the erosion of soil and to
prevent the accumulation of stagnant water thereon, or within any structure
located thereon.
   Exception: Approved retention areas and reservoirs.
302.3 Sidewalks and driveways.
Sidewalks, walkways, stairs, driveways, parking spaces and similar areas shall
be kept in a proper state of repair, and maintained free from hazardous
conditions.
302.4 Weeds.
Premises and exterior property shall be maintained free from weeds or plant
growth in excess of six (6) inches (152.4 mm). Noxious weeds shall be
prohibited. Weeds shall be defined as all grasses, annual plants and
vegetation, other than trees or shrubs provided; however, this term shall not
include cultivated flowers and gardens.
   Upon failure of the owner or agent having charge of a property to cut and
destroy weeds after service of a notice of Violation, they shall be subject to
prosecution in accordance with Section 106.3 and as prescribed by the authority
having jurisdiction. Upon failure to comply with the notice of violation, any
duly authorized employee of the jurisdiction or contractor hired by the
jurisdiction shall be authorized to enter upon the property in violation and
cut and destroy the weeds growing thereon, and the costs of such removal shall
be paid by the owner or agent responsible for the property.
302.5 Rodent harborage.
Structures and exterior property shall be kept free from rodent harborage and
infestation. Where rodents are found, they shall be promptly exterminated by
approved processes that will not be injurious to human health. After pest
elimination, proper precautions shall be taken to eliminate rodent harborage
and prevent reinfestation.
302.6 Exhaust vents.
Pipes, ducts, conductors, fans or blowers shall not discharge gases, steam,
vapor, hot air, grease, smoke, odors or other gaseous or particulate wastes
directly on abutting or adjacent public or private property or that of another
tenant.
302.7 Accessory structures.
Accessory structures, including detached garages, fences and walls, shall be
maintained structurally sound and in good repair.
302.8 Motor vehicles.
Except as provided for in other regulations, inoperative or unlicensed motor
vehicles shall not be parked, kept or stored on any premises, and vehicles
shall not at any time be in a state of major disassembly, disrepair, or in the
process of being stripped or dismantled. Painting of vehicles is prohibited
unless conducted inside an approved spray booth.
   Exception: A vehicle of any type is permitted to undergo major overhaul,
including body work, provided that such work is performed inside a structure or
similarly enclosed area designed and approved for such purposes.
302.9 Defacement of property.
A person shall not Willfully or wantonly damage, mutilate or deface any
exterior surface of any structure or building on any private or public property
by placing thereon any marking, carving or graffiti.
   It shall be the responsibility of the owner to restore said surface to an
approved state of maintenance and repair.
302.10 Trees, bushes and shrubs.
All trees. bushes and shrubs shall be maintained in such a way that they do not
cause any dangerous and/or adverse condition to the public.
   SECTION 303
   SWIMMING POOLS, SPAS AND HOT TUBS
303.1 Swimming pools.
Swimming pools shall be maintained in a clean and sanitary condition, and in
good repair.
303.2 Enclosures.
Private swimming pools, hot tubs and spas, containing water more than 24 inches
(610 mm) in depth shall be completely surrounded by a fence or barrier not less
than 48 inches (1219 mm) in height above the finished ground level measured on
the side of the barrier away from the pool. Gates and doors in such barriers
shall be selfclosing and self-latching. Where the self-latching device is less
than 54 inches (1372 mm) above the bottom of the gate, the release mechanism
shall be located on the pool side of the gate. Self-closing and self-latching
gates shall be maintained such that the gate will positively close and latch
when released from an open position of 6 inches (152 mm) from the gatepost. An
existing pool enclosure shall not be removed, replaced or changed in a manner
that reduces its effectiveness as a safety barrier.
   Exception: Spas or hot tubs with a safety cover that complies with ASTM
F1346 shall be exempt from the provisions of this section.
   SECTION 304
   EXTERIOR STRUCTURE
304.1 General.
The exterior of a structure shall be maintained in good repair, structurally
sound and sanitary so as not to pose a threat to the public health, safety or
welfare.
   304.1.1 Unsafe conditions.
   The following conditions shall be determined as unsafe and shall be repaired
or replaced to comply with the International Building Code or the International
Existing Building Code as required for existing buildings in accordance with
the Pennsylvania Uniform Construction Code as adopted by the City of Reading:
      1.   The nominal strength of any structural member is exceeded by nominal
loads, the load effects or the required strength.
      2.   The anchorage of the floor or roof to walls or columns, and of walls
and columns to foundations is not capable of resisting all nominal loads or
load effects.
      3.   Structures or components thereof that have reached their limit
state;
      4.   Siding and masonry joints including joints between the building
envelope and the perimeter of windows, doors and skylights are not maintained,
weather resistant or water tight.
      5.   Structural members that have evidence of deterioration or that are
not capable of safely supporting all nominal loads and load effects.
      6.   Foundation systems that are not firmly supported by footings, are
not plumb and free from open cracks and breaks, are not properly anchored or
are not capable of supporting all nominal loads and resisting all load effects.
      7.   Exterior walls that are not anchored to supporting and supported
elements or are not plumb and free of holes, cracks or breaks and loose or
rolling materials, are not properly anchored or are not capable of supporting
all nominal loads and resisting all load effects.
      8.   Roofing or roofing components that have defects that admit rain,
roof surfaces with inadequate drainage, or any portion of the roof framing that
is not in good repair with signs of deterioration, fatigue or without proper
anchorage and incapable of supporting all nominal loads and resisting all load
effects.
      9.   Flooring and flooring components with defects that affect
serviceability or flooring components that show signs of deterioration or
fatigue, are not properly anchored or are incapable of supporting all nominal
loads and resisting all load effects.
      10.   Veneer, cornices, belt courses, corbels, trim, wall facings and
similar decorative features not properly anchored or that are anchored with
connections not capable of supporting all nominal loads and resisting all load
effects.
      11.   Overhang extensions or projections including, but not limited to,
trash chutes, canopies, marquees, signs, awnings, fire escapes, standpipes and
exhaust ducts not properly anchored or that are anchored with connections not
capable of supporting all nominal loads and resisting all load effects.
      12.   Exterior stairs, decks, porches, balconies and all similar
appurtenances attached thereto, including guards and handrails, are not
structurally sound, not properly anchored or that are anchored with connections
not capable of supporting all nominal loads and resisting all load effects.
      13.   Chimneys, cooling towers, smokestacks and similar appurtenances not
structurally sound or not properly anchored, or that are anchored with
connections not capable of supporting all nominal loads and resisting all load
effects.
   Exceptions:
      1.   When substantiated otherwise by an approved method.
      2.   Demolition of unsafe conditions shall be permitted when approved by
the code official.
304.2 Protective treatment.
Exterior surfaces, including but not limited to, doors, door and window frames,
cornices, porches, trim, balconies, decks and fences, shall be maintained in
good condition. Exterior wood surfaces, other than decay-resistant woods, shall
be protected from the elements and decay by painting or other protective
covering or treatment. Peeling, flaking and chipped paint shall be eliminated
and surfaces repainted. Siding and masonry joints, as well as those between the
building envelope and the perimeter of windows, doors and skylights, shall be
maintained weather resistant and water tight. Metal surfaces subject to rust or
corrosion shall be coated to inhibit such rust and corrosion, and surfaces with
rust or corrosion shall be stabilized and coated to inhibit future rust and
corrosion. Oxidation stains shall be removed from exterior surfaces. Surfaces
designed for stabilization by oxidation are exempt from this requirement.
[F] 304.3 Premises identification.
Buildings shall have approved address numbers placed in a position to be
plainly legible and visible from the street or road fronting the property.
These numbers shall contrast with their background. Address numbers shall be
Arabic numerals or alphabet letters. Numbers shall be not less than 4 inches
(102 mm) in height with a minimum stroke width of 0.5 inch (12.7 mm).
304.4 Structural members.
Structural members shall be maintained free from deterioration, and shall be
capable of safely supporting the imposed dead and live loads.
304.5 Foundation walls.
Foundation walls shall be maintained plumb and free from open cracks and breaks
and shall be kept in such condition so as to prevent the entry of rodents and
other pests.
304.6 Exterior walls.
Exterior walls shall be free from holes, breaks, and loose or rotting
materials; and maintained weatherproof and properly surface coated where
required to prevent deterioration.
304.7 Roofs and drainage.
The roof and flashing shall be sound, tight and not have defects that admit
rain. Roof drainage shall be adequate to prevent dampness or deterioration in
the walls or interior portion of the structure. Roof drains, gutters and
downspouts shall be maintained in good repair and free from obstructions. Roof
water shall not be discharged in a manner that creates a public nuisance.
304.8 Decorative features.
Cornices, belt courses, corbels, terra cotta trim, wall facings and similar
decorative features shall be maintained in good repair with proper anchorage
and in a safe condition.
304.9 Overhang extensions.
Overhang extensions including, but not limited to, canopies, marquees, signs,
metal awnings, fire escapes, standpipes and exhaust ducts shall be maintained
in good repair and be properly anchored so as to be kept in a sound condition.
Where required, all exposed surfaces of metal or wood shall be protected from
the elements and against decay or rust by periodic application of weather-
coating materials, such as paint or similar surface treatment.
304.10 Stairways, decks, porches and balconies.
Every exterior stairway, deck, porch and balcony, and all appurtenances
attached thereto, shall be maintained structurally sound, in good repair, with
proper anchorage and capable of supporting the imposed loads.
304.11 Chimneys and towers.
Chimneys, cooling towers, smoke stacks, and similar appurtenances shall be
maintained structurally safe and sound, and in good repair. Exposed surfaces of
metal or wood shall be protected from the elements and against decay or rust by
periodic application of weathercoating materials, such as paint or similar
surface treatment.
304.12 Handrails and guards.
Every handrail and guard shall be firmly fastened and capable of supporting
normally imposed loads and shall be maintained in good condition.
304.13 Window, skylight and door frames.
Every window, skylight, door and frame shall be kept in sound condition, good
repair and weather tight.
   304.13.1 Glazing.
   All glazing materials shall be maintained free from cracks and holes.
   304.13.2 Openable windows.
   Every window, other than a fixed window, shall be easily openable and
capable of being held in position by window hardware.
304.14 Insect screens.
During the period from the 1st of May to the 30th of September, every door,
window and other outside opening required for ventilation of habitable rooms,
food preparation areas, food service areas or any areas where products to be
included or utilized in food for human consumption are processed, manufactured,
packaged or stored shall be supplied with approved tightly fitting screens of
minimum 16 mesh per inch (16 mesh per 25 mm), and every screen door used for
insect control shall have a self-closing device in good working condition.
   Exception: Screens shall not be required where other approved means, such as
air curtains or insect repellent fans, are employed.
304.15 Doors.
Exterior doors, door assemblies, operator systems, and hardware if provided,
shall be approved exterior grade doors, assemblies and hardware, maintained in
good condition. Locks at all entrances to dwelling units and sleeping units
shall tightly secure the door. Locks on means of egress doors shall be in
accordance with Section 702.3.
304.16 Basement hatchways.
Every basement hatchway shall be maintained to prevent the entrance of rodents,
rain and surface drainage water.
304.17 Guards for basement windows.
Every basement window that is openable shall be supplied with rodent shields,
storm windows or other approved protection against the entry of rodents.
304.18 Building security.
Doors, windows or hatchways for dwelling units, room units or housekeeping
units shall be provided with devices designed to provide security for the
occupants and property within.
   304.18.1 Doors.
   Doors providing access to a dwelling unit, rooming unit or housekeeping unit
that is rented, leased or let shall be equipped with a deadbolt lock designed
to be readily openable from the side from which egress is to be made without
the need for keys, special knowledge or effort and shall have a minimum lock
throw of 1 inch (25 mm). Such deadbolt locks shall be installed according to
the manufacturer's specifications and maintained in good working order. For the
purpose of this section, a sliding bolt shall not be considered an acceptable
deadbolt lock.
   304.18.2 Windows.
   Operable windows located in whole or in part within 6 feet (1828 mm) above
ground level or a walking surface below that provide access to a dwelling unit,
rooming unit or housekeeping unit that is rented, leased or let shall be
equipped with a window sash locking device.
   304.18.3 Basement hatchways.
   Basement hatchways that provide access to a dwelling unit, rooming unit or
housekeeping unit that is rented, leased or let shall be equipped with devices
that secure the units from unauthorized entry.
304.19 Gates.
Exterior gates, gate assemblies, operator systems if provided, and hardware
shall be maintained in good condition. Latches at all entrances shall tightly
secure the gates.
   SECTION 305
   INTERIOR STRUCTURE
305.1 General.
The interior of a structure and equipment therein shall be maintained in good
repair, structurally sound and in a sanitary condition. Occupants shall keep
that part of the structure that they occupy or control in a clean and sanitary
condition. Every owner of a structure containing a rooming house, housekeeping
units, a hotel, a dormitory, two or more dwelling units or two or more
nonresidential occupancies, shall maintain, in a clean and sanitary condition,
the shared or public areas of the structure and exterior property.
   305.1.1 Unsafe conditions.
   The following conditions shall be determined as unsafe and shall be repaired
or replaced to comply with the International Building Code or the International
Existing Building Code as required for existing buildings:
      1.   The nominal strength of any structural member is exceeded by nominal
loads, the load effects or the required strength.
      2.   The anchorage of the floor or roof to walls or columns, and of walls
and columns to foundations is not capable of resisting all nominal loads or
load effects.
      3.   Structures or components thereof that have reached their limit
state;
      4.   Structural members are incapable of supporting nominal loads and
load effects;
      5.   Stairs, landings, balconies and all similar walking surfaces,
including guards and handrails, are not structurally sound, not properly
anchored or are anchored with connections not capable of supporting all nominal
loads and resisting all load effects.
      6.   Foundation systems that are not firmly supported by footings are not
plumb and free from open cracks and breaks, are not properly anchored or are
not capable of supporting all nominal loads and resisting all load effects.
      Exceptions:
         1.   When substantiated otherwise by an approved method.
         2.   Demolition of unsafe conditions shall be permitted when approved
by the code official.
305.2 Structural members.
Structural members shall be maintained structurally sound, and be capable of
supporting the imposed loads.
305.3 Interior surfaces.
Interior surfaces, including windows and doors, shall be maintained in good,
clean and sanitary condition. Peeling, chipping, flaking or abraded paint shall
be repaired, removed or covered. Cracked or loose plaster, decayed wood and
other defective surface conditions shall be corrected.
305.4 Stairs and walking surfaces.
Every stair, ramp, landing, balcony, porch, deck or other walking surface shall
be maintained in sound condition and good repair.
305.5 Handrails and guards.
Every handrail and guard shall be firmly fastened and capable of supporting
normally imposed loads and shall be maintained in good condition.
305.6 Interior doors.
Every interior door shall fit reasonably well within its frame and shall be
capable of being opened and closed by being properly and securely attached to
jambs, headers or tracks as intended by the manufacturer of the attachment
hardware.
   SECTION 306
   COMPONENT SERVICEABILITY
306.1 General.
The components of a structure and equipment therein shall be maintained in good
repair, structurally sound and in a sanitary condition.
   306.1.1 Unsafe conditions.
   Where any of the following conditions cause the component or system to be
beyond its limit state, the component or system shall be determined as unsafe
and shall be repaired or replaced to comply with the International Building
Code or the International Existing Building Code as required for existing
buildings in accordance with the Pennsylvania Uniform Construction Code as
adopted by the City of Reading:
      1.   Soils that have been subjected to any of the following conditions:
         1.1.   Collapse of footing or foundation system.
         1.2.   Damage to footing, foundation, concrete or other structural
element due to soil expansion.
         1.3.   Adverse effects to the design strength of footing, foundation,
concrete or other structural element due to a chemical reaction from the soil.
         1.4.   Inadequate soil as determined by a geotechnical investigation.
         1.5.   Where the allowable bearing capacity of the soil is in doubt.
         1.6.   Adverse effects to the footing, foundation, concrete or other
structural element due to the ground water table.
      2.   Concrete that has been subjected to any of the following conditions:
         2.1.   Deterioration.
         2.2.   Ultimate deformation.
         2.3.   Fractures.
         2.4.   Fissures.
         2.5.   Spalling.
         2.6.   Exposed reinforcement.
         2.7.   Detached, dislodged or failing connections.
      3.   Aluminum that has been subjected to any of the following conditions:
         3.1.   Deterioration.
         3.2.   Corrosion.
         3.3.   Elastic deformation.
         3.4.   Ultimate deformation.
         3.5.   Stress or strain cracks.
         3.6.   Joint fatigue.
         3.7.   Detached, dislodged or failing connections.
      4.   Masonry that has been subjected to any of the following conditions:
         4.1.   Deterioration.
         4.2.   Ultimate deformation.
         4.3.   Fractures in masonry or mortar joints.
         4.4.   Fissures in masonry or mortar joints.
         4.5.   Spalling.
         4.6.   Exposed reinforcement.
         4.7.   Detached, dislodged or failing connections.
      5.   Steel that has been subjected to any of the following conditions:
         5.1.   Deterioration.
         5.2.   Elastic deformation.
         5.3.   Ultimate deformation.
         5.4.   Metal fatigue.
         5.5.   Detached, dislodged or failing connections.
      6.   Wood that has been subjected to any of the following conditions:
         6.1.   Ultimate deformation.
         6.2.   Deterioration.
         6.3.   Damage from insects, rodents and other vermin.
         6.4.   Fire damage beyond charring.
         6.5.   Significant splits and checks.
         6.6.   Horizontal shear cracks.
         6.7.   Vertical shear cracks.
         6.8.   Inadequate support.
         6.9.   Detached, dislodged or failing connections.
         6.10. Excessive cutting and notching.
         Exceptions:
            1.   When substantiated otherwise by an approved method.
            2.   Demolition of unsafe conditions shall be permitted when
approved by the code official.
   SECTION 307
   HANDRAILS AND GUARDRAILS
307.1 General.
Every exterior and interior flight of stairs having more than four risers shall
have a handrail on one side of the stair and every open portion of a stair,
landing, balcony, porch, deck, ramp or other walking surface that is more than
30 inches (762 mm) above the floor or grade below shall have guards. Handrails
shall be not less than 30 inches (762 mm) in height or more than 42 inches
(1067 mm) in height measured vertically above the nosing of the tread or above
the finished floor of the landing or walking surfaces. Guards shall be not less
than 30 inches (762 mm) in height above the floor of the landing, balcony,
porch, deck, or ramp or other walking surface.
   Exception: Guards shall not be required where exempted by the adopted
building code.
   SECTION 308
   RUBBISH AND GARBAGE
308.1 Accumulation of solid waste.
Exterior property and premises, and the interior of every structure, shall be
free from any accumulation of solid waste, including rubbish and garbage.
308.2 Disposal of solid waste.
Every occupant of a structure shall dispose of all solid waste in a clean and
sanitary manner by placing such solid waste in approved containers.
   308.2.1 Solid waste storage facilities.
   The owner of every occupied premises shall supply approved covered
containers for solid waste, and the owner of the premises shall be responsible
for the removal of solid waste.
   308.2.2 Refrigerators.
   Refrigerators and similar equipment not in operation shall not be discarded,
abandoned or stored on premises without first removing the doors.
308.3 Disposal of solid waste.
Every occupant of a structure shall dispose of solid waste, including garbage
and rubbish, in a clean and sanitary manner by placing such solid waste in an
approved solid waste disposal facility or approved solid waste containers.
   308.3.1 Solid waste facilities.
   The owner of every dwelling shall supply one of the following: an approved
mechanical food waste grinder in each dwelling unit; an approved incinerator
unit in the structure available to the occupants in each dwelling unit; or an
approved leak-proof, covered, outside solid waste container.
   308.3.2 Containers.
   The operator of every establishment producing solid waste shall provide, and
at all times cause to be utilized, approved leak-proof containers provided with
close-fitting covers for the storage of such materials until removed from the
premises for disposal.
   308.3.3 Storage, collection and removal.
   It shall be the responsibility of the owner of all residential, commercial
and industrial establishments to ensure that the solid waste from his or her
properties is removed of properly and in such a manner not to create a public
nuisance.
   308.3.4 Recyclables.
   It shall be the responsibility of the owner of all residential, commercial
and industrial establishments to ensure storage, collection and disposal of all
recyclables from his or her property and in such a manner not to create a
public nuisance.
308.4 Solid Waste Ordinance.
Every owner of every dwelling shall comply with the City of Reading Solid Waste
Ordinance regarding the removal of solid waste from the property.
   SECTION 309
   PEST ELIMINATION
309.1 Infestation.
Structures shall be kept free from insect and rodent infestation. Structures in
which insects or rodents are found shall be promptly exterminated by approved
processes that will not be injurious to human health. After pest elimination,
proper precautions shall be taken to prevent reinfestation.
309.2 Owner.
The owner of any structure shall be responsible for pest elimination within the
structure prior to renting or leasing the structure.
309.3 Single occupant.
The occupant of a one-family dwelling or of a single-tenant nonresidential
structure shall be responsible for pest elimination on the premises.
309.4 Multiple occupancy.
The owner of a structure containing two or more dwelling units, a multiple
occupancy, a rooming house or a nonresidential structure shall be responsible
for pest elimination in the public or shared areas of the structure and
exterior property. If infestation is caused by failure of an occupant to
prevent such infestation in the area occupied, the occupant and owner shall be
responsible for pest elimination.
309.5 Occupant.
The occupant of any structure shall be responsible for the continued rodent and
pest-free condition of the structure.
   Exception: Where the infestations are caused by defects in the structure,
the owner shall be responsible for pest elimination.
   SECTION 310
   KITCHEN FACILITIES
310.1 Kitchen stove.
The landlord shall provide utility connections in each dwelling unit containing
a room for installed cooking facilities.
310.2 Kitchen sink.
The landlord shall provide each dwelling unit containing a room for installed
facilities with a kitchen sink in good working condition and which provides at
all times an adequate amount of heated and unheated running water under
pressure.
310.3 Refrigerator.
The landlord shall provide each dwelling unit where perishable food is kept a
utility connection for refrigeration.
310.4 Counters and cabinets.
Counters, countertops and cabinets shall be maintained in good repair.
   Chapter 4
   Light, Ventilation and Occupancy Limitations
   SECTION 401
   GENERAL
401.1 Scope.
The provisions of this chapter shall govern the minimum conditions and
standards for light, ventilation and space for occupying a structure.
401.2 Responsibility.
The owner of the structure shall provide and maintain light, ventilation and
space conditions in compliance with these requirements. A person shall not
occupy as owner-occupant, or permit another person to occupy, any premises that
do not comply with the requirements of this chapter.
401.3 Alternative devices.
In lieu of the means for natural light and ventilation herein prescribed,
artificial light or mechanical ventilation complying with the International
Building Code shall be permitted.
   SECTION 402
   LIGHT
402.1 Habitable spaces.
Every habitable space shall have not less than one window of approved size
facing directly to the outdoors or to a court. The minimum total glazed area
for every habitable space shall be 8 percent of the floor area of such room.
Wherever walls or other portions of a structure face a window of any room and
such obstructions are located less than 3 feet (914 mm) from the window and
extend to a level above that of the ceiling of the room, such window shall not
be deemed to face directly to the outdoors nor to a court and shall not be
included as contributing to the required minimum total window area for the
room.
   Exception: Where natural light for rooms or spaces without exterior glazing
areas is provided through an adjoining room, the unobstructed opening to the
adjoining room shall be not less than 8 percent of the floor area of the
interior room or space, or not less than 25 square feet (2.33 m2) whichever is
greater. The exterior glazing area shall be based on the total floor area being
served.
402.2 Common halls and stairways.
Every common hall and stairway in residential occupancies, other than in one-
and two-family dwellings, shall be lighted at all times with not less than a
60-watt standard incandescent light bulb for each 200 square feet (19 m2) of
floor area or equivalent illumination, provided that the spacing between lights
shall not be greater than 30 feet (9144 mm). In other than residential
occupancies, interior and exterior means of egress, stairways shall be
illuminated at all times the building space served by the means of egress is
occupied with not less than 1 footcandle (11 lux) at floors, landings and
treads.
402.3 Other spaces.
Other spaces shall be provided with natural or artificial light sufficient to
permit the maintenance of sanitary conditions, and the safe occupancy of the
space and utilization of the appliances, equipment and fixtures.
   SECTION 403
   VENTILATION
403.1 Habitable spaces.
Every habitable space shall have not less than one openable window. The total
openable area of the window in every room shall be equal to not less than 45
percent of the minimum glazed area required in Section 402.1.
   Exception: Where rooms and spaces without openings to the outdoors are
ventilated through an adjoining room, the unobstructed opening to the adjoining
room shall be not less than 8 percent of the floor area of the interior room or
space, but not less than 25 square feet (2.33 m2). The ventilation openings to
the outdoors shall be based on a total floor area being ventilated.
403.2 Bathrooms and toilet rooms.
Every bathroom and toilet room shall comply with the ventilation requirements
for habitable spaces as required by Section 403.1, except that a window shall
not be required in such spaces equipped with a mechanical ventilation system.
Air exhausted by a mechanical ventilation system from a bathroom or toilet room
shall discharge to the outdoors and shall not be recirculated.
403.3 Cooking facilities.
Unless approved through the certificate of occupancy, cooking shall not be
permitted in any rooming unit or dormitory unit, and a cooking facility or
appliance shall not be permitted to be present in the rooming unit or dormitory
unit.
   Exceptions:
      1.   Where specifically approved in writing by the code official.
      2.   Devices such as coffee pots and microwave ovens shall not be
considered cooking appliances.
403.4 Process ventilation.
Where injurious, toxic, irritating or noxious fumes, gases, dusts or mists are
generated, a local exhaust ventilation system shall be provided to remove the
contaminating agent at the source. Air shall be exhausted to the exterior and
not be recirculated to any space.
403.5 Clothes dryer exhaust.
Clothes dryer exhaust systems shall be independent of all other systems and
shall be exhausted outside the structure in accordance with the manufacturer's
instructions.
   Exception: Listed and labeled condensing (ductless) clothes dryers.
   SECTION 404
   OCCUPANCY LIMITATIONS
404.1 Privacy.
Dwelling units, hotel units, housekeeping units, rooming units and dormitory
units shall be arranged to provide privacy and be separate from other adjoining
spaces.
404.2 Minimum room widths.
A habitable room, other than a kitchen, shall be not less than 7 feet (2134 mm)
in any plan dimension. Kitchens shall have a minimum clear passageway of 3 feet
(914 mm) between counterfronts and appliances or counterfronts and walls.
404.3 Minimum ceiling heights.
Habitable spaces, hallways, corridors, laundry areas, bathrooms, toilet rooms
and habitable basement areas shall have a minimum clear ceiling height of 7
feet (2134 mm).
   Exceptions:
      1.   In one- and two-family dwellings, beams or girders spaced not less
than 4 feet (1219 mm) on center and projecting not greater than 6 inches (152
mm) below the required ceiling height.
      2.   Basement rooms in one- and two-family dwellings occupied exclusively
for laundry, study or recreation purposes, having a minimum ceiling height of 6
feet 8 inches (2033 mm) with a minimum clear height of 6 feet 4 inches (1932
mm) under beams, girders, ducts and similar obstructions.
      3.   Rooms occupied exclusively for sleeping, study or similar purposes
and having a sloped ceiling over all or part of the room, with a minimum clear
ceiling height of 7 feet (2134 mm) over not less than one-third of the required
minimum floor area. In calculating the floor area of such rooms, only those
portions of the floor area with a minimum clear ceiling height of 5 feet (1524
mm) shall be included.
404.4 Bedroom and living room requirements.
Every bedroom and living room shall comply with the requirements of Sections
404.4.1 through 404.4.5.
   404.4.1 Room area.
   Every living room shall contain not less than 120 square feet (11.2 m2) and
every bedroom shall contain not less than 70 square feet (6.5 m2) and every
bedroom occupied by more than one person shall contain not less than 50 square
feet (4.6 m2) of floor area for each occupant thereof.
   404.4.2 Access from bedrooms.
   Bedrooms shall not constitute the only means of access to other bedrooms or
habitable spaces and shall not serve as the only means of egress from other
habitable spaces.
      Exception: Units that contain fewer than two bedrooms.
   404.4.3 Water closet accessibility.
   Every bedroom shall have access to not less than one water closet and one
lavatory without passing through another bedroom. Every bedroom in a dwelling
unit shall have access to not less than one water closet and lavatory located
in the same story as the bedroom or an adjacent story.
   404.4.4 Prohibited occupancy.
   Kitchens and nonhabitable spaces shall not be used for sleeping purposes.
Basements shall not be used for sleeping purposes unless they conform to the
specifications of this code and the required minimum window area is entirely
above the grade of the ground adjoining. The basement, and the bedroom(s) in
the basement, shall meet the emergency egress requirements of this code, the
International Building Code, the International Existing Building Code, the
International Fire Code, the Zoning Ordinance and the International Residential
Code in accordance with the Pennsylvania Uniform Construction Code as adopted
by the City of Reading.
   404.4.5 Other requirements.
   Bedrooms shall comply with the applicable provisions of this code including,
but not limited to, the light, ventilation, room area, ceiling height and room
width requirements of this chapter; the plumbing facilities and water-heating
facilities requirements of Chapter 5; the heating facilities and electrical
receptacle requirements of Chapter 6; and the smoke detector and emergency
escape requirements of Chapter 7.
404.5 Overcrowding.
Dwelling units shall not be occupied by more occupants than permitted by the
minimum area requirements of Table 404.5.
   Table 404.5
   Minimum Area Requirements
 
              Minimum Area in Square Feet
Space          1-2 Occupants  3-5 Occupants 6 or More Occupants
Living rooma,b 120            120           150
Dining rooma,b No requirement 80            100
Bedrooms       Shall comply with Section 404.4.1
 
For SI: 1 square foot = 0.0929 m2.
a.   See Section 404.5.2 for combined living room/dining room spaces.
b.   See Section 404.5.1 for limitations on determining the minimum occupancy
area for sleeping purposes.
   404.5.1 Sleeping area.
   The minimum occupancy area required by Table 404.5 shall not be included as
a sleeping area in determining the minimum occupancy area for sleeping
purposes. Sleeping areas shall comply with Section 404.4.
   404.5.2 Combined spaces.
   Combined living room and dining room spaces shall comply with the
requirements of Table 404.5 if the total area is equal to that required for
separate rooms and if the space is located so as to function as a combination
living room/dining room.
404.6 Efficiency unit.
Nothing in this section shall prohibit an efficiency living unit from meeting
the following requirements:
   1.   A unit occupied by not more than one occupant shall have a minimum
clear floor area of 120 square feet (11.2 m2). A unit occupied by not more than
two occupants shall have a minimum clear floor area of 220 square feet (20.4
m2). A unit occupied by three occupants shall have a minimum clear floor area
of 320 square feet (29.7 m2). These required areas shall be exclusive of the
areas required by Items 2 and 3.
   2.   The unit shall be provided with a kitchen sink, cooking appliance and
refrigeration facilities, each having a minimum clear working space of 30
inches (762 mm) in front. Light and ventilation conforming to this code shall
be provided.
   3.   The unit shall be provided with a separate bathroom containing a water
closet, lavatory and bathtub or shower.
   4.   The maximum number of occupants shall be three.
404.7 Food preparation.
Spaces to be occupied for food preparation purposes shall contain suitable
space and equipment to store, prepare and serve foods in a sanitary manner.
There shall be adequate facilities and services for the sanitary disposal of
food wastes and refuse, including facilities for temporary storage.
   Chapter 5
   Plumbing Facilities and Fixture Requirements
   SECTION 501
   GENERAL
501.1 Scope.
The provisions of this chapter shall govern the minimum plumbing systems,
facilities and plumbing fixtures to be provided.
501.2 Responsibility.
The owner of the structure shall provide and maintain such plumbing facilities
and plumbing fixtures in compliance with these requirements. A person shall not
occupy as owner-occupant or permit another person to occupy any structure or
premises that does not comply with the requirements of this chapter.
   SECTION 502
   REQUIRED FACILITIES
[P] 502.1 Dwelling units.
Every dwelling unit shall contain its own bathtub or shower, lavatory, water
closet and kitchen sink that shall be maintained in a sanitary, safe working
condition. The lavatory shall be placed in the same room as the water closet or
located in close proximity to the door leading directly into the room in which
such water closet is located. A kitchen sink shall not be used as a substitute
for the required lavatory.
[P] 502.2 Rooming houses.
Not less than one water closet, lavatory and bathtub or shower shall be
supplied for each four rooming units.
[P] 502.3 Hotels.
Where private water closets, lavatories and baths are not provided, one water
closet, one lavatory and one bathtub or shower having access from a public
hallway shall be provided for each 10 occupants.
[P] 502.4 Employees' facilities.
Not less than one water closet, one lavatory and one drinking facility shall be
available to employees.
   [P] 502.4.1 Drinking facilities.
   Drinking facilities shall be a drinking fountain, water cooler, bottled
water cooler or disposable cups next to a sink or water dispenser. Drinking
facilities shall not be located in toilet rooms or bathrooms.
[P] 502.5 Public toilet facilities.
Public toilet facilities shall be maintained in a safe, sanitary and working
condition in accordance with the International Plumbing Code. Except for
periodic maintenance or cleaning, public access and use shall be provided to
the toilet facilities at all times during occupancy of the premises.
   SECTION 503
   TOILET ROOMS
[P] 503.1 Privacy.
Toilet rooms and bathrooms shall provide privacy and shall not constitute the
only passageway to a hall or other space, or to the exterior. A door and
interior locking device shall be provided for all common or shared bathrooms
and toilet rooms in a multiple dwelling.
[P] 503.2 Location.
Toilet rooms and bathrooms serving hotel units, rooming units or dormitory
units or housekeeping units, shall have access by traversing not more than one
flight of stairs and shall have access from a common hall or passageway.
[P] 503.3 Location of employee toilet facilities.
Toilet facilities shall have access from within the employees' working area.
The required toilet facilities shall be located not more than one story above
or below the employees' working area and the path of travel to such facilities
shall not exceed a distance of 500 feet (152 m). Employee facilities shall
either be separate facilities or combined employee and public facilities.
   Exception: Facilities that are required for employees in storage structures
or kiosks, which are located in adjacent structures under the same ownership,
lease or control, shall not exceed a travel distance of 500 feet (152 m) from
the employees' regular working area to the facilities.
[P] 503.4 Floor surface.
In other than dwelling units, every toilet room floor shall be maintained to be
a smooth, hard, nonabsorbent surface to permit such floor to be easily kept in
a clean and sanitary condition.
   SECTION 504
   PLUMBING SYSTEMS AND FIXTURES
[P] 504.1 General.
Plumbing fixtures shall be properly installed and maintained in working order,
and shall be kept free from obstructions, leaks and defects and be capable of
performing the function for which such plumbing fixtures are designed. Plumbing
fixtures shall be maintained in a safe, sanitary and functional condition.
[P] 504.2 Fixture clearances.
Plumbing fixtures shall have adequate clearances for usage and cleaning.
[P] 504.3 Plumbing system hazards.
Where it is found that a plumbing system in a structure constitutes a hazard to
the occupants or the structure by reason of inadequate service, inadequate
venting, cross connection, backsiphonage, improper installation, deterioration
or damage or for similar reasons, the code official shall require the defects
to be corrected to eliminate the hazard.
   SECTION 505
   WATER SYSTEM
505.1 General.
Every sink, lavatory, bathtub or shower, drinking fountain, water closet or
other plumbing fixture shall be properly connected to either a public water
system or to an approved private water system. Kitchen sinks, lavatories,
laundry facilities, bathtubs and showers shall be supplied with hot or tempered
and cold running water in accordance with the International Plumbing Code.
[P] 505.2 Contamination.
The water supply shall be maintained free from contamination, and all water
inlets for plumbing fixtures shall be located above the flood-level rim of the
fixture. Shampoo basin faucets, janitor sink faucets and other hose bibs or
faucets to which hoses are attached and left in place, shall be protected by an
approved atmospheric-type vacuum breaker or an approved permanently attached
hose connection vacuum breaker.
[P] 505.3 Supply.
The water supply system shall be installed and maintained to provide a supply
of water to plumbing fixtures, devices and appurtenances in sufficient volume
and at pressures adequate to enable the fixtures to function properly, safely,
and free from defects and leaks.
[P] 505.4 Water heating facilities.
Water heating facilities shall be properly installed, maintained and capable of
providing an adequate amount of water to be drawn at every required sink,
lavatory, bathtub, shower and laundry facility at a temperature not less than
110°F (43°C). A gas-burning water heater shall not be located in any bathroom,
toilet room, bedroom or other occupied room normally kept closed, unless
adequate combustion air is provided. An approved combination temperature and
pressure-relief valve and relief valve discharge pipe shall be properly
installed and maintained on water heaters.
   505.4.1 Prohibition of water heaters in the kitchen.
   Water heaters shall not exist in the kitchen unless approved by the
authority having jurisdiction.
[P] 505.5 Nonpotable water reuse systems.
Nonpotable water reuse systems and rainwater collection and conveyance systems
shall be maintained in a safe and sanitary condition. Where such systems are
not properly maintained, the systems shall be repaired to provide for safe and
sanitary conditions, or the system shall be abandoned in accordance with
Section 505.5.1.
   [P] 505.5.1 Abandonment of systems.
   Where a nonpotable water reuse system or a rainwater collection and
distribution system is not maintained or the owner ceases use of the system,
the system shall be abandoned in accordance with Section 1301.10 of the
International Plumbing Code.
   SECTION 506
   SANITARY DRAINAGE SYSTEM
[P] 506.1 General.
Plumbing fixtures shall be properly connected to either a public sewer system
or to an approved private sewage disposal system.
[P] 506.2 Maintenance.
Every plumbing stack, vent, waste and sewer line shall function properly and be
kept free from obstructions, leaks and defects.
[P] 506.3 Grease interceptors.
Grease interceptors and automatic grease removal devices shall be maintained in
accordance with this code and the manufacturer's installation instructions.
Grease interceptors and automatic grease removal devices shall be regularly
serviced and cleaned to prevent the discharge of oil, grease, and other
substances harmful or hazardous to the building drainage system, the public
sewer, the private sewage disposal system or the sewage treatment plant or
processes. Records of maintenance, cleaning and repairs shall be available for
inspection by the code official.
   SECTION 507
   STORM DRAINAGE
[P] 507.1 General.
Drainage of roofs and paved areas, yards and courts, and other open areas on
the premises shall not be discharged in a manner that creates a public
nuisance.
   Chapter 6
   Mechanical and Electrical Requirements
   SECTION 601
   GENERAL
601.1 Scope.
The provisions of this chapter shall govern the minimum mechanical and
electrical facilities and equipment to be provided.
601.2 Responsibility.
The owner of the structure shall provide and maintain mechanical and electrical
facilities and equipment in compliance with these requirements. A person shall
not occupy as owner-occupant or permit another person to occupy any premises
that does not comply with the requirements of this chapter.
   SECTION 602
   HEATING FACILITIES
602.1 Facilities required.
Heating facilities shall be provided in structures as required by this section.
602.2 Residential occupancies.
Dwellings shall be provided with heating facilities capable of maintaining a
room temperature of 68° F. (20° C.) in all habitable rooms, bathrooms and
toilet rooms based on the winter outdoor design temperature for the locality
indicated in Appendix D of the International Plumbing Code. Cooking appliances
shall not be used, nor shall portable unvented fuel-burning space heaters be
used, as a means to provide required heating.
   Exception: In areas where the average monthly temperature is above 30° F. (-
1° C.), a minimum temperature of 65° F. (18° C.) shall be maintained.
602.3 Heat supply.
Every owner and operator of any building who rents, leases or lets one or more
dwelling units or sleeping units on terms, either expressed or implied, to
furnish heat to the occupants thereof shall supply heat during the period from
the 1st of October to the 30th of May to maintain a minimum temperature of 68°
F. (20° C.) in all habitable rooms, bathrooms and toilet rooms.
   Exceptions:
      1.   When the outdoor temperature is below the winter outdoor design
temperature for the locality, maintenance of the minimum room temperature shall
not be required provided that the heating system is operating at its full
design capacity. The winter outdoor design temperature for the locality shall
be as indicated in Appendix D of the International Plumbing Code.
      2.   In areas where the average monthly temperature is above 30° F. (-1°
C.) a minimum temperature of 65° F. (18° C.) shall be maintained.
602.4 Occupiable work spaces.
Indoor occupiable work spaces shall be supplied with heat during the period
from [DATE] to [DATE] to maintain a minimum temperature of 65°F (18°C) during
the period the spaces are occupied.
   Exceptions:
      1.   Processing, storage and operation areas that require cooling or
special temperature conditions.
      2.   Areas in which persons are primarily engaged in vigorous physical
activities.
602.5 Room temperature measurement.
The required room temperatures shall be measured 3 feet (914 mm) above the
floor near the center of the room and 2 feet (610 mm) inward from the center of
each exterior wall.
   SECTION 603
   MECHANICAL EQUIPMENT
603.1 Mechanical equipment and appliances.
Mechanical equipment, appliances, fireplaces, solid fuel-burning appliances,
cooking appliances and water heating appliances shall be properly installed and
maintained in a safe working condition, and shall be capable of performing the
intended function.
603.2 Removal of combustion products.
Fuel-burning equipment and appliances shall be connected to an approved chimney
or vent.
   Exception: Fuel-burning equipment and appliances which are labeled for
unvented operation.
603.3 Clearances.
Required clearances to combustible materials shall be maintained.
603.4 Safety controls.
All safety controls for fuel-burning equipment shall be maintained in effective
operation.
603.5 Combustion air.
A supply of air for complete combustion of the fuel and for ventilation of the
space containing the fuel-burning equipment shall be provided for the fuel-
burning equipment.
603.6 Energy conservation devices.
Devices intended to reduce fuel consumption by attachment to a fuel-burning
appliance, to the fuel supply line thereto, or to the vent outlet or vent
piping therefrom, shall not be installed unless labeled for such purpose and
the installation is specifically approved.
   SECTION 604
   ELECTRICAL FACILITIES
604.1 Facilities required.
Every occupied building shall be provided with an electrical system in
compliance with the requirements of this section and Section 605.
604.2 Service.
The size and usage of appliances and equipment shall serve as a basis for
determining the need for additional facilities in accordance with NFPA 70.
Dwelling units shall be served by a three-wire, 120/240 volt, single-phase
electrical service having a minimum rating of 60 amperes.
604.3 Electrical system hazards.
Where it is found that the electrical system in a structure constitutes a
hazard to the occupants or the structure by reason of inadequate service,
improper fusing, insufficient receptacle and lighting outlets, improper wiring
or installation, deterioration or damage, or for similar reasons, the code
official shall require the defects to be corrected to eliminate the hazard.
   604.3.1 Abatement of electrical hazards associated with water exposure.
   The provisions of this section shall govern the repair and replacement of
electrical systems and equipment that have been exposed to water.
      604.3.1.1 Electrical equipment.
      Electrical distribution equipment, motor circuits, power equipment,
transformers, wire, cable, flexible cords, wiring devices, ground fault circuit
interrupters, surge protectors, molded case circuit breakers, low-voltage
fuses, luminaires, ballasts, motors and electronic control, signaling and
communication equipment that have been exposed to water shall be replaced in
accordance with the provisions of the International Building Code.
         Exception: The following equipment shall be allowed to be repaired
where an inspection report from the equipment manufacturer or approved
manufacturer's representative indicates that the equipment has not sustained
damage that requires replacement:
            1.   Enclosed switches, rated not more than 600 volts or less.
            2.   Busway, rated not more than 600 volts.
            3.   Panelboards, rated not more than 600 volts.
            4.   Switchboards, rated not more than 600 volts.
            5.   Fire pump controllers, rated not more than 600 volts.
            6.   Manual and magnetic motor controllers.
            7.   Motor control centers.
            8.   Alternating current high-voltage circuit breakers.
            9.   Low-voltage power circuit breakers.
            10.   Protective relays, meters and current transformers.
            11.   Low- and medium-voltage switchgear.
            12.   Liquid-filled transformers.
            13.   Cast-resin transformers.
            14.   Wire or cable that is suitable for wet locations and whose
ends have not been exposed to water.
            15.   Wire or cable, not containing fillers, that is suitable for
wet locations and whose ends have not been exposed to water.
            16.   Luminaires that are listed as submersible.
            17.   Motors.
            18.   Electronic control, signaling and communication equipment.
   604.3.2 Abatement of electrical hazards associated with fire exposure.
   The provisions of this section shall govern the repair and replacement of
electrical systems and equipment that have been exposed to fire.
      604.3.2.1 Electrical equipment.
      Electrical switches, receptacles and fix1ures, including furnace, water
heating, security system and power distribution circuits, that have been
exposed to fire, shall be replaced in accordance with the provisions of the
International Building Code.
         Exception: Electrical switches, receptacles and fixtures that shall be
allowed to be repaired where an inspection report from the equipment
manufacturer or approved manufacturer's representative indicates that the
equipment has not sustained damage that requires replacement.
   SECTION 605
   ELECTRICAL EQUIPMENT
605.1 Installation.
Electrical equipment, wiring and appliances shall be properly installed and
maintained in a safe and approved manner.
605.2 Receptacles.
Every habitable space in a dwelling shall contain not less than two separate
and remote receptacle outlets. Every laundry area shall contain not less than
one grounding-type receptacle or a receptacle with a ground fault circuit
interrupter. Every bathroom shall contain not less than one receptacle. Any new
bathroom receptacle outlet shall have ground fault circuit interrupter
protection. All receptacle outlets shall have the appropriate faceplate cover
for the location.
605.3 Luminaires.
Every public hall, interior stairway, toilet room, kitchen, bathroom, laundry
room, boiler room and furnace room shall contain not less than one electric
luminaire. Pool and spa luminaires over 15 V shall have ground fault circuit
interrupter protection.
605.4 Wiring.
Flexible cords shall not be used for permanent wiring, or for running through
doors, windows, or cabinets, or concealed within walls, floors, or ceilings.
   SECTION 606
   ELEVATORS, ESCALATORS AND DUMBWAITERS
606.1 General.
Elevators, dumbwaiters and escalators shall be maintained in compliance with
ASME A17.1. The most current certificate of inspection shall be on display at
all times within the elevator or attached to the escalator or dumbwaiter, be
available for public inspection in the office of the building operator or be
posted in a publicly conspicuous location approved by the code official. The
inspection and tests shall be performed at not less than the periodic intervals
listed in ASME A17.1, Appendix N, except where otherwise specified by the
authority having jurisdiction.
606.2 Elevators.
In buildings equipped with passenger elevators, not less than one elevator
shall be maintained in operation at all times when the building is occupied.
   Exception: Buildings equipped with only one elevator shall be permitted to
have the elevator temporarily out of service for testing or servicing.
   SECTION 607
   DUCT SYSTEMS
607.1 General.
Duct systems shall be maintained free of obstructions and shall be capable of
performing the required function.
   Chapter 7
   Fire Safety Requirements
   SECTION 701
   GENERAL
701.1 Scope.
The provisions of this chapter shall govern the minimum conditions and
standards for fire safety relating to structures and exterior premises,
including fire safety facilities and equipment to be provided.
701.2 Responsibility.
The owner of the premises shall provide and maintain such fire safety
facilities and equipment in compliance with these requirements. A person shall
not occupy as owner-occupant or permit another person to occupy any premises
that do not comply with the requirements of this chapter.
   SECTION 702
   MEANS OF EGRESS
[F] 702.1 General.
A safe, continuous and unobstructed path of travel shall be provided from any
point in a building or structure to the public way. Means of egress shall
comply with the International Fire Code as adopted by the City of Reading.
[F] 702.2 Aisles.
The required width of aisles in accordance with the International Fire Code, as
it is adopted by the City of Reading, shall be unobstructed.
[F] 702.3 Locked doors.
Means of egress doors shall be readily openable from the side from which egress
is to be made without the need for keys, special knowledge or effort, except
where the door hardware conforms to that permitted by the International
Building Code, as adopted by the City of Reading.
[F] 702.4 Emergency escape openings.
Required emergency escape openings shall be maintained in accordance with the
code in effect at the time of construction, and the following. Required
emergency escape and rescue openings shall be operational from the inside of
the room without the use of keys or tools. Bars, grilles, grates or similar
devices are permitted to be placed over emergency escape and rescue openings
provided that the minimum net clear opening size complies with the code that
was in effect at the time of construction and such devices shall be releasable
or removable from the inside without the use of a key, tool or force greater
than that which is required for normal operation of the escape and rescue
opening.
   SECTION 703
   FIRE-RESISTANCE RATINGS
[F] 703.1 Fire-resistance-rated assemblies.
The provisions of this chapter shall govern maintenance of the materials,
systems and assemblies used for structural fire resistance and fire-resistance-
rated construction separation of adjacent spaces to safeguard against the
spread of fire and smoke within a building and the spread of fire to or from
buildings.
[F] 703.2 Unsafe conditions.
Where any components are not maintained and do not function as intended or do
not have the fire resistance required by the code under which the building was
constructed or altered, such components or portions thereof shall be deemed
unsafe conditions in accordance with Section 111.1.1 of the International Fire
Code, as adopted by the City of Reading. Components or portions thereof
determined to be unsafe shall be repaired or replaced to conform to that code
under which the building was constructed or altered. Where the condition of
components is such that any building, structure or portion thereof presents an
imminent danger to the occupants of the building, structure or portion thereof,
the fire code official shall act in accordance with Section 111.2 of the
International Fire Code, as adopted by the City of Reading.
[F] 703.3 Maintenance.
The required fire-resistance rating of fire-resistance-rated construction,
including walls, firestops, shaft enclosures, partitions, smoke barriers,
floors, fire-resistive coatings and sprayed fire-resistant materials applied to
structural members and joint systems, shall be maintained. Such elements shall
be visually inspected annually by the owner and repaired, restored or replaced
where damaged, altered, breached or penetrated. Records of inspections and
repairs shall be maintained. Where concealed, such elements shall not be
required to be visually inspected by the owner unless the concealed space is
accessible by the removal or movement of a panel, access door, ceiling tile or
entry to the space. Openings made therein for the passage of pipes, electrical
conduit, wires, ducts, air transfer and any other reason shall be protected
with approved methods capable of resisting the passage of smoke and fire.
Openings through fire-resistance-rated assemblies shall be protected by self-
or automatic-closing doors of approved construction meeting the fire protection
requirements for the assembly.
   [F] 703.3.1 Fire blocking and draft stopping.
   Required fire blocking and draft stopping in combustible concealed spaces
shall be maintained to provide continuity and integrity of the construction.
   [F] 703.3.2 Smoke barriers and smoke partitions.
   Required smoke barriers and smoke partitions shall be maintained to prevent
the passage of smoke. Openings protected with approved smoke barrier doors or
smoke dampers shall be maintained in accordance with NFPA 105.
   [F] 703.3.3 Fire walls, fire barriers, and fire partitions.
   Required fire walls, fire barriers and fire partitions shall be maintained
to prevent the passage of fire. Openings protected with approved doors or fire
dampers shall be maintained in accordance with NFPA 80.
[F] 703.4 Opening protectives.
Opening protectives shall be maintained in an operative condition in accordance
with NFPA 80. The application of field-applied labels associated with the
maintenance of opening protectives shall follow the requirements of the
approved third-party certification organization accredited for listing the
opening protective. Fire doors and smoke barrier doors shall not be blocked or
obstructed, or otherwise made inoperable. Fusible links shall be replaced
whenever fused or damaged. Fire door assemblies shall not be modified.
   [F] 703.4.1 Signs.
   Where required by the code official, a sign shall be permanently displayed
on or near each fire door in letters not less than 1 inch (25 mm) high to read
as follows:
      1.   For doors designed to be kept normally open: FIRE DOOR - DO NOT
BLOCK.
      2.   For doors designed to be kept normally closed: FIRE DOOR - KEEP
CLOSED.
   [F] 703.4.2 Hold-open devices and closers.
   Hold-open devices and automatic door closers shall be maintained. During the
period that such a device is out of service for repairs, the door it operates
shall remain in the closed position.
   [F] 703.4.3 Door operation.
   Swinging fire doors shall close from the full-open position and latch
automatically. The door closer shall exert enough force to close and latch the
door from any partially open position.
[F] 703.5 Ceilings.
The hanging and displaying of salable goods and other decorative materials from
acoustical ceiling systems that are part of a fire-resistance-rated horizontal
assembly shall be prohibited.
[F] 703.6 Testing.
Horizontal and vertical sliding and rolling fire doors shall be inspected and
tested annually to confirm operation and full closure. Records of inspections
and testing shall be maintained.
[F] 703.7 Vertical shafts.
Interior vertical shafts, including stairways, elevator hoistways and service
and utility shafts, which connect two or more stories of a building shall be
enclosed or protected as required in Chapter 11 of the International Fire Code,
as adopted by the City of Reading. New floor openings in existing buildings
shall comply with the International Building Code, as adopted by the City of
Reading.
[F] 703.8 Opening protective closers.
Where openings are required to be protected, opening protectives shall be
maintained self-closing or automatic-closing by smoke detection. Existing
fusible-link-type automatic door-closing devices shall be replaced if the
fusible link rating exceeds 135°F (57°C).
   SECTION 704
   FIRE PROTECTION SYSTEMS
[F] 704.1 Inspection, testing and maintenance.
Fire detection, alarm and extinguishing systems, mechanical smoke exhaust
systems, and smoke and heat vents shall be maintained in accordance with the
International Fire Code, as it is adopted by the City of Reading, in an
operative condition at all times, and shall be replaced or repaired where
defective.
   [F] 704.1.1 Installation.
   Fire protection systems shall be maintained in accordance with the original
installation standards for that system. Required systems shall be extended,
altered or augmented as necessary to maintain and continue protection where the
building is altered or enlarged. Alterations to fire protection systems shall
be done in accordance with applicable standards.
   [F] 704.1.2 Required fire protection systems.
   Fire protection systems required by this code, the International Fire Code,
as adopted by the City of Reading, or the International Building Code, as
adopted by the City of Reading, shall be installed, repaired, operated, tested
and maintained in accordance with this code. A fire protection system for which
a design option, exception or reduction to the provisions of this code, the
International Fire Code, as adopted by the City of Reading, or the
International Building Code, as adopted by the City of Reading, has been
granted shall be considered to be a required system.
   [F] 704.1.3 Fire protection systems.
   Fire protection systems shall be inspected, maintained and tested in
accordance with the following International Fire Code requirements as they are
adopted by the City of Reading.
      1.   Automatic sprinkler systems, see Section 903.5.
      2.   Automatic fire-extinguishing systems protecting commercial cooking
systems, see Section 904.12.5.
      3.   Automatic water mist extinguishing systems, see Section 904.11.
      4.   Carbon dioxide extinguishing systems, see Section 904.8.
      5.   Carbon monoxide alarms and carbon monoxide detection systems, see
Section 915.6.
      6.   Clean-agent extinguishing systems, see Section 904.10.
      7.   Dry-chemical extinguishing systems, see Section 904.6.
      8.   Fire alarm and fire detection systems, see Section 907.8.
      9.   Fire department connections, see Sections 912.4 and 912.7.
      10.   Fire pumps, see Section 913.5.
      11.   Foam extinguishing systems, see Section 904.7.
      12.   Halon extinguishing systems, see Section 904.9.
      13.   Single- and multiple-station smoke alarms, see Section 907.10.
      14.   Smoke and heat vents and mechanical smoke removal systems, see
Section 910.5.
      15.   Smoke control systems, see Section 909.20.
      16.   Wet-chemical extinguishing systems, see Section 904.5.
[F] 704.2 Standards.
Fire protection systems shall be inspected, tested and maintained in accordance
with the referenced standards listed in Table 704.2 and as required in this
section.
   TABLE 704.2
   FIRE PROTECTION SYSTEM MAINTENANCE STANDARDS
SYSTEM STANDARD
SYSTEM                                   STANDARD
Portable fire extinguishers              NFPA 10
Carbon dioxide fire-extinguishing system NFPA 12
Halon 1301 fire-extinguishing systems    NFPA 12A
Dry-chemical extinguishing systems       NFPA 17
Wet-chemical extinguishing systems       NFPA 17A
Water-based fire protection systems      NFPA 25
Fire alarm systems                       NFPA 72
Smoke and heat vents                     NFPA 204
Water-mist systems                       NFPA 750
Clean-agent extinguishing systems        NFPA 2001
 
   [F] 704.2.1 Records.
   Records shall be maintained of all system inspections, tests and maintenance
required by the referenced standards.
[F] 704.3 Systems out of service.
Where a required fire protection system is out of service, the fire marshal's
office, fire department and the fire code official shall be notified
immediately and, where required by the fire code official, either the building
shall be evacuated or an approved fire watch shall be provided for all
occupants left unprotected by the shutdown until the fire protection system has
been returned to service. Where utilized, fire watches shall be provided with
not less than one approved means for notification of the fire department and
shall not have duties beyond performing constant patrols of the protected
premises and keeping watch for fires. Actions shall be taken in accordance with
Section 901 of the International Fire Code, as adopted by the City of Reading,
to bring the systems back in service.
   [F] 704.3.1 Emergency impairments.
   Where unplanned impairments of fire protection systems occur, appropriate
emergency action shall be taken to minimize potential injury and damage. The
impairment coordinator shall implement the steps outlined in Section 901.7.4 of
the International Fire Code as they are adopted by the City of Reading.
[F] 704.4 Removal of or tampering with equipment.
It shall be unlawful for any person to remove, tamper with or otherwise disturb
any fire hydrant, fire detection and alarm system, fire suppression system or
other fire appliance required by this code except for the purposes of
extinguishing fire, training, recharging or making necessary repairs.
   [F] 704.4.1 Removal of or tampering with appurtenances.
   Locks, gates, doors, barricades, chains, enclosures, signs, tags and seals
that have been installed by or at the direction of the fire code official shall
not be removed, unlocked, destroyed or tampered with in any manner.
   [F] 704.4.2 Removal of existing occupant-use hoselines.
   The fire code official is authorized to permit the removal of existing
occupant-use hose lines where all of the following apply:
      1.   The installation is not required by the International Fire Code or
the International Building Code, as these codes are adopted by the City of
Reading.
      2.   The hose line would not be utilized by trained personnel or the fire
department.
      3.   The remaining outlets are compatible with local fire department
fittings.
   [F] 704.4.3 Termination of monitoring service.
   For fire alarm systems required to be monitored by the International Fire
Code, as it is adopted by the City of Reading, notice shall be made to the fire
code official whenever alarm monitoring services are terminated. Notice shall
be made in writing by the provider of the monitoring service being terminated.
[F] 704.5 Fire department connection.
Where the fire department connection is not visible to approaching fire
apparatus, the fire department connection shall be indicated by an approved
sign mounted on the street front or on the side of the building. Such sign
shall have the letters "FOG" not less than 6 inches (152 mm) high and words in
letters not less than 2 inches (51 mm) high or an arrow to indicate the
location. Such signs shall be subject to the approval of the fire code
official.
   [F] 704.5.1 Fire department connection access.
   Ready access to fire department connections shall be maintained at all times
and without obstruction by fences, bushes, trees, walls or any other fixed or
movable object. Access to fire department connections shall be approved by the
fire chief.
      Exception: Fences, where provided with an access gate equipped with a
sign complying with the legend requirements of Section 912.5 of the
International Fire Code, as it is adopted by the City of Reading, and a means
of emergency operation. The gate and the means of emergency operation shall be
approved by the fire chief and maintained operational at all times.
   [F] 704.5.2 Clear space around connections.
   A working space of not less than 36 inches (914 mm) in width, 36 inches (914
mm) in depth and 78 inches (1981 mm) in height shall be provided and maintained
in front of and to the sides of wall-mounted fire department connections and
around the circumference of freestanding fire department connections.
[F] 704.6 Single- and multiple-station smoke alarms.
Single- and multiple-station smoke alarms shall be installed in existing Group
1-1 and R occupancies in accordance with Sections 704.6.1 through 704.6.3.
   [F] 704.6.1 Where required.
   Existing Group 1-1 and R occupancies shall be provided with single-station
smoke alarms in accordance with Sections 704.6.1.1 through 704.6.1.4.
Interconnection and power sources shall be in accordance with Sections 704.6.2
and 704.6.3.
      Exceptions:
         1.   Where the code that was in effect at the time of construction
required smoke alarms and smoke alarms complying with those requirements are
already provided.
         2.   Where smoke alarms have been installed in occupancies and
dwellings that were not required to have them at the time of construction,
additional smoke alarms shall not be required provided that the existing smoke
alarms comply with requirements that were in effect at the time of
installation.
         3.   Where smoke detectors connected to a fire alarm system have been
installed as a substitute for smoke alarms.
      [F] 704.6.1.1 Group R-1.
      Single- or multiple-station smoke alarms shall be installed in all of the
following locations in Group R-1:
         1.   In sleeping areas.
         2.   In every room in the path of the means of egress from the
sleeping area to the door leading from the sleeping unit.
         3.   In each story within the sleeping unit, including basements. For
sleeping units with split levels and without an intervening door between the
adjacent levels, a smoke alarm installed on the upper level shall suffice for
the adjacent lower level provided that the lower level is less than one full
story below the upper level.
      [F] 704.6.1.2 Groups R-2, R-3, R-4 and I-1.
      Single or multiple-station smoke alarms shall be installed and maintained
in Groups R-2, R-3, R-4 and I-1 regardless of occupant load at all of the
following locations:
         1.   On the ceiling or wall outside of each separate sleeping area in
the immediate vicinity of bedrooms.
         2.   In each room used for sleeping purposes.
         3.   In each story within a dwelling unit, including basements but not
including crawl spaces and uninhabitable attics. In dwellings or dwelling units
with split levels and without an intervening door between the adjacent levels,
a smoke alarm installed on the upper level shall suffice for the adjacent lower
level provided that the lower level is less than one full story below the upper
level.
      [F] 704.6.1.3 Installation near cooking appliances.
      Smoke alarms shall not be installed in the following locations unless
this would prevent placement of a smoke alarm in a location required by Section
704.6.1.1 or 704.6.1.2.
         1.   Ionization smoke alarms shall not be installed less than 20 feet
(6096 m) horizontally from a permanently installed cooking appliance.
         2.   Ionization smoke alarms with an alarm-silencing switch shall not
be installed less than 10 feet (3048 mm) horizontally from a permanently
installed cooking appliance.
         3.   Photoelectric smoke alarms shall not be installed less than 6
feet (1829 mm) horizontally from a permanently installed cooking appliance.
      [F]704.6.1.4 Installation near bathrooms.
      Smoke alarms shall be installed not less than 3 feet (914 mm)
horizontally from the door or opening of a bathroom that contains a bathtub or
shower unless this would prevent placement of a smoke alarm required by Section
704.6.1.1 or 704.6.1.2.
   [F] 704.6.2 Interconnection.
   Where more than one smoke alarm is required to be installed within an
individual dwelling or sleeping unit, the smoke alarms shall be interconnected
in such a manner that the activation of one alarm will activate all of the
alarms in the individual unit. Physical interconnection of smoke alarms shall
not be required where listed wireless alarms are installed and all alarms sound
upon activation of one alarm. The alarm shall be clearly audible in all
bedrooms over background noise levels with all intervening doors closed.
      Exceptions:
         1.   Interconnection is not required in buildings that are not
undergoing alterations, repairs or construction of any kind.
         2.   Smoke alarms in existing areas are not required to be
interconnected where alterations or repairs do not result in the removal of
interior wall or ceiling finishes exposing the structure, unless there is an
attic, crawl space or basement available that could provide access for
interconnection without the removal of interior finishes.
   704.6.3 Tampering.
   Anyone tampering or interfering with the effectiveness of a smoke detector
shall be in violation of this code.
   704.6.4 Maintenance.
   The property owner shall maintain all smoke detectors located in rental
units.
   704.6.5 Fire extinguishers.
   Handheld portable fire extinguishers shall be mounted in the kitchen area in
accordance with the manufacturer's installation instructions as well as Annex F
of the National Fire Protection Association (NFPA) #10, The Standard for
Portable Fire Extinguishers.
   [F] 704.6.3 Power source.
   Single-station smoke alarms shall receive their primary power from the
building wiring provided that such wiring is served from a commercial source
and shall be equipped with a battery backup. Smoke alarms with integral strobes
that are not equipped with battery backup shall be connected to an emergency
electrical system. Smoke alarms shall emit a signal when the batteries are low.
Wiring shall be permanent and without a disconnecting switch other than as
required for overcurrent protection.
      Exceptions:
         1.   Smoke alarms are permitted to be solely battery operated in
existing buildings where construction is not taking place.
         2.   Smoke alarms are permitted to be solely battery operated in
buildings that are not served from a commercial power source.
         3.   Smoke alarms are permitted to be solely battery operated in
existing areas of buildings undergoing alterations or repairs that do not
result in the removal of interior walls or ceiling finishes exposing the
structure, unless there is an attic, crawl space or basement available that
could provide access for building wiring without the removal of interior
finishes.
   [F] 704.6.4 Smoke detection system.
   Smoke detectors listed in accordance with UL 268 and provided as part of the
building's fire alarm system shall be an acceptable alternative to single- and
multiple-station smoke alarms and shall comply with the following:
      1.   The fire alarm system shall comply with all applicable requirements
in Section 907 of the International Fire Code as adopted by the City of
Reading.
      2.   Activation of a smoke detector in a dwelling or sleeping unit shall
initiate alarm notification in the dwelling or sleeping unit in accordance with
Section 907.5.2 of the International Fire Code as adopted by the City of
Reading.
      3.   Activation of a smoke detector in a dwelling or sleeping unit shall
not activate alarm notification appliances outside of the dwelling or sleeping
unit, provided that a supervisory signal is generated and monitored in
accordance with Section 907.6.6 of the International Fire Code as adopted by
the City of Reading.
[F] 704.7 Single- and multiple-station smoke alarms.
Single- and multiple-station smoke alarms shall be tested and maintained in
accordance with the manufacturer's instructions. Smoke alarms that do not
function shall be replaced. Smoke alarms installed in one- and two-family
dwellings shall be replaced not more than 10 years from the date of manufacture
marked on the unit, or shall be replaced if the date of manufacture cannot be
determined.
   SECTION 705
   CARBON MONOXIDE ALARMS AND DETECTION
[F] 705.1 General.
Carbon monoxide alarms shall be installed in dwellings in accordance with
Section 1103.9 of the International Fire Code, as adopted by the City of
Reading, except that alarms in dwellings covered by the International
Residential Code, as adopted by the City of Reading, shall be installed in
accordance with Section R315 of that code.
[F] 705.2 Carbon monoxide alarms and detectors.
Carbon monoxide alarms and carbon monoxide detection systems shall be
maintained in accordance with NFPA 720. Carbon monoxide alarms and carbon
monoxide detectors that become inoperable or begin producing end-of-life
signals shall be replaced.
   SECTION 706
   ACCUMULATION AND STORAGE
706.1 Accumulations.
Rubbish, garbage or other materials shall not be stored or allowed to
accumulate in stairways, passageways, doors, windows, fire escapes or other
means of egress.
705.2 Hazardous material. 
Combustible, flammable, explosive or other hazardous materials, such as paints,
volatile oils and cleaning fluids, or combustible rubbish, such as wastepaper,
boxes and rags, shall not be accumulated or stored unless such storage complies
with the applicable requirements of the International Building Code as adopted
by the City of Reading.
    Chapter 8
   Referenced Standards
This chapter lists the standards that are referenced in various sections of
this document. The standards are listed herein by the promulgating agency of
the standard, the standard identification, the effective date and title and the
section or sections of this document that reference the standard: The
application of the referenced standards shall be as specified in Section 102.7.
                          American Society of
ASME                      Mechanical Engineers        
                          Two Park Avenue
                          New York, NY 10016-5990
                                                   Referenced in code
Standard reference number Title                      section number
ASME A17.1—2016/CSA     Safety Code for Elevators  606.1
B44—16                  and Escalators
                          ASTM International
ASTM                      100 Barr Harbor Drive       
                          West Conshohocken, PA
                          19428-2959
                                                   Referenced in code
Standard reference number Title                      section number
                          Performance Specifications
                          for Safety Covers and
F 1346—91 (2010)        Labeling Requirements for  303.2
                          All Covers for Swimming
                          Pools, Spas and Hot Tubs
                          International Code Council
                         500 New Jersey Avenue, NW   
ICC                       6th Floor
                          Washington, DC 20001
                                                   Referenced in code
Standard reference number Title                      section number
                                                     102.3, 201.3, 304.1.1,
IEBC-18                   International Building     305.1.1, 306.1.1, 401.3,
                          Code®                  604.3.1.1,
                                                     604.3.2.1, 702.3, 704.4.2
IECC-18                   International Energy       102.3
                          Conservation Code®
IEBC-18                   International Existing     102.3, 201.3, 304.1.1,
                          Building Code®            305.1.1, 306.1.1
                                                     102.3, 201.3, 604.3.1.1,
                                                     702.1, 702.2, 704.1,
IFC-18                    International Fire Code®  704.1.2, 704.1.3,
                                                     704.3, 704.3.1, 704.4.2,
                                                     704.4.3, 704.5.1, 704.6.4,
                                                     705.1
IFGC-18                   International Fuel Gas     102.3, 201.3
                          Code®
IMC-18                    International Mechanical   102.3, 201.3
                          Code®
                          International Plumbing     102.3, 201.3, 502.5,
IPC-18                    Code®                     505.1, 505.5.1, 602.2,
                                                     602.3
IRC-18                    International Residential  102.3, 201.3
                          Code®
IZC-18                    International Zoning Code®102.3, 201.3
                          National Fire Protection
NFPA                      Association                 
                          1 Batterymarch Park
                          Quincy, MA 02169-7471
                                                   Referenced in code
Standard reference number Title                      section number
10-17                     Standard for Portable Fire Table 704.2
                          Extinguishers
12-15                     Standard on Carbon Dioxide Table 704.2
                          Extinguishing Systems
12A-15                    Standard on Halon 1301     Table 704.2
                          Fire Extinguishing System
17-17                     Standard for Dry Chemical  Table 704.2
                          Extinguishing Systems
17A-17                    Standard for Wet Chemical  Table 704.2
                          Extinguishing Systems
                          Standard for the
25-17                     Inspection, Testing and    Table 704.2
                          Maintenance of Water-Based
                          Fire Protection Systems
70-17                     National Electrical Code   102.3, 201.3, 604.2
72-16                     National Fire Alarm and    Table 704.2
                          Signaling Code
                          Standard for Fire Doors
80-16                     and Other Opening          703.3.3, 703.4
                          Protectives
                          Standard for Smoke Door
105-16                    Assemblies and Other       703.3.2
                          Opening Protectives
204-15                    Standard for Smoke and     Table 704.2
                          Heat Venting
                          Standard for the
720-15                    Installation of Carbon     [F] 705.2
                          Monoxide (CO) Detection
                          and Warning Equipment
750-14                    Standard on Water Mist     Table 704.2
                          Fire Protection Systems
2001-15                   Standard on Clean Agent    Table 704.2
                          Fire Extinguishing Systems
                          Underwriters Laboratories,
UL                        LLC                         
                          333 Pfingsten Road
                          Northbook, IL 60062
268-09                    Smoke Detectors for Fire   704.6.4
                          Alarm Systems
 
   Appendix A
   Boarding Standard
The provisions contained in this appendix are not mandatory unless specifically
referenced in the adopting ordinance.
   A101
   GENERAL
A101.1 General.
Windows and doors shall be boarded in an approved manner to prevent entry by
unauthorized persons and shall be painted to correspond to the color of the
existing structure.
   A102
   MATERIALS
A102.1 Boarding sheet material.
Boarding sheet material shall be minimum 1/2-inch-thick (12.7 mm) wood
structural panels complying with the International Building Code.
A102.2 Boarding framing material.
Boarding framing material shall be minimum nominal 2-inch by 4-inch (51 mm by
102 mm) solid sawn lumber complying with the International Building Code.
A102.3 Boarding fasteners.
Boarding fasteners shall be minimum 3/8-inch-diameter (9.5 mm) carriage bolts
of such a length as required to penetrate the assembly and as required to
adequately attach the washers and nuts. Washers and nuts shall comply with the
International Building Code.
   A103
   INSTALLATION
A103.1 Boarding installation.
The boarding installation shall be in accordance with Figures A103.1(1) and
A103.1(2) and Sections A103.2 through A103.5.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/6541e9c0b130f7197f9155a8a6441bb6dc5ca83c/
IMAGES/0-0-0-5252.png]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/6541e9c0b130f7197f9155a8a6441bb6dc5ca83c/
IMAGES/0-0-0-5254.png]
 
For SI: 1 inch = 25.4 mm
A103.2 Boarding sheet material.
The boarding sheet material shall be cut to fit the door or window opening
neatly or shall be cut to provide an equal overlap at the perimeter of the door
or window.
A103.3 Windows.
The window shall be opened to allow the carriage bolt to pass through or the
window sash shall be removed and stored. The 2-inch by 4-inch (51 mm by 102 mm)
strong back framing material shall be cut minimum 2 inches (51 mm) wider than
the window opening and shall be placed on the inside of the window opening 6
inches (152 mm) minimum above the bottom and below the top of the window
opening. The framing and boarding shall be predrilled. The assembly shall be
aligned and the bolts, washers and nuts shall be installed and secured.
A103.4 Door walls.
The door opening shall be framed with minimum 2-inch by 4-inch (51 mm by 102
mm) framing material secured at the entire perimeter and vertical members at a
maximum of 24 inches (610 mm) on center. Blocking shall also be secured at a
maximum of 48 inches (1219 mm) on center vertically. Boarding sheet material
shall be secured with screws and nails alternating every 6 inches (152 mm) on
center.
A103.5 Doors.
Doors shall be secured by the same method as for windows or door openings. One
door to the structure shall be available for authorized entry and shall be
secured and locked in an approved manner.
   A104
   REFERENCED STANDARDS
 
IBC-18 International Building Code A102.1, A102.2, A102.3
 
Part 14
International Fire Code
[Adopted 5-29-2012 by Ord. No. 60-2012; amended 11-13-2018 by Ord. No. 72-2018;
5-9-2022 by Ord. No. 40-2022]
§ 180-1401. Adoption of International Fire Code.
City of Reading adopted fire protection standards by Ordinance No. 1992-114
enacted on November 4, 1992.
The standards provided for in Ordinance No. 1992-114 have continued since their
adoption.
The standards set forth in Ordinance No. 1992-114 exceed the requirements of
the UCC.
The pre 1999 amendments to the City Fire Code continue in accord with section
303 of the UCC.
The pre 1999 amendments including those from Ordinance No. 1992-114 are
incorporated hereto and renumbered in accord with the 2018 code.
A certain document, three copies of which are on file in the office of the City
Clerk of City of Reading, being marked and designated as the International Fire
Code, 2018 edition, including Appendix Chapters (A, B, C, D, E, F, G, H, I, J,
K, L, M, N) (see International Fire Code § 101.2.1, 2018 edition), as published
by the International Code Council is hereby adopted and incorporated herein by
reference in and is hereby adopted as the City of Reading Fire Prevention Code,
in the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania regulating and governing the safeguarding
of life and property from fire and explosion hazards arising from the storage,
handling and use of hazardous substances, materials and devices, and from
conditions hazardous to life or property in the occupancy of buildings and
premises as herein provided; providing for the issuance of permits and
collection of fees therefore; and each and all of the regulations, provisions,
penalties, conditions and terms of said Fire Code on file in the office of the
City of Reading are hereby referred to, adopted, and made a part hereof, as if
fully set out in this Part, with the additions, insertions, deletions and
changes, if any, prescribed in §
180-1407 of this Part.
§ 180-1402. State law and regulations.
In all matters that are regulated by the law of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania or by regulations of departments or agencies of the Commonwealth
promulgated by authority of law, such laws or regulations, or other ordinances
of the City of Reading, Pennsylvania, as the case may be, shall control where
the requirements thereof are the same as or in excess of the provisions of this
Part. This code shall control in all cases where the State requirements, or the
requirements of other ordinances of this City, are not as strict as those
contained in this Part.
§ 180-1403. Provisions to be continuation of existing regulations.
Nothing in this Part or in the Fire Code hereby adopted shall be constructed to
affect any suit or proceeding impending in any court, or any rights acquired,
or liability incurred, or any cause or causes of action acquired or existing,
under any act or ordinance as repealed by this Part; nor shall any just or
legal right or remedy of any character be lost, impaired or affected by this
Part.
§ 180-1404. Publication.
The City Clerk is hereby ordered and directed to cause this Part to be
published as required by all applicable statutes, laws, regulations, charters
and ordinances.
§ 180-1405. Title.
This Part shall be known as the "City of Reading Fire Prevention Code."
§ 180-1406. Enforcement.
Division of Fire Prevention:
   A.   The Fire Prevention Code shall be enforced by the City of Reading -
Department of Fire and Rescue Services - Office of the Fire Marshal.
   B.   The person in charge of the Office of the Fire Marshal shall be
designated as the Fire Marshal and shall be appointed by the Mayor of the City
of Reading with the approval and consent of the Council of the City of Reading,
bi-annually. The Fire Marshal shall also be known as the Fire Code Official and
any use of the term Fire Code Official in this document shall be synonymous
with Fire Marshal.
   C.   The Fire Chief shall recommend to the Mayor and Council the employment
of such assistants as are deemed appropriate to enforce the Fire Prevention
Code.
   D.   The Fire Marshal shall supervise his/her assistants and may detail such
assistants to perform such functions as are appropriate or necessary for
effective enforcement of the Fire Prevention Code.
   E.   The Fire Chief shall be the ex-officio in the absence of the Fire
Marshal.
   F.   No person shall in any way obstruct or prevent or attempt to obstruct
or prevent the Fire Marshal or his/her designee in the discharge of his/her
duties. Violation of this provision shall be considered a summary offense. Any
person violating any of the provisions of this section shall, upon conviction
thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine by the District Justice not to exceed $300
and be subject to a term of imprisonment not in excess of 90 days if they fail
to pay such fine.
§ 180-1407. Amendments to the International Fire Code.
The International Fire Code 2018 Edition, is modified and amended in the
following respects, and the following amendments, modifications and additions
so made are hereby adopted to the same intent and effect as if originally
incorporated in that Code:
   A.   Chapter 1, Section 101.1, Title, is amended by deleting the words "name
of jurisdiction" and the brackets surrounding that phrase and by substituting
in place thereof the words "the City of Reading."
   B.   Chapter 1, Section 104.3 Right of entry, insert the following sentence
after the section title and before the first sentence of Section 104.3:
   The Fire Code Official may inspect all structures and premises for the
purposes of ascertaining and causing to be corrected any conditions liable to
cause fire, contribute to the spread of fire, interfere with firefighting
operations, endanger life, or any violations of the provisions or intent of
this code.
   C.   Chapter 1, Subsection 104.7.2 Technical assistance. Delete Subsection
104.7.2 Technical assistance in its entirety and replace with Subsection
104.7.2 Technical assistance from the International Fire Code, 2018 Edition.
   C.   Chapter 1, Subsection 104.7.2 Technical assistance, amend by adding
Subsection 104.7.2.1 after Section 104.7.2 to read:
   104.7.2.1 Qualifications for technical opinion, report, or inspection
acceptable to the Fire Code Official: Technical opinion, report, or inspection
shall include but not be limited to a minimum 15 years' experience in design,
consultation, review, inspection and special inspection of fire protection
systems both typical and complex, as well as building construction review and
inspection. Qualifications shall include expertise, licensing, and
certification in fire protection engineering, electrical engineering, and
mechanical engineering, air balancing, and fire dynamics/modeling. Professional
affiliation with peer accepted model organizations including but not limited to
the International Code Council (ICC) and the National Fire Protection
Association (NFPA) and possession of requisite certifications. NFPA Technical
Committee representation and/or published and referenced by ICC on matters
regarding code compliancy, development, or enforcement. Documented and peer
reviewed subject matter expert.
   D.   Chapter 1, Subsection 105.1.1 Permits required. Delete Subsection
105.1.1 in its entirety and substitute with the following Subsection 105.1.1:
   105.1.1 Permits required. Permits required by this code shall be obtained
from the Fire Code Official. Issued permits shall be kept on the premises
designated therein at all times and shall be readily available for inspection
by the Fire Code Official. A fee for each permit shall be paid in accordance
with the fee schedule as is set forth from time to time by Resolution of
Council of the City of Reading, Pennsylvania.
   E.   Chapter 1, Section 106.2 Schedule of permit and inspection fees. Delete
Section 106.2 in its entirety and substitute the following:
   106.2 Schedule of permit and inspection fees. Permit fees assessable by the
City for the administration and enforcement of this Code shall be established
by the governing body by resolution from time to time, as provided by Chapter
212, Fees. The building owner, business operator, tenant, or contractor shall
be responsible for all fees.
   F.   Chapter 1, Subsection 107.2 Inspections, add Subsection 107.2.3 Notice
after Subsection 107.2.2 as follows:
   107.2.3 Notice. Notices scheduling inspections shall be mailed via regular
mail to the owner at the address of record. Owners receiving notices shall
notify tenants of the inspection without delay. If the tenant objects to the
inspection, the tenant shall advise the owner who shall so inform the
inspector. Nothing in this section shall preclude inspection without notice.
   G.   Chapter 1, Section 107.2 Inspections, add Subsection 107.2.4 Failure to
appear for inspection after new Subsection 107.2.3 as follows:
   107.2.4 Failure to appear for inspection. Owner or their representatives who
cannot be available at the proposed time and date, shall no less than 24 hours
prior to the scheduled inspection provide the Fire Prevention Division written
notice of their unavailability. Failure to appear or provide 24 hour, written
notice of unavailability will result in the assessment of a Failure to Appear
or a Reschedule Fee as listed in the fee schedule adopted by Resolution of City
Council.
   H.   Chapter 1, Section 109, Board of Appeals, is deleted in its entirety
and amended by substituting the following:
   I.   109.1 Appeals. Appeals before the City of Reading Building and Fire
Code Board of Appeals, henceforth known as the Board, shall be governed by the
provisions of this Code and all related amendments and by the rules of
procedure.
   J.   109.1.1 Background knowledge. The Board shall become familiar with all
other ordinances under which it may be expected to act as well as applicable
State statutes such as the Sunshine Law, 65 Pa.C.S. § 701 et seq., and Local
Agency Law, 2 Pa.C.S. § 101 et seq.
   K.   109.1.2 Power to change to ordinances. Nothing herein shall be
construed to grant or give to the Board the power or authority to alter or
change the building, fire prevention or other related ordinances, which
authority is reserved to the Governing Body.
   L.   109.1.3 Technical and legal services. Within the limits of funds
appropriated by the Governing Body, the Board may employ or contract for
secretaries, clerks, legal counsel, consultants, and other technical and
clerical services.
   M.   109.1.4 Legal counsel. The legal counsel to the Board shall be
consulted in cases where the powers of the Board are not clearly defined and
provide assistance and consultation at hearings and preparation of decisions.
   N.   109.1.5 Fees, costs and expenses. Fees established by resolution of
Council for the City of Reading shall be charged for filing an appeal.
Appellants shall also be responsible for all costs and expenses arising from
the Appeal which exceed in initial fee.
   O.   109.2 Chairman and members. The Board shall annually select one of its
members to serve as Chairman. The Chairman shall perform all duties required by
law, ordinances and these rules; shall preside at all meetings of the Board;
shall decide on all points or order and procedure, subject to these rules,
unless directed otherwise by a majority of the Board.
   P.   109.2.1 Secretary. A qualified clerk shall serve as secretary to the
Board. The Secretary shall file a detailed record of all proceedings.
   Q.   109.2.2 Members. The Board shall consist of seven members appointed by
the Mayor and confirmed by the Council of the City of Reading as follows: one
for 5 years, one for 4 years, one for 3 years, two for 2 years, and two for I
year. Thereafter, each new member shall serve for 5 years or until a successor
has been appointed.
   R.   109.2.3 Qualifications. The Board of Appeals shall consist of persons
who are qualified by experience and training to rule on matters pertaining to
the hazards of fire, explosions, hazardous conditions, or fire protection
systems, and are not employed by the City of Reading.
   S.   109.2.4 Alternates. The Mayor shall appoint and the Council of the City
of Reading shall confirm two alternate members who shall be called by the Board
Chairman to hear appeals during the absence or disqualification of a member.
Alternate members shall possess the qualifications required for Board
membership, and shall be appointed for 5 years or until a successor has been
appointed.
   T.   109.3 Meetings. The Board shall meet upon notice from the Chairman,
within 20 days of the filing of an appeal, or at stated periodic meetings.
   U.   109.3.1 Public notice. The Board shall hold all meetings at specified
times and places of which public notice shall be given.
      (a)   All hearings before the Board shall be open to the public.
      (b)   Public notice of each meeting shall be given in a newspaper of
general circulation within the community within 24 hours' notice prior to the
time of the hearing in accordance with the Pennsylvania Sunshine Act, 65
Pa.C.S. § 701 et seq.
   V.   109.3.2 Quorum. The Board shall modify or reverse the decision of the
Fire Code Official by a concurring vote of three members.
   W.   109.3.3 Postponement. When five members are not present to hear an
appeal, either the appellant or the appellant's representative shall have the
right to request a postponement of the hearing.
   X.   109.3.4 Continuance. On its own motion, or on approval of requests by
applicant, appellants or their authorized agents, the Board may provide for
later continuances of cases on which hearings have begun. Such continuances
shall be permitted only for good cause, stated in the motion, and, unless time
and place is stated, shall require new public notice, with fees paid for by
applicants if continuances are at their request or result from their actions. A
notice of the place, date and time of the continued hearing shall also be
posted prominently at the municipal office where the hearing will be continued.
   Y.   109.4 Board's function. The owner of a structure; the owner's agent;
tenants; adjoining property owners; their tenants; or any other person involved
in the design, construction, or maintenance of the structure shall have the
right to appeal to the Board of Appeals from a decision of the Fire Code
Official refusing to grant a modification of this code or of the application of
the code.
   Z.   109.4.1 Jurisdiction. The Board shall have exclusive jurisdiction to
hear and render final adjudications based on a claim that the true intent of
the Fire Prevention Code or the rules legally adopted thereunder have been
incorrectly interpreted, the provisions of this code do not fully apply, or an
equivalent form of construction can be used.
   AA.   109.4.2 Authority limited. Nothing herein shall be construed to grant
or give to the Board the power or authority to alter or change the Fire
Prevention Code, or other related ordinances, which authority is reserved to
the Governing Body.
   BB.   109.5 Initiating action before the board. All action before the Board
shall be initiated by a written application with fee submission for a hearing,
which shall be filed with the Fire Code Official within 20 days of the receipt
of an order from the Fire Code Official.
   CC.   109.5.1 Hearing schedule. The Board will conduct hearings and make
decisions. In no instance will a hearing be scheduled later than 30 days from
the date of the applicant's request for a hearing, unless the applicant has
agreed to an extension of time in writing.
   DD.   109.6 Conduct of hearing. The hearing shall be conducted by the Board
and governed by Local Agency Law, 2 Pa.C.S. § 101 et seq.
   EE.   109.6.1 Order of hearing.
      (a)   Hearing called to order.
      (b)   Chairman's statement of reason for hearing.
      (c)   Chairman's statement of parties to hearing.
      (d)   Identification of other parties who wish to be heard.
      (e)   Outline of procedures to be followed during hearing.
      (f)   Determination of standing.
      (g)   Applicant's presentation of their case.
         (i)   Objectors cross-examine applicant's witnesses.
         (ii)   Board cross-examines applicant's witnesses.
      (h)   Objector's presentation of their case.
         (i)   Applicants cross-examine objector's witnesses.
         (ii)   Board cross-examines objector's witnesses.
      (i)   Statement of the Fire Code Official.
         (i)   Applicant's cross-examination.
         (ii)   Objector's cross-examination.
         (iii)   Board's cross-examination.
      (j)   Other testimony and evidence.
      (k)   Rebuttal by applicant.
      (l)   Rebuttal by objectors.
   FF.   109.6.2 Records. The Board shall keep a record of the proceedings. The
minutes of the meeting and copies of graphic or written material received in
evidence shall be made available to any party at cost by the court reporter, in
accordance with Local Agency Law and Right to Know Law, 65 P.S. § 66.l et seq.
   GG.   109.6.3 Parties. The parties to the hearing shall be the appellant,
municipality, any person affected by the application who has made a timely
appearance of record before the Board, and any other person including civic or
community organizations permitted to appear by the Board. All persons who wish
to be considered parties shall enter appearances in writing on forms provided
to the Board for that purpose.
   HH.   109.6.4 Representation. All parties shall have the right to be
represented by counsel and shall be afforded the opportunity to respond and
present evidence and argument, and to cross-examine adverse witnesses on all
relevant issues.
      (a)   For purposes of this subsection, the term "counsel" shall be
construed to mean a duly licensed attorney permitted to practice before the
Supreme Court of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
      (b)   Any person other than a duly licensed attorney including, but not
limited to, architects, engineers and developers shall present a power of
attorney or notarized letter executed by the party stating that the person so
appearing before the Board is permitted to do so.
   II.   109.6.5 Witnesses. All witnesses shall testify under oath.
   JJ.   109.6.6 Evidence. The Board shall not be bound by strict rules of
evidence, but it may exclude irrelevant, immaterial, incompetent, or unduly
repetitious testimony or evidence. The chairman shall rule on all questions
relating to the admissibility of evidence, which may be overruled by a majority
of the Board.
   KK.   109.6.7 Communication. The Board shall not communicate directly or
indirectly, with any party or his/her representative in connection with any
issue involved except upon notice and opportunity for all parties to
participate, shall not take notice of any communication, reports, staff
memoranda, or other materials except advice from the Board's solicitor, unless
the parties are afforded an opportunity to contest the material so noticed and
shall not inspect the site or its surroundings after the commencement of the
hearings with any party or his/her representative unless all parties are given
an opportunity to be present.
   LL.   109.7 Decisions.
      (a)   The Board shall render a written decision within 30 days after the
last hearing before the Board in accord with Local Agency Law, 2 Pa.C.S. § 101
et seq.
      (b)   The Board shall vote on all matters in public session at the
meeting in which evidence is concluded. The Board may deliberate upon any
matter in executive session provided that any vote is rendered at a public
session within the allotted 30-day time limit.
      (c)   All matters shall be decided by roll call vote.
      (d)   The Board shall modify or reverse the decision of the Fire Code
Official by a concurring vote of three members.
      (e)   The decision of the Board shall be by resolution. Certified copies
shall be furnished to the appellant and to the Fire Code Official.
      (f)   No member of the Board shall vote on any matter in which he is
personally or financially interested. Said member shall not be counted by the
Board in establishing a quorum for such matters.
      (g)   No member of the Board shall vote on an adjudication of any matter
unless he has attended the public hearing thereon.
      (h)   A copy of the final decision shall be delivered to the applicant
personally or mailed to him not later than the day following the date of the
decision. The Board shall provide by mail or otherwise, to all other persons
   who have filed their name and address with the Board, a copy of the
decision.
   MM.   Chapter 1, Section 110.4, Violation penalties, is amended by:
      l.   Deleting the words "specify offense" and the brackets surrounding
that phrase and by inserting in place thereof the word "summary offense."
      2.   Deleting the word "amount" and the brackets surrounding that phrase
and by inserting in place thereof "$300."
      3.   Deleting the words "number of days" and the brackets surrounding
that phrase and by inserting in place thereof "90 days."
   NN.   Chapter 1, Section 111.1 General, is amended by adding the following
after the first paragraph and before Subsection 111.1.1 as follows:
   The Fire Code Official or in his/her absence, the senior on-duty fire chief
officer shall order the following dangerous or hazardous conditions or
materials to be removed or remedied in accordance with this code:
      1.   Dangerous conditions which are liable to cause or contribute to the
spread of fire in or on said premises, building or structure or adjacent
structures or to endanger the occupants thereof.
      2.   Conditions which would interfere with the efficiency and use of any
fire protection equipment.
      3.   Obstructions to or on fire escapes, stairs, passageways, doors or
windows, which are liable to interfere with the egress of occupants or the
operation of the fire department in case of fire.
      4.   Accumulations of dust or waste material in air conditioning or
ventilating systems or grease in kitchen or other exhaust ducts.
      5.   Accumulations of grease on kitchen cooking equipment, or oil, grease
or dirt upon, under or around any mechanical equipment.
      6.   Accumulations of rubbish, waste, paper, boxes, shavings, or other
combustible materials, or excessive storage of any combustible material.
      7.   Hazardous conditions arising from defective or improperly used or
installed electrical wiring, equipment or appliances.
      8.   Hazardous conditions arising from defective or improperly used or
installed equipment for handling or using combustible, explosive or otherwise
hazardous materials.
      9.   Dangerous or unlawful amounts of combustible, explosive or otherwise
hazardous materials.
      10.   All equipment, materials, processes or operations which are in
violation of the provisions and intent of this code.
   OO.   Section 111.2 Evacuation, Insert the following language after the word
"occupants" that which appears at the end of the first sentence:
   When, in the Fire Code Official's opinion, there is actual and potential
danger to the occupants or those in the proximity of any structure or premises
because of, but not limited to, unsafe structural conditions, or inadequacy of
any means of egress, the presence of explosives, explosive fumes or vapors, or
the presence of toxic fumes, gases or materials, the Fire Code Official may
order the immediate evacuation of the structure or premises.
   PP.   Section 111.2.1 Posting. Add Section 111.2.1 as follows:
   111.2.1 Posting. The Fire Code Official is authorized to post structures and
premises ordered evacuated in accordance with Section 111.2 with a placard
prohibiting entry or occupancy.
   QQ.   Section 111.2.2 Placard removal. Add Section 111.2.2 as follows:
   111.2.2 Placard removal. The Fire Code Official shall remove the placard
when the unsafe condition or conditions are remedied or have been eliminated.
Any person who conceals, covers, hides, removes, or causes to be removed, or
defaces a placard without the approval of the Fire Code Official shall be
guilty of a summary offense.
   RR.   Chapter 1, Section 112.4, Failure to comply, is amended by deleting
the words "amount" and "amount" and the brackets surrounding said words and by
substituting in place thereof "$500" and "$1,000," respectively.
   SS.   Chapter 1, Section 114 Certificates of Fitness. Add Section 114
Certificates of Fitness as follows:
   Section 114 Certificates of Fitness
   114.1 Certificate of fitness. No person shall engage in the following
activities without a certificate of fitness issued by the Fire Code Official. A
Certificate of Fitness shall be obtained by all applicants/vendors (companies
or person(s)) for the purposes of conducting any operation or performing an act
for which a Certificate of Fitness is required as set forth below.
   114.2 Application. Applicant shall meet the standards and regulations
established by the Fire Marshal, including possession of a Certificate of
Insurance covering the work requested, Workmen's Compensation for employees as
required by Federal, State or local mandated regulations, laws, and statutes.
Additionally, an exhibition of appropriate levels of education, training,
certification, and experience shall be submitted to the Fire Marshal for review
and Certificate of Fitness issuance prior to any work commencing. The applicant
and all employees engaging in the specified work shall have a strong
familiarity and understanding of fire protection systems/fire code application
for which a Certificate of Fitness is requested. An application on a form
prescribed by the Fire Marshal and a fee as established by Resolution of City
Council of the City of Reading per system, shall be submitted to the Department
of Fire and Rescue Services - Office of the Fire Marshal for review and
approval for each system described herein for which an applicant seeks to
obtain a Certificate of Fitness.
   114.3 Issuance. Upon approval, a Certificate of Fitness shall be issued and
the applicant placed on a list of approved vendors within the City of Reading,
PA authorizing them to perform the type of work categorized per the approved
Certificate of Fitness. Certificates of Fitness shall be valid for one year,
January 1 through December 31 of each calendar year. Certificate holders must
reapply each calendar year, and provide the fee as established by City Council
per system for which they seek approval and listing. Performance of work on a
system described below in the City of Reading, PA without a Certificate of
Fitness, shall cause the violator to be precluded from applying for a
Certificate of Fitness for a period of one (1) calendar year, and subject the
violator to fines, double fee costs, citations, and additional costs as
provided for herein.
   114.4 Certificate categories.
   CF-101 Automatic fire alarms Installation/service/inspection
   CF-102 Sprinkler/standpipe Installation/service/inspection
   CF-103 Emergency Responder Coverage Enhancement Systems
   CF-104 Alternative Automatic Fire-Extinguishing Systems
   CF-105 Central stations Retransmission, record keeping/reporting/runner's
service
   CF-106 Fire extinguishers Installation/service/inspection
   CF-107 Fireworks/pyrotechnics Displays/demonstrations
   CF-108 Blasting or demolition operations
   CF-109 Other
   114.5 Additional categories. The Fire Code Official may require a
certificate of fitness for certain processes which pose an unusual risk to the
public safety or in cases or as part of the code modification process.
   114.6 Fees. Fees for Certificates of fitness shall be in accordance with the
Fee Schedule as adopted by the City Council from time to time.
   114.7 Revocation. The Office of the Fire Marshal may revoke or suspend a
Certificate of Fitness due to an applicant's inability to perform work, or the
performance of work, which is not in accordance with this Code.
   TT.   Chapter 3, Section 301.2 Permits. Add the following sentence at the
end of the Section 301.2:
   No person shall ignite, cause to be ignited, and permit to be ignited or
maintain any open burning without first securing a permit from the Fire Code
Official.
   UU.   Chapter 5, Section 506.1, Where required, add the following sentence
at the end of the Section 506.1 as follows:
   The owner or agent of all new and existing buildings in which fire
protection systems are present which were or are required by the City or
Pennsylvania law, ordinance, or order, shall provide rapid access Knox Box® key
boxes, Knox Box® key switches, Knox Box® pad locks, or other secured boxes as
specified by the Fire Code Official, to be installed in a location(s) approved
by the Fire Code Official.
   VV.   Chapter 9, Section 901.1, Scope. Delete Section 901.1 Scope in its
entirety and substitute the following:
   901.1 Scope. The provisions of this chapter shall apply to the maintenance,
inspection and testing of all fire protection and life safety systems.
   WW.   Chapter 9, Section 901.2 Construction documents is amended by
inserting the words "architectural drawings," between the words "require" and
"construction" in the first sentence.
   XX.   Chapter 9, Section 901.4.1, Required fire protection systems. Delete
the words International Building Code from the third and sixth lines and
substitute City of Reading Codified Ordinance or other law, statute, regulation
or rule.
   YY.   Chapter 9, Section 901.4.2, Nonrequired fire protection systems.
Delete the words International Building Code from the first and second line of
Section 901.4.2 and substitute City of Reading Codified Ordinances or other
law, statute, regulations or rules in both locations; add the following
sentence after the last sentence: Nonrequired fire protection systems shall be
maintained to function as originally installed. If a nonrequired system is to
be reduced in function or discontinued, prior approval shall be obtained by the
Fire Code Official.
   ZZ.   Chapter 9, Section 901.6 Records. is amended to add section 901.6.2
substitute as follows:
   Section 901.6.3.2 Records. Records of all system inspections, tests and
maintenance required by the referenced standards shall be maintained on the
premises for a minimum of three years and shall be provided to the Office of
the Fire Marshal within thirty (30) days of request, by the company performing
the inspection(s), through the third-party reporting system, Brycer LLC, at a
reasonable fee designated by Brycer LLC per inspection, payable directly to
Brycer, LLC.
   AAA.   Chapter 9, Section 903.2 Where required. Delete and substitute the
following:
   903.2 Where required. Approved automatic sprinkler systems shall be
installed as required by the City of Reading Codified Ordinances or other law,
statute, regulation or rule.
   BBB.   Chapter 9, Section 903.2, Where required is amended to add Section
903.2.13. Use Group "B" Business as follows:
   Section 903.2.13, Use Group "B" Business. Throughout all buildings in use
group "B" an automatic fire suppression system shall be provided as follows:
      I.   When area exceeds 100,000 square feet; or
      II.   When the total combined area of all floors exceed 100,000 square
feet; or
      III.   When the floor level of the highest story is located more than 30
feet (9144 mm) above the lowest level of fire department vehicle access.
   CCC.   Chapter 9, Section 903.4, Sprinkler system supervision and alarms, is
amended by adding the following after the last sentence of Section 903.4 and
before the Exceptions: All new fire protection systems (manual or automatic
fire detection system or suppression system) where required by the City of
Reading, Pennsylvania, State law, ordinance or order shall be connected to an
approved central station service system according to NFPA 72, (2016 edition), §
26-3. Any exceptions shall be approved by the Fire Code Official.
   DDD.   Chapter 9, Section 903.4.1, Monitoring, is amended by deleting
Section 903.4.1 and substituting in place thereof:
   903.4.1 Monitoring. Alarm, supervisory and trouble signals shall be
distinctly different and shall be automatically transmitted to an approved
central station service system according to NFPA 72, (2016 edition), § 26-3 any
exceptions shall be approved by the Fire Code Official.
   EEE.   Section 904.3.5, Monitoring, is deleted and replaced with the
following:
   904.3.5 Monitoring. All new and existing fire protection systems (manual or
automatic fire detection system or suppression system) where required by the
City of Reading, Pennsylvania, State law, ordinance or order shall be connected
to an approved central station service system according to NFPA 72, (2016
edition), § 26-3. Any exceptions shall be approved by the Fire Code Official.
   FFF.   Chapter 9, Section 905.3 Required installations. Delete the first
sentence and substitute the following: Standpipe systems shall be installed
where required by the City of Reading Codified Ordinances or other law,
statute, regulations or rules.
   GGG.   Chapter 9, Add section 905.13 as follows:
   Section 905.13, Standpipe hose valve connections. At each floor level on the
stair tower side there shall be connected to each standpipe not more than 5
feet above the floor level, a 2 1/2-inch hose connection with Knox Box®,
locking caps, valves and threads conforming to the City of Reading Fire
Department standards and as specified by the Fire Code Official. Deviations are
required to be approved in writing by the Fire Code Official.
   HHH.   Chapter 9, Section 907.1 General. Delete the words "installation"
from the first sentence of the existing section and insert the following before
the first sentence: Fire alarm and detection systems shall be installed where
required by the City of Reading Codified Ordinances or other law, statute,
regulations or rules and where required by the City of Reading, Pennsylvania,
State law, ordinance or order shall be connected to an approved central station
service system according to NFPA 72, 2016 edition, § 26-3. Any exceptions shall
be approved by the Fire Code Official.
   III.   Chapter 9, Section 907.2, Where required, is amended by deleting the
words "Section 907.2.23" and substituting in place Section 907.2.26.
   JJJ.   Section 907.2.9.1, Group R-2 Detection Systems is renumbered and
retitled to read as follows is amended to add the following subsection:
   907.2.9.4 Group R-2 detection systems - ten or more dwelling units. An
automatic fire detection system shall be installed and maintained in mechanical
areas and means of egress in all buildings of use group R-2 of ten or more
dwelling units.
   KKK.   Chapter 9, Section 907.2.9.4 is amended to add the following
subsection:
   907.2.9.4.1 Group (R-2) - Existing. The following smoke alarms and/or fire
protection systems shall be installed and maintained in existing R-
2 occupancies.
   EXISTING 3-9 DWELLING UNITS
      a.   Common Area. Smoke alarms for all common areas, including hall,
corridors, stairways, cellars and basements of buildings, shall be directly
hard wired to the buildings power supply and shall be interconnected to cause
the operation or an activation of an alarm that shall be clearly audible in all
portions of the structure over background noise levels with all intervening
doors closed which complies with NFPA 72.
      b.   Single and Multiple Station Smoke Alarms Within Dwelling Units.
Single and multiple station smoke alarms shall be installed in existing group
R-2 occupancies regardless of occupant load in all the following locations:
         1.   Outside every sleeping area in the vicinity of the bedrooms.
         2.   In each room used for sleeping purposes.
         3.   In each story within the dwelling unit including basements and
cellars.
      c.   Interconnection. Where more than one smoke alarm is required to be
installed within an individual dwelling unit the smoke alarms shall be
interconnected in such a manner that the activation of one alarm will activate
ail the alarms in the dwelling unit. The alarm shall be clearly audible in all
bedrooms over background noise levels with all intervening doors closed.
      d.   Power Source. Single-station and multiple-station alarms shall
receive their primary power from the building wiring and shall be equipped with
a battery backup. Smoke alarms shall emit a signal when the batteries are low.
      e.   Wiring shall be permanent and without a disconnecting switch other
than as required for over current protection.
   1.   EXISTING 10 TO 21 DWELLING UNITS
      a.   Common Areas. A complete automatic and manual fire alarm system
including notification appliances is required in all common areas as determined
by the Fire Code Official.
      b.   Single and Multiple Station Smoke Alarms Within Dwelling Units.
Single and multiple station smoke alarms shall be installed in existing group
R-2 occupancies regardless of occupant load in all the following locations:
         1.   Outside every sleeping area in the vicinity of the bedrooms.
         2.   In each room used for sleeping purposes.
         3.   In each story within the dwelling unit including basements and
cellars.
      c.   Interconnection. Where more than one smoke alarm is required to be
installed within an individual dwelling unit the smoke alarms shall be
interconnected in such a manner that the activation of one alarm will activate
all the alarms in the dwelling unit. The alarm shall be clearly audible in all
bedrooms over background noise levels with all intervening doors closed.
      d.   Power Source. Single-station and multiple-station alarms shall
receive their primary power from the building wiring and shall be equipped with
a battery backup. Smoke alarms shall emit a signal when the batteries are low.
Wiring shall be permanent and without a disconnecting switch other than as
required for over current protection.
   2.   EXISTING 22 DWELLING UNITS OR MORE
      A complete automatic and manual fire alarm system including notification
appliances shall be installed throughout the entire structure including
dwelling units as determined by the Fire Code Official.
   3.   EXISTING HIGH RISE BUILDINGS
      In buildings with a floor used for human occupancy located more than 65
feet (l9812mm) above the lowest level of fire department access, a complete
automatic/manual fire alarm system including emergency voice alarm
communications shall be installed throughout the entire structure as determined
by the Fire Code and Building Official.
      (2)   Section 907.2.11, Single-Station and Multiple-Station Alarms,
applies only to R-1, R-3, and R-4 use groups. (See amended § 907.2.9.4 and
907.2.9.4.1 for Use Group R-2).
   LLL.   Chapter 9, Section 907.10 Single and multiple-station smoke alarms is
amended by adding Section 907.10.8 as follows:
      907.10.8 Single and multiple station smoke alarm inspection and testing:
      1.   All single- and multiple-station smoke alarm devices shall be tested
in accordance with the manufacturer's instructions, not less than once a month
for devices with the primary power supplied by the building electrical service
and not less than once a week for devices with the primary power supplied by a
monitored battery. All testing shall be conducted by the owner, except as
provided for in this section.
      2.   In the case of tenant occupied properties, every owner shall, at the
beginning of the leasehold of a one and two family dwelling, multifamily
dwelling, or manufactured home, inspect and test each single- and multiple-
station smoke alarm device to insure that each required device is present and
in proper working order.
      3.   In the case of tenant occupied properties, the owner may require the
occupant to conduct the weekly/monthly testing as set forth in paragraph (1)
above. The owner must then provide the occupant with clear and concise written
instructions regarding the weekly/monthly testing and the occupant must be able
to perform such testing. The owner must also demonstrate to the occupant the
proper testing procedures at the beginning of the leasehold.
      4.   The occupant shall have the duty and responsibility to notify the
owner of any defect(s).
      5.   The owner shall have the duty and responsibility of remedying any
defect after receiving notice of the defect.
      6.   All single-and multiple-station smoke alarm devices shall be kept in
proper working condition at all times and shall be replaced after being in
service for a period of ten years or becoming defective/inoperable, whichever
comes first.
   MMM.   Section 907.2.12, High Rise Buildings, is amended by adding the
following language before the first sentence of the paragraph:
      907.2.13907.2.12 High rise buildings. Buildings with a floor used for
human occupancy located more than 65 feet (19812mm) above the lowest level of
fire department access.
   NNN.   Section 907.2.12.1.1 is amended by deleting subsection I and
replacing with the following:
   1.   In each mechanical room/equipment, electrical, transformer, telephone
equipment, elevator machine room, elevator lobbies or similar room and stair
tower, exits, exit access corridors.
   OOO.   Section 907.2.12.32, Fire department communication system is amended
by adding "mechanical rooms" in the first sentence between the words fire pump
rooms and areas of refuge.
   PPP.   Section 907.2.12, is amended by adding the following subsection:
      907.2.13.3,907.2.12.4 Monitoring. All new and existing fire protection
systems (manual or automatic fire detection or suppression systems) where
required by the City of Reading, Pennsylvania, State law, ordinance or order
shall be connected to an approved central station service system according to
NFPA 72, (2016 edition), § 8 26-3.
   QQQ.   Section 907.2 shall be amended by adding Section 907.2.24, Height and
Area as follows:
      907.2.24 Height and Area. In all buildings four or more stories in height
or more than 30 feet in height or 5,000 square feet or more in area shall have
an automatic fire alarm/detection system installed throughout the building,
conforming to NFPA 72.
   RRR.   Section 907.2 shall be amended by adding Section 907.2.25, Hazardous
Areas as follows:
      907.2.25 Hazardous Areas. Smoke detectors shall be installed in the
following hazardous areas, in addition to a fire suppression system: trash
rooms, painting rooms, laundry collection rooms, furnace room, boiler room,
mechanical/electrical rooms, and rooms of similar use as determined by the Fire
Code Official.
   SSS.   Section 907.2 shall be amended by adding by adding Section 907.2.26,
Sprinklered Buildings, as follows:
      907.2.26 Sprinklered buildings. In all buildings provided with approved
automatic sprinkler systems, a complete manual fire alarm system and an
automatic detection system shall be provided in all means of egress and
mechanical rooms in addition to the automatic fire detection systems required
in 907.2.10.1 through and including 907.2.25.
   TTT.   Chapter 9, Section 909.1. Delete the words International Building
Code in the first sentence and substitute the words City of Reading Codified
Ordinances or other law, statute, regulations or rules.
   UUU.   Chapter 9, Section 913.4, Valve Supervision, is amended by deleting
the entire Section and substituting the fol1owing:
      913.4 Valve Supervision. Where provided, the fire pump suction, discharge
and bypass valves, and the isolation valves on the backflow prevention device
or assembly shal1 be supervised by an approved central station service system
according to NFPA 72, (2016 edition), § 26-3.
   VVV.   Chapter 9, Section 914.1 General. Delete the words International
Building Code and substitute the words City of Reading Codified Ordinances or
other law, statute, regulations or rules.
   WWW.   Chapter 10, Section 1031, is amended to add subsection 1031.11
      Overcrowding as follows:
      1031.11 Overcrowding. Overcrowding, admittance of any person beyond the
approved occupant load established by the City of Reading Building Code or
other building code or City ordinance under which the building was constructed,
or obstructing aisles, passageways or any part of the means of egress shall not
be allowed. The Fire Code Official, upon finding any condition that constitutes
a life safety hazard, shall be authorized to cause the event to be stopped
until such condition or obstruction is corrected.
   XXX.   Chapter 32, Section 3204.3.6 Location is renumber 5504.3.1.1.3 with
the following language added after the first sentence:
      Chapter 55, Section 5504.3.1.1.3 is amended by adding the following
language after the first sentence: Location, Locations and limitation as
determined by the Fire Code Official.
   YYY.   Chapter 33, Section 3301.1.3 Fireworks, is renumbered 5601.1.3, and
amended by deleting Exception No. 4. Chapter 56, Section 5601.1.3 is amended by
deleting Exception No. 4.
   ZZZ.   Chapter 34, Section 3404.2.9.4 is renumbered 5704.2.9.5.3, the title
amended, and replaced with the following: 5704.2.9.5.3 Aboveground tanks inside
of buildings. Locations and limitation of aboveground tans shall be determined
by the Fire Code Official. Chapter 57, Section 5704.2.9.5 Aboveground tanks
inside of buildings, is amended to add section 5704.2.9.5.3 Locations, as
follows: Locations and limitation of aboveground tanks shall be determined by
the Fire Code Official.
   AAAA.   Chapter 34, Section 3406.2.5.1 is renumbered Chapter 57, Section
5706.2.4.4, is amended and replaced with the following: 5706.2.4.4 Locations
where aboveground tanks are prohibited, Locations and limitations of
aboveground tanks shall be determined by Fire Code Official.
   BBBB.   Chapter 38, Section 3804.2, Maximum capacity within established
limits, is renumber 6104.2 and amended by deleting all wording after the word
"of" on the fifth line and inserting the following: Chapter 61, Section 6104.2
is amended by deleting the words "2,000 gallons (7570 L)" and inserting the
following: 5 gallons for residential and water capacity of 2,000 gallons for
commercial installations.
Exhibit A Hazard Areas1
Reference: International Wildland-Urban Interface Code
1. Forest Areas:
   Mount Penn
   Neversink Mountain
   Yellow Clay
2. Wooded/Shrub Growth Areas:
   Dana Park
   Mineral Spring Park
3. Grass/Shrub Areas:
   Cemeteries
   Railroad beds
   Ball fields
4. Urban Interface Areas (houses in forest areas):
   Neversink Mountain (1994 Highland Street-Box 261)
1 Editor’s Note: Copies of the wildland-urban interface map are available in
the Fire Department.
Table R301.2(1)
Climatic and Geographic Design Criteria
[Amended during codification (see
Ch. 1, General Provisions, Part 2)]
 
Ground Wind   Seismic   Subject to Damage From      Winter Ice Barrier           Air      Mean
Snow   Speedd Design                Frost           Design Underlayment Flood    Freezing Annual
Load   (mph)  Categoryf Weatheringa Line   Termitec Tempe  Requiredh    Hazardsg Indexi   Tempj
                                    Depthb
25     90     B         Severe      36”  DM/H     13°   Yes          6-11-    1,000    55°
                                                                        2012
For SI: 1 pound per square foot = 0.0479 kPa, one mile per hour = 0.447 m/s.
a. Weathering may require a higher-strength concrete or grade of masonry than
necessary to satisfy the structural requirements of this code. The weathering
column shall be filled in with the weathering index, i.e., “negligible,”
“moderate” or “severe,” for concrete as determined from the Weathering
Probability Map [Figure R301.2(3)]. The grade of masonry unit shall be
determined from ASTM C 34, C 55, C 62, C 73, C 90, C 129, C 145, C 216 or C
652.
b. The frost line depth may require deeper footings than indicated in Figure
R403.1(1). The jurisdiction shall fill in the frost line depth column with the
minimum depth of footing below finish grade.
c. The jurisdiction shall fill in this part of the table to indicate the need
for protection depending on whether there has been a history of local
subterranean termite damage.
d. The jurisdiction shall fill in this part of the table with the wind speed
from the basic wind speed map [Figure R301.2(4)]. Wind exposure category shall
be determined on a site-specific basis in accordance with Section R301.2.1.4.
e. The outdoor design dry-bulb temperature shall be selected from the columns
of 97 1/2% values for winter from Appendix D of the International Plumbing
Code. Deviations from the Appendix D temperatures shall be permitted to reflect
local climates or local weather experience as determined by the Building
Official.
f. The jurisdiction shall fill in this part of the table with the seismic
design category determined from Section R301.2.2.1.
g. The jurisdiction shall fill in this part of the table with: (1) the date of
the jurisdiction’s entry into the National Flood Insurance Program (date of
adoption of the first code or ordinance for management of flood hazard areas);
(2) the date(s) of the currently effective FIRM and FBFM, or other flood hazard
map adopted by the community, as may be amended.
h. In accordance with Sections R905.2.7.1, R905.4.3.1, R905.5.3.1, R905.6.3.1,
R905.7.3.1, and R905.8.3.1, where there has been a history of local damage from
the effects of ice damming, the jurisdiction shall fill in this part of the
table with “YES.” Otherwise, the jurisdiction shall fill in this part of the
table with “NO.”
i. The jurisdiction shall fill in this part of the table with the one-hundred-
year return period air freezing index (BF-days) from Figure R403.3(2) or from
the one-hundred-year (99%) value on the National Climatic Data Center data
table “Air Freezing Index- USA Method (Base 32° F.)” at www.ncdc.noaa.gov/
fpsf.html.
j. The jurisdiction shall fill in this part of the table with the mean annual
temperature from the National Climatic Data Center data table “Air Freezing
Index-USA Method (Base 32° F.)” at www.ncdc.noaa.gov/fpsf.html.
Chapter 185
CONVERSION THERAPY
§
185-101.   Definitions.
§
185-102.   Conversion therapy prohibited.
§
185-103.   Penalty.
§
185-104.   Enforcement: investigation of complaints of violation, notice and
hearing.
§
185-105.   Appropriate Mental Health Services Appeals Board.
[HISTORY: Adopted by the City Council of the City of Reading 12-18-2017 by Ord.
No. 118-2017.]
§ 185-101.   Definitions.
   The following words, terms, and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall
have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except when the context
clearly indicates a different meaning:
   CONVERSION THERAPY —
   A.   Any practices or treatments that seek to change an individual’s sexual
orientation or gender identity, including efforts to change behaviors or gender
expressions or to reduce or eliminate sexual or romantic attractions or
feelings toward individuals of the same gender.
   B.   Conversion therapy does not include counseling that:
      (1)   Provides assistance to a person undergoing gender transition; or
      (2)   Provides acceptance, support, and understanding of a person or
facilitates a person’s coping, social support, and identity exploration and
development, including sexual orientation-neutral interventions to prevent or
address unlawful conduct or unsafe sexual practices, if such counseling does
not seek to change an individual’s sexual orientation or gender identity.
   MENTAL HEALTH PROFESSIONAL — An individual who is licensed, certified, or
otherwise authorized to administer or provide professional mental health care
or counseling under the act of March 23, 1972 (P.L.136, No.52), known as the
Professional Psychologists Practice Act, the act of July 9, 1976 (P.L.817,
No.143), known as the Mental Health Procedures Act, the act of December 20,
1985 (P.L.457, No.112), known as the Medical Practice Act of 1985, or the act
of July 9, 1987 (P.L.220, No.39), known as the Social Workers, Marriage and
Family Therapists and Professional Counselors Act.
   MINOR — A person less than 18 years of age.
§ 185-102.   Conversion therapy prohibited.
   A person who is licensed by the State of Pennsylvania to provide
professional counseling, or who performs counseling as part of his or her
professional training under Chapters 16, 25, 41, 47, 48, or 49 of Title 49 of
the Pennsylvania Code, as such chapters may be amended, including, but not
limited to, medical practitioners, osteopathic practitioners, psychologists,
social workers, marriage and family therapists, and professionals counselors,
may not engage in conversion therapy with a minor.
§ 185-103   Penalty.
   The penalty for a violation of §
185-102 shall be revocation of the licensee’s business license, after notice
and hearing.
§ 185-104.   Enforcement: investigation of complaints of violation, notice and
hearing.
   A.   There is hereby established a Complaint Administrator to investigate
complaints for the violation of §
185-102 of this chapter. A licensed mental health professional shall be
nominated by the Mayor and confirmed by City Council to serve in this capacity.
   B.   Neither the Complaint Administrator nor the Appropriate Mental Health
Services Appeals Board, established under §
185-105 of this chapter, shall have the ability to compel the production of
records or any materials that are made confidential by federal or state law or
that are protected from disclosure by a lawful privilege, unless a valid waiver
of the privilege is made.
   C.   The Complaint Administrator and the Appropriate Mental Health Services
Appeals Board, established under §
185-105 of this chapter, shall not divulge confidential or privileged
information that is disclosed during the enforcement process under this §
185-104 to anyone outside the enforcement process.
   D.   Notice of the hearing for revocation of a license shall be given in
writing, setting forth specifically the grounds of complaint and the time and
place of hearing conducted by an appeals board. The notice shall be mailed,
postage prepaid, to the licensee at the licensee’s last known address at least
five days prior to the date set for hearing.
§ 185-105.   Appropriate Mental Health Services Appeals Board.
   A.   There is hereby established an Appropriate Mental Health Services
Appeals Board.
      (1)   The Appropriate Mental Health Services Appeals Board shall consist
of five members - a member of City Council, the City’s Health Officer or
designee, a Licensed Mental Health Professional, and two private citizens
nominated by the Mayor and confirmed by the City Council.
      (2)   The initial terms of the members of the Board of Appeals are as
follows:
         (a)   Licensed Mental Health Professional – 4 years
         (b)   Health Officer or designee - 3 years
         (c)   Private citizen - 3 years
         (d)   Licensed Mental Health Professional - 2 years
         (e)   Private citizen – 2 years
      (3)   After the initial terms have expired, members of the Appeals Board
shall be appointed for terms of four years.
      (4)   After all members have been appointed, the Appropriate Mental
Health Services Appeals Board shall hold an organizational meeting within 30
days to appoint a Chair and Vice-Chair.
      (5)   Thereafter, an organizational meeting shall be held annually.
   B.   It shall be the responsibility of the Appropriate Mental Health
Services Appeals Board to hold hearings to review all appeals of the revocation
of a business license.
   C.   Hearings shall occur at monthly public meetings. Monthly meetings may
be cancelled if there are no pending appeals as of ten days prior to the
scheduled meeting.
      (1)   All hearings for appeals of determinations of licenses shall occur
within 45 days of the date of service of the appeal.
      (2)   Notice of the date, time, and place of the hearing shall be served
upon the Appellant and the Health Officer, in the Property Maintenance
Division.
   D.   The Appropriate Mental Health Services Appeals Board shall issue its
decision to either grant or deny the appeal within five business days of the
date of the hearing. Notice of the decision shall be served upon the Appellant
and the Health Officer, in the Property Maintenance Division.
   E.   Failure to hold an appeal hearing and/or issue a decision within the
allotted time shall result in the appeal being granted.
   F.   All hearings shall be conducted pursuant to the requirements of the
Local Agency Law (Subchapter B of Chapter 5 and Subchapter B of Chapter 7 of
Title 2 of the Pennsylvania Consolidated Statutes).
      (1)   At its first and annual organizational meetings, the Appropriate
Mental Health Services Appeals Board shall decide whether to engage
stenographic services to record hearings for the ensuing year and shall
consider the option to replace stenographic services with the meeting streaming
system located in Council Chambers.
      (2)   An appellant has the right to retain the services of a court
reporter or stenographer for the hearing at the appellant’s sole cost should
such service not be provided by the Appropriate Mental Health Services Appeals
Board.
   G.   Any appellant whose appeal is denied by the Appropriate Mental Health
Services Appeals Board may continue to remain open during a pendency of appeal
with the Berks County Court of Common Pleas.
Chapter 188
CURFEW
Part 1
Juvenile Curfew
§
188-101.   Findings.
§
188-102.   Purpose.
§
188-103.   Juveniles under 18.
§
188-104.   Duty of parent, guardian or custodian.
§
188-105.   (Reserved).
§
188-106.   Exemptions.
§
188-107.   Duty of business owner.
§
188-108.   Authority of police officer.
§
188-109.   Temporary custody procedure.
§
188-110.   Violations and penalties.
Part 2
School Time Curfew
§
188-201.   Findings.
§
188-202.   Purpose.
§
188-203.   Definitions.
§
188-204.   Unlawful activity.
§
188-205.   Defenses.
§
188-206.   Enforcement procedure.
§
188-207.   Violations and penalties.
§
188-208.   Delegation.
[HISTORY: Adopted by the City Council of the City of Reading as indicated in
part histories. Amendments noted where applicable.]
STATE LAW REFERENCES
Juvenile Act — See 42 Pa.C.S.A. § 6301 et seq.
Part 1
Juvenile Curfew
[Adopted 11-13-2000 by Ord. No. 22-2000 (Ch. 6, Part 2, of the 2001 Code of
Ordinances); amended in its entirety 7-24-2017 by Ord. No. 71-A-2017]
§ 188-101. Findings.
Juvenile violence in our community causes great concern for the immediate
health, safety and general welfare of our citizens. The City highly values the
health, safety and general welfare of our juveniles, and has a vested interest
in preserving and nurturing them as a valuable asset and investment for
Reading's future. Persons under the age of 18 are susceptible to be pressured
to participate in unlawful activities and to be victims of older perpetrators
of crime by their lack of maturity, experience and their vulnerability. The
physical, psychological and moral well-being of our juveniles is threatened by
the increasing presence of gangs and street crime. Juveniles in public places
during late night and early morning hours are particularly susceptible to being
victimized and abused. The City needs effective tools available to protect
juveniles from the dangers that exist in the late and early morning hours at
public places. The City believes that parental responsibility and supervision
must be encouraged and promoted. The City finds that reasonable regulations on
the hours which juveniles under the age of 18 years may be in or upon public
streets, parks, or other places will protect the juveniles of this municipality
and reinforce parental responsibility and authority.
§ 188-102. Purpose.
It is expressly the purpose of this Part to provide for and promote the health,
safety and welfare of the general public and not to create or otherwise
establish or designate any particular class or group of persons who will or
should be especially protected or benefitted by the terms of this Part. It is
the specific intent of this Part that no provision or term used in this Part is
intended to impose any duty whatsoever upon the City of Reading or any of its
officers or employees, for whom the implementation and enforcement of this Part
shall be discretionary and not mandatory. Nothing contained in this Part is
intended nor shall be construed to create or form the basis of any liability on
the part of the City, or its officers, employees or agents, for any injury or
damage resulting from any action or inaction of the Part of the City related in
any matter to the enforcement of this Part by its officers, employees or
agents.
§ 188-103. Juveniles under 18.
No person under the age of 18 years shall be on or present in any public
street, avenue, alley, park or any other public place in the City between the
hours of 10:00 p.m. and 5:00 a.m. of the following day, official City time,
unless there exists a reasonable necessity therefor. The fact that such
juvenile is unaccompanied by any parent, guardian or other person having legal
custody is found upon any street, alley or public place between the hours of
10:00 p.m. and 5:00 a.m. of the following day shall be prima facie evidence
that such juvenile is there unlawfully and no reasonable excuse exists
therefor. (See §
188-106. Exemptions)
§ 188-104. Duty of parent, guardian or custodian.
Like juveniles who have violated the offense, a parent of a juvenile is also
subject to a separate fine. A parent or guardian of a juvenile under the age of
18 commits an offense if he or she knowingly permits, or, by insufficient
lawful control, allows the juvenile to remain in any public place or on the
premises of any establishment within the curfew hours. (See §
188-106. Exemptions)
§ 188-105. (Reserved).
§ 188-106. Exemptions.
It is a defense to prosecution under §§
188-103 and
188-104 that:
   A.   The juvenile under the age of 18 is accompanied by his or her parents
or legal guardian.
   B.   The juvenile under the age of 18 is upon an errand as directed by his
or her parent or legal guardian, or one made necessary by an emergency, without
detour or stop.
   C.   The juvenile under the age of 18 is in a motor vehicle involved in
intrastate or interstate transportation or transportation for which passage
through a curfew area is the most direct route.
   D.   The juvenile under the age of 18 is attending an official school,
religious or other recreational activity supervised by adults, sponsored by the
City, a civic organization or another similar entity.
   E.   The juvenile under the age of 18 is engaged in an employment activity,
or going to or returning home from an employment activity, without any detour
or stop.
   F.   The juvenile under the age of 18 is involved in an emergency.
   G.   The juvenile under the age of 18 is on the sidewalk abutting the
minor's residence or abutting the residence of a next-door neighbor if the
neighbor did not complain to the police department about the minor's presence.
   H.   The juvenile under the age of 18 is married or had been married or had
disabilities of juveniles removed in accordance with state law.
§ 188-107. Duty of business owner.
   A.   No person, firm or corporation operating or in charge of any place of
amusement, entertainment or refreshment or other place of business shall permit
any minor under the age of 18 years to loiter, loaf or idle in such place
during the hours prohibited by this Part.
   B.   This Part shall not be construed as permitting the presence at any time
of any person under the age of 18 years in any place where his presence is now
prohibited by any existing law or ordinance.
   C.   Whenever the owner or person in charge or in control of any place of
amusement, entertainment, refreshment or other place of business finds persons
under the age of 18 years loitering, loafing or idling in such place of
business, he shall immediately order such person to leave, and if such person
refuses to leave the place of business, the operator shall immediately notify
the Police Department and inform them of the violation.
§ 188-108. Authority of police officer.
Any police officer is authorized to arrest, with or without warrant, any person
or persons violating any provision of this Part, and any child unaccompanied by
a parent, guardian or other adult person having the lawful care custody of such
minor child. Enforcement of this Part shall be discretionary and not mandatory.
§ 188-109. Temporary custody procedure.
   A.   A police officer who reasonably believes that a juvenile under the age
of 18 is violating any of the provisions as described herein shall have the
authority to take the juvenile into custody, shall inform the juvenile of the
reasons for such custody, and may demand that the parent or guardian appear and
take custody of the juvenile. Should the parent not appear, or should the
officer otherwise deem appropriate, the officer shall deliver, or arrange to
deliver, the juvenile as follows:
      (1)   To the juvenile's parent, guardian, custodian, or other adult
person having custody or control of such juvenile. The officer releasing a
juvenile into custody of an adult person having custody or control shall inform
the adult of the reasons for the taking of the juvenile into custody; or
      (2)   The officer may take the juvenile to the home of an adult extended
family member after attempting to notify the parent, guardian, or custodian.
   B.   In the event that Subsection A(1) and (2) are not appropriate under the
circumstances, the officer may deliver the juvenile to the following:
      (1)   Juvenile will be taken to an appropriate social service agency with
whom the City has contracted for such services or to an appropriate facility of
the Department of Social and Health Services until the parent appears to take
responsibility for the juvenile; or
      (2)   In event the parent fails to appear, the juvenile is to be referred
to an appropriate social service agency with whom the City has contracted for
such services of to an appropriate facility of the Department of Social and
Health Services for consideration of further intervention and/or placement
services.
§ 188-110. Violations and penalties.
Any juvenile under the age of 18 and parent who shall violate any provision of
this Part shall, upon conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine no less
than $50 and not in excess of $300, with additional community service for each
occurrence.
Part 2
School Time Curfew
[Adopted 9-8-2008 by Ord. No. 57-2008 (Ch. 6, Part 7, of the 2001 Code of
Ordinances)]
§ 188-201. Findings.
The City of Reading and community have legitimate concerns regarding the
refusal or failure of juveniles to attend school as required by the Compulsory
Attendance Statute of the Commonwealth, with evidence that juveniles who refuse
to attend school are more likely to not complete elementary or secondary
education and are more likely to engage in misconduct injurious to themselves
or other persons or property.
§ 188-202. Purpose.
The City of Reading has an obligation to provide for the protection of
juveniles from each other and from other persons, for the enforcement of
parental responsibility for acts of their children, for the protection of the
general public, and for the reduction of the incidents of juvenile criminal
activity. The City also desires to promote the safety and good order of the
community by encouraging parental responsibility and helping to eradicate or
minimize the occurrences of rowdiness, vandalism, harassment, graffiti, theft,
drug dealing, drug use, and other behaviors of juveniles as well as the harm
done by juveniles to the community.
§ 188-203. Definitions.
As used in this Part, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
   ESTABLISHMENT — Any privately owned place of business operated for a profit
to which the public is invited including, but not limited to, any place of
amusement or entertainment.
   GRADE SCHOOL — Any elementary or secondary institution.
   GUARDIAN — A person who, under court order, is the guardian of a juvenile,
or a public or private agency with which a juvenile has been placed by a court
of competent jurisdiction.
   HOMESCHOOL — Applies to children legally authorized to participate in a Home
Education Program conducted in compliance with § 1327.1 of the Public School
Code. 1
   JUVENILE — Any unmarried person over seven years of age and under 17 years
of age or a person over 17 years of age and less than 18 years of age who is
enrolled in or subject to compulsory education.
   LOITERING — Remaining idle in essentially one location or lingering or
standing around without purpose either alone or in consort with others.
[Amended 3-23-2009 by Ord. No. 11-2009]
   OPERATOR — Any individual, firm, association, partnership, corporation, or
other entity, operating, managing or conducting any establishment. The term
"operator" includes the members, owner or partners of an association,
partnership or other similar entity and the officers of a corporation.
   PARENT — A person who is the birth parent, stepparent or adoptive parent of
a juvenile. As used herein, "parent" shall also include a court-appointed
guardian or other person, 18 years of age or older, authorized by the parent, a
court order, or by the court-appointed guardian to have the care and custody of
the juvenile.
   PUBLIC PLACE — Any location to which the public or a substantial group of
the public has access and includes, but is not limited to streets, sidewalks,
the common areas of schools, parks, hospitals, apartment houses, office
buildings, transport facilities, shopping centers, malls and other such common
areas.
   REMAIN — To fail to immediately leave specific premises when requested to do
so by a police officer or the owner, operator or other person in control of the
premises.
   SCHOOL — Any public, private, denominational, charter or parochial education
institution that is licensed, or exempt from licensing, by the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania or any other state or government, including any alternative
program of study, including a home school, or work- study offered by such an
institution and any degree granting institution of higher education as
prescribed in the regulations of the Board of Education.
1.   Editor's Note: See 24 P.S. § 13-1327.1.
§ 188-204. Unlawful activity.
   A.   It shall be unlawful for any juvenile who is subject to compulsory
education to loiter, wander, or be in or upon the public street, road, alley,
park, playground or other public place, or the premises of any establishment,
vacant lot or any unsupervised place in the City of Reading from 8:30 a.m.
through 3:30 p.m. on any day for which the school, at which such juvenile is
enrolled, is in session, subject to §
188-205.
   B.   It shall be unlawful for any juvenile who is subject to compulsory
continuing/alternative education to loiter, wander or be in or upon a public
street, road, alley, park, playground, or other public place or the premises of
any establishment, vacant lot or any unsupervised place in the City of Reading
from 8:30 a.m. through 3:30 p.m. on any day for which the school at which such
juvenile is enrolled is in session, subject to §
188-205.
   C.   It shall be unlawful for the parent(s) or guardian(s) of any juvenile
to knowingly permit or allow the juvenile to remain in, loiter, wander, or be
in or upon the public street, road, alley, park, playground or other public
place or the premises of any establishment, vacant lot or any unsupervised
place from 8:30 a.m. through 3:30 p.m. on any day for which the school, at
which such juvenile is enrolled, is in session, subject to §
188-205.
   D.   No operator of an establishment or the agents or employees thereof
shall knowingly permit any juvenile to remain in or about any public place or
any establishment between the hours of 8:30 a.m. and 3:30 p.m. during any day
on which the school in which the juvenile is enrolled is in session.
   E.   It shall be unlawful for any juvenile to loiter within 1,000 feet of
any grade school building from 8:00 a.m. through 3:30 p.m. on any day in which
the school is in session, subject to §
188-205A through I.
§ 188-205. Defenses.
It is a defense to prosecution under this Part:
   A.   That the juvenile is accompanied by his or her parent(s), guardian(s),
or other adult(s) who has the care or custody of the juvenile.
   B.   That the juvenile is on an emergency errand (without any detour or
stop) directed by his or her parent(s), guardians) or other adult(s) who has
the care or custody of the juvenile.
   C.   That the juvenile is going to or coming directly from, without detour
or stop, with permission, his or her place of school or approved employment,
which includes vocational training.
   D.   That the juvenile is going to or coming directly from a medical
appointment or an emergency.
   E.   That the juvenile has permission to leave the school campus for lunch
or a school-related activity or has possession of a valid school-issued off-
campus permit.
   F.   That the juvenile is going to or coming from a continuing/alternative
education activity.
   G.   That the juvenile is attending an official school, religious or other
recreational activity supervised by adults or sponsored by the City of Reading
or other governmental entity, a civic organization, or another similar entity
that takes responsibility for the juvenile and that the parent(s) or guardian
(s) has given permission for the student to attend such activity.
   H.   That the juvenile is going to or returning from, without any detour or
stop, of the foregoing in Subsection G.
   I.   That the juvenile is going to or coming from any government-sponsored
activity.
   J.   That the compulsory education or continuing/alternative education to
which the juvenile is subject is not in session.
§ 188-206. Enforcement procedure.
   A.   Upon a juvenile's failure to comply with §
188-204A, B or E of this Part, a police officer shall issue a citation to the
juvenile and transport the juvenile home or to the school from which the
juvenile is absent. If cited, the juvenile and parent(s) or guardian(s) shall
appear in District Justice Court. The parent(s) or guardian(s) shall be
forwarded a copy of the citation of the juvenile, and said citation will be
mailed via certified mail, return receipt requested, and will include a warning
that the parent(s) is (are) responsible and liable as the juvenile's parent(s).
Any and all records of such citations shall be maintained in the City's
database. Each violation shall constitute a separate offense.
   B.   If the parent(s) or guardian(s) has (have) been warned pursuant to
Subsection A hereof, then the officer may issue a citation to the parent(s) or
guardian(s) for every subsequent violation of this Part. Each violation shall
constitute a separate offense.
   C.   Once a citation is issued, pursuant to Subsection B hereof, each and
every subsequent violation of this Part is cause for an officer to issue a
citation to the parent(s) or guardian(s) of the juvenile.
   D.   If any operator of an establishment or any agents or employees of any
operator fail to comply with the provisions of this Part, a police officer
shall issue a citation for said violation. Each violation shall constitute a
separate offense.
§ 188-207. Violations and penalties.
   A.   Any juvenile, parent(s) or guardian(s), individual(s), or operator(s)
convicted of violating any section of this Part shall be subject to the
following:
      (1)   First offense: $50, plus costs and performance of restorative or
community service to be assigned by the Superintendent of Schools and/or school
principal.
      (2)   Second offense: $100, plus costs and performance of restorative or
community service to be assigned by the Superintendent of Schools and
principal.
   B.   Any juvenile, parent(s) or guardian(s), individual(s) or operator(s)
convicted of violating any section of this Part for a third and every
subsequent offense, may be subject to a fine not less than $300 nor more than
$1,000, plus costs and performance of community service as set forth in
Subsection A.
   C.   Any community service required will not exceed 40 hours in a month and
will be completed within 30 days from the date of the violation; community
service imposed on a juvenile will not be completed by the juvenile during his
or her hours of school attendance or related employment.
§ 188-208. Delegation.
Appropriate City officials, including members of the Police Department,
authorized members of the Reading School District, including truancy
enforcement and school safety officers, Children Youth Service employees and
juvenile probation officers are authorized and directed to take such actions as
are necessary to effectuate this Part.
Chapter 195
DEMOLITION OF STRUCTURES
§
195-101.   Purpose.
§
195-102.   Demolition.
§
195-103.   Repurposing.
[HISTORY: Adopted by the City Council of the City of Reading 4-28-2025 by Ord.
No. 29-2025.]
§ 195-101. Purpose. 
The purpose of this chapter is to ensure that the Centre Park Historic
District, Inc. and the City are provided with the ability to remove items from
the property for repurposing and create a permanent Emergency Demolition Fund.
§ 195-102. Demolition.
   A.   Demolitions shall be ordered by the Building Inspector or the Fire
Marshal as per City Code
Chapter 295 Historical and Conservation Districts, §§
295-114 and
295-115 or the Manager of the Property Maintenance Division as per City Code
Chapter 180 Construction Codes, Part 1301 Adoption of International Property
Maintenance Code, §§ 109 and 110, or such other applicable ordinances, rules
and regulations currently in effect or implemented in the future.
   B.   Upon the completion of the demolition of a property at the direction of
the Building Inspector or the Fire Marshal, the Community Development
Department, in coordination with the Law Department, shall bill the property
owner for the cost of the demolition and all related costs by certified mail,
return receipt requested and first-class mail, with a due date of 60 days
following the date of the demolition. If payment is not received on the
sixtieth day, a delinquency notice shall be sent by first-class mail at which
time a 6% annual interest penalty for non-payment will be assessed.
      If the bill is unpaid on the 60th day, the Law Department shall file a
lien on the property with the Berks County Prothonotary unless and until
payment in full is received. The Law Department may also exercise any other
legal remedy to enable the City to be reimbursed, in whole or in part, for the
cost of the demolition and other related costs. The Law Department shall track
the unsatisfied liens and renew them prior to their expiration. When the City
is reimbursed for the cost of the demolition, the funding shall be deposited
into a new Emergency Demolition line item within the Agency fund that shall
roll forward from year to year to be used to fund demolitions performed by the
City.
§ 195-103. Repurposing.
   A.   When a building is scheduled for demolition by the City of Reading the
City Building Inspector or Fire Marshal shall determine if the property is safe
to enter and if the building is determined safe, the due-process notice to the
property owner shall also notify the owner of his ability to retrieve items
from the property in advance of the demolition, after executing a liability
waiver in form and substance satisfactory to the City Solicitor. The property
owner must notify the Building Inspector or Fire Marshal that they wish to
enter the property within 48 hours of this notice.
      If the City Building Inspector or Fire Marshal determines that the
property is unsafe to enter, this part shall not be applicable, and the
property owner may work with the City Building Inspector or Fire Marshal to
have items from the property removed by the demolition contractor.
   B.   The Building Inspector or the Fire Marshal shall provide the same 48-
hour notice to the Centre Park Historic District, Inc about the proposed
demolition providing the organization with time to consider working with the
City, after the expiration of the property owner's ability to retrieve items
from the property, to access the property to remove building features that can
be preserved, repurposed, restored or sold by the Centre Park Historic
District, Inc. for historical purposes. The Building Inspector or Fire Marshal
shall next inform the Centre Park Historic District, Inc. about the property
owner's response within 24 hours.
      If the City Building Inspector or Fire Marshal determine that the
building is safe to enter, the Centre Park Historic District, Inc. shall
execute a liability waiver in form and substance satisfactory to the City
Solicitor. Unless otherwise agreed to by the Managing Director, or his
designee, the Centre Park Historic District, Inc. shall assume all costs and
expenses of the removal and relocation of the selected items. In the event that
the owner or Centre Park Historic District, Inc. does not timely respond or
chooses not to purchase and/or take possession of items, the City may proceed
with selling the items, removing the items for its own use or disposing the
items as it sees fit as part of the demolition process.
      If the City Building Inspector or Fire Marshal determines that the
property is unsafe to enter, this part shall not be applicable and Centre Park
Historic District, Inc. may work with the City Building Inspector or Fire
Marshal to have items from the property removed by the demolition contractor.
   C.   The demolition contract with the contractor retained by the City shall
contain notice of the timelines required by divisions A. and B. herein in
consultation with the Building Inspector or the Fire Marshal and the Centre
Park Historic District, Inc.
   D.   The Centre Park Historic District, Inc. shall notify the City Building
Inspector or Fire Marshal of any items that it wishes to take possession of
pursuant to this condition at least three hours prior to the commencement of
the scheduled demolition.
   E.   This prior notice requirement by the City shall not apply in the event
of an emergency where demolition is needed on an expedited basis due to
preserve the health, safety and welfare of the surrounding neighborhood.
   F.   Managing Director, or his designee, shall make the Centre Park Historic
District, Inc. aware of any building features the City wishes to retain for
historical preservation and/or repurpose on its own and, in such event, the
City shall be permitted to retain such item(s) without the right of first
refusal of the Centre Park Historic District, Inc. being applicable.
Chapter 201
ELECTRIC SERVICE
Part 1
Reintroduction of Power Inspection Program
§
201-101.   Purpose.
§
201-102.   Definitions.
§
201-103.   Administration; enforcement.
§
201-104.   Inspection.
§
201-105.   Inspection procedure.
§
201-106.   Required inspection.
§
201-107.   Owner, tenant and/or responsible party responsibility.
§
201-108.   Fee.
§
201-109.   Regulations.
[HISTORY: Adopted by the City Council of the City of Reading as indicated in
part histories. Amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Construction codes — See
Ch. 180.
Part 1
Reintroduction of Power Inspection Program
[Adopted 8-9-2010 by Ord. No. 52-2010 (
Ch. 5, Part 15, of the 2001 Code of Ordinances)]
§ 201-101. Purpose.
Reintroduction of power to properties for which electricity has been turned off
or de-energized for a period of one year or greater creates a risk. To ensure
it is safe to reintroduce or restore power to such structures or units, a
reintroduction of power inspection is required and the appropriate
documentation submitted to the electricity supplier to permit restoration of
power to the property. Reintroduction of power does not require a permit.
§ 201-102. Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases when used in this Part shall be defined
as follows, unless context clearly indicates otherwise:
   BUILDING CODE OFFICIAL — City of Reading employee of the Building/Trades
Division of the Community Development Department charged with overseeing said
division and so registered with the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania Department of
Labor and Industry.
   CUT-IN CARD — Documentation issued by the Electrical Inspector to the
Electrical Supplier/ Public Utility Company authorizing energizing of
electrical services at the property.
   DE-ENERGIZE — Discontinuing, shutting off, or ceasing the utility supply of
electricity to a property by the electrical utility for reasons including but
not limited to: vacancy, illegal tampering, nonpayment, fire or other
structural damage.
   ELECTRICAL INSPECTOR — City of Reading employee hired to perform the duties
of Electrical Inspector in accordance with the City of Reading Code.
   ELECTRIC COMPANY; ELECTRICAL SUPPLIER; PUBLIC UTILITY — Any person or
corporation now or hereafter owning or operating in this commonwealth equipment
or facilities for producing, generating, transmitting, distributing or
furnishing electricity, for the production of light, heat, or power to or for
the public for compensation.
   ONE YEAR — 365 calendar days.
   OVERCURRENT DEVICE — A device capable of providing protection for service,
feeder, branch circuits and equipment over the full range of overcurrents
between its rated current and its interrupting rating, including but not
limited to fuses, circuit breakers or combinations thereof.
   PROPERTY — Any property, structure or building in the City of Reading
including any subcategory thereof, including but not limited to room, floor,
apartment or condominium. Excluding new construction for which a permit and
inspection is required under the permit.
   REINTRODUCTION OF POWER — The reestablishing or re-energizing of a property
with electrical power.
   REINTRODUCTION OF POWER INSPECTION — An inspection performed by the
Electrical Inspector of the City of Reading subsequent to de-energization of a
property for a period of one year or longer and prior to reestablishing of
electricity to a property to ensure the connections and electric panel are safe
for re-energization of power to the property.
§ 201-103. Administration; enforcement.
The administration and enforcement of this Part shall be within the authority
of the Electrical Inspector of the City of Reading or in the absence of the
Electrical Inspector, person designated by the Building Code Official.
§ 201-104. Inspection.
The inspection would be to ensure it is safe to restore power/re-energize a
property. The inspection would inspect the meter based and panel board and to
ensure there are no electrical hazards.
§ 201-105. Inspection procedure.
Upon receipt of a request from a property owner or the electrical supplier/
public utility company, the Electrical Inspector will schedule a reintroduction
of power inspection at the property to be conducted within two working days of
receipt of request via completed application and payment of requisite fee.
   A.   Passage of inspection. Upon passage of the inspection, the Electrical
Inspector posts the appropriate label at the service location and submits the
requisite documentation, including but not limited to a cut-in card to the
electrical supplier/public utility. All breakers/ overcurrent devices would be
placed in the off position.
   B.   Failure of inspection. If an inspection fails, no sticker or label
would be issued, the contact on the application would be notified of the
failure and the electrical supplier/public utility would be notified of the
failure and no cut-in card would be issued thereto. The applicant would be
notified that a licensed contractor would be required to make any requisite
fixes/ repairs in accordance with obtaining of the necessary permits and the
applicable provisions of the City of Reading Code and statutes of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania. After the repairs have been made, the contractor
shall contact the City of Reading Electrical Inspector to perform an
inspection. If the inspection is passed, then procedures outlined in Subsection
A shall be followed.
§ 201-106. Required inspection.
An inspection of a property shall be performed by the Electrical Inspector of
the City prior to reintroduction of electric power to a property where the
electric power has been de-energized for a period of one year or more.
§ 201-107. Owner, tenant and/or responsible party responsibility.
Upon passage of the inspection required hereby and reintroduction of power/re-
energization of the property by the electrical supplier/public utility, it
shall be the responsibility of the owner, tenant and/or responsible party to
turn the breakers/overcurrent devices to the On position providing power
throughout the property.
§ 201-108. Fee.
The Electrical Inspector shall charge a fee for performance of the
reintroduction of power inspection as established and amended as necessary by
ordinance by City Council under the City of Reading Fee Schedule. 1
1.   Editor's Note: See
Ch. 212, Fees.
§ 201-109. Regulations.
The Electrical Inspector in conjunction with the Building Code Official is
hereby authorized to promulgate rules and regulations and prepare an
application to implement and supplement the provisions of this Part.
Chapter 212
FEES
Part 1
Fee Schedule
§
212-101.   Alarm systems.
§
212-102.   Alcoholic beverages.
§
212-103.   Animals.
§
212-104.   Business licenses - annual license tax.
§
212-105.   Commercial laundries.
§
212-106.   Construction codes: Building Code.
§
212-107.   Construction codes: Electrical Code.
§
212-108.   Construction codes: Existing Building Code.
§
212-109.   Construction codes: Mechanical Code.
§
212-110.   Construction codes: Plumbing Code.
§
212-111.   Construction codes: Residential Code.
§
212-112.   Electric service.
§
212-113.   Fire prevention, fire protection and medical transportation.
§
212-114.   Food Code.
§
212-115.   Food vending machines and businesses.
§
212-116.   Housing.
§
212-117.   Lead-based paint.
§
212-118.   Massage therapists.
§
212-119.   Miscellaneous.
§
212-120.   Parks and recreation.
§
212-121.   Peddling and soliciting.
§
212-122.   Poles.
§
212-123.   Police Department miscellaneous fees.
§
212-124.   Portable home storage units.
§
212-125.   Post fire fees.
§
212-126.   Property sales: certificate of transfer; health and safety
inspections.
§
212-127.   Public records.
§
212-128.   Rental housing inspection.
§
212-129.   Roadside and utility pole signs.
§
212-130.   Sales: mobile vendors.
§
212-131.   Sales: sidewalk sales.
§
212-132.   Sales: sidewalk vendors.
§
212-133.   Sewers and sewage disposal.
§
212-134.   Sexually oriented businesses.
§
212-135.   Sidewalk cafes.
§
212-136.   Curbside waste collection.
§
212-137.   (Reserved)
§
212-138.   Solid waste: dumpsters.
§
212-139.   Stormwater management.
§
212-140.   Streets and sidewalks.
§
212-141.   Subdivision and land development.
§
212-141.1.   Tattoo establishments.
§
212-142.   Taxation.
§
212-143.   Trees.
§
212-144.   Vehicles and traffic.
§
212-145.   Vehicle storage.
§
212-146.   Vending.
§
212-147.   Zoning and Historic Preservation.
[HISTORY: Adopted by the City Council of the City of Reading as indicated in
part histories. Amendments noted where applicable.]
Part 1
Fee Schedule
[Adopted 11-13-2006 By Ord. No. 75-2006. Amended In Its Entirety 8-26-2013 By
Ord. No. 35-2013 1 ]
§ 212-101. Alarm systems.2
Description Fee Ordinance No. Code Citation
Description                         Fee             Ordinance No. Code Citation
Permit application fee              $50             126-1995      §
(nonrefundable)                                                   120-104G
Alarm business permit (annual)      $50             126-1995      §
                                                                  120-105
Alarm user permit fee               $25             14-2001       §
                                                                  120-113
Unnecessary/needless false burglary alarms. A
service fee shall be charged for each unnecessary/  41-2010       §
needless false alarm in a calendar year, pursuant                 120-115
to the chart set forth below:
Alarm in Calendar Year                                           
1                                   Free                          
                                    (no charge)
2                                   $50                           
3                                   $50                           
4                                   $100                          
5                                   $100                          
6                                   $150                          
7                                   $150                          
8                                   $150                          
9                                   $150                          
10                                  $250                          
11                                  $250                          
12                                  $250                          
13                                  $500                          
For each alarm 14 and greater (over $500 per alarm                
13) in a calendar year
 
1.   Editor's Note: This Part Was Reorganized And Renumbered At The Request Of
The City In Order To Group Similar Fees Together.
2.   Editor's Note: The following fees, previously included in this section,
were repealed as follows: The fee for fire protection contractor false alarm
was repealed 12-16-2013 by Ord. No. 78-2013.
§ 212-102. Alcoholic beverages.
[Amended 1-11-2021 by Ord. No. 2-2021]
 
Description                             Fee    Ordinance No. Code Citation
Bottle club permit (administrative fee) $2,500 35-2007       §
                                                             127-306
Bottle club permit (annual renewal fee) $500   35-2007       §
                                                             127-306
 
§ 212-103. Animals.
[Amended 10-12-2020 by Ord. No. 66-2020; and 1-11-2021 by Ord. No. 2-2021]
 
Description  Fee                                      Ordinance Code Citation
                                                      No.
Permit for
an exotic
animal,
domestic
agricultural $100 for the first calendar year         57-2009   §
animal or    $50 for subsequent years                           141-215
native
wildlife
animal (per
household)
   The fee shall be disbursed $50 to the designated
animal control authority and $50 to the City to cover
the costs of inspections and administration. For                
subsequent years, the fee shall be $50 and will be
disbursed $25 to the designated animal control
authority and $25 to the City to cover costs.
Dangerous,
aggressive                                                      §
or vicious   $250                                     57-2009   141-216
dog/animal
permit
Dangerous,
aggressive                                                      §
or vicious   $100                                              141-220
dog/animal
appeal
Reclaiming   $25 per day of impoundment * additional            §
an impounded fees may be charged by the Animal        57-2009   141-218
animal       Control Agency
 
§ 212-104. Business licenses - annual license tax. 3
[Amended 7-10-2017 by Ord. No. 62-2017.]
Description Fee Ordinance No. Code Citation
Description                Fee                    Ordinance No. Code Citation
Solicitations (taking      $80                    78-2013       §
orders for goods)                                               339-103
Pawnbroker                 $400                   78-2013       §
                                                                339-103
Market house               $400                   78-2013       §
                                                                339-103
Express companies, power   $400                   78-2013       §
companies, communications                                       339-103
Motor vehicles for hire    $400                   78-2013       §
(per vehicle)                                                   339-103
Motor buses (per vehicle)  $400                   78-2013       §
                                                                339-103
Motor buses (per vehicle)                                       §
from the City to points    $200                   78-2013       339-103
with a radius of 10 miles
Taxi                       $50 each not to exceed 78-2013       §
                           $500                                 339-103
Bowling alley, pool and
billiard tables, gaming    $25                    78-2013       §
tables (per alley or                                            339-103
table)
Theaters with live         $150                   78-2013       §
performances, circuses                                          339-103
Movie theaters (no stage   $150                   78-2013       §
production)                                                     339-103
Amusement devices          $50                    78-2013       §
                                                                339-103
Shuffleboard               $25                    78-2013       §
                                                                339-103
Juke box, per              $50                    78-2013       §
establishment                                                   339-103
Coin-operated riding       $25                    78-2013       §
device                                                          339-103
Public dump or junkyard    $400                   78-2013       §
                                                                339-103
Business privilege license                                      §
for special event,         $15                    5-2015        339-203
annually
Business license fee (per  $55                    36-2009       §
year)                                                           339-205
License refusal appeal fee $150                   98-2014       §
                                                                339-207
License reinstatement fee  $1,000                 98-2014       §
                                                                339-210
Appeal fee - business
license revocation or      $100                   62-2017       339-211
cease operations order
 
3.   Editor's Note: The following fees, previously included in this section,
were repealed as follows: The fee for newspaper vendor at sidewalk stands, most
recently amended by Ord. No. 60-1980, was repealed 12-16-2013 by Ord. No. 78-
2013.
§ 212-105. Commercial laundries.
[Amended 1-11-2021 by Ord. No. 2-2021]
 
Description              Fee          Ordinance No.              Code Citation
Commercial laundry                                               §
establishment permit     $100         19-2004; 40-2012; 124-2012 173-106
(annual)
Each washer and/or dryer $25 per unit 78-2013                    §
                                                                 173-106
 
§ 212-106. Construction codes: Building Code.4
[Amended 1-11-2021 by Ord. No. 2-2021; 2-27-2023 by Ord. No. 17-2023; 5-8-2023
by Ord. No. 46-2023]
Description Fee
Description                                            Fee
Permit Fees                                             
   Water Heaters                                    $65
   Up to $1,000                                     $150
   See “Up to $1,000"                              
   $1,000.01 and up                                 $20 per thousand
Interim Electrical Permit Fees                          
   Up to $1,000                                     $54.50
   $1,000.01 and up                                 $20 per five thousand
Administrative fee                                     $50
State inspection fee                                   $4.50
Consultation fee                                       $90 per hour
Plan review: residential (per discipline)              $100
Plan review: non residential-commercial, industrial,   $250
institutional (per discipline)
Plan review administrative fee                         $50
Removal of placard                                     $150
Application for appeal                                 $1,000
Fast track plan review: residential                    $400
Fast track plan review:
nonresidential-commercial, industrial, institutional   $400 per discipline
(per discipline)
Rescheduling of inspections, administrative fee        $50
Administrative fees for more than two violations in a  Third violation: $50
12-month period
                                                      Fourth violation: $75
Permit fees above doubled if completed without permits (add reference to UCC)
 
4.   Editor's Note: The following fees, previously included in this section,
were repealed as follows: The fee for accessibility plan reviews and
inspections, most recently amended by Ord. No. 43-2011, was repealed 12-8-2014
by Ord. No. 100-2014.
§ 212-107. Construction codes: Electrical Code.
[Amended 1-11-2021 by Ord. No. 2-2021]
 
Description                  Fee                   Ordinance No. Code Citation
See § 212-106 above                                            
Administrative fees for more Third violation: $50                §
than two violations in a     Fourth violation: $75 98-2006       180-702
twelve-month period
 
§ 212-108. Construction codes: Existing Building Code.
[Amended 1-11-2021 by Ord. No. 2-2021]
See § 212-106 above.
§ 212-109. Construction codes: Mechanical Code.
Amended 1-11-2021 by Ord. No. 2-2021]
 
Description                  Fee                   Ordinance No. Code Citation
See § 212-106 above.                                           
Administrative fees for more Third violation: $50
than two violations in a     Fourth violation: $75 97-2006       §
twelve-month period          Fifth and successive                180-602
                             violations: $100
 
§ 212-110. Construction codes: Plumbing Code.
[Amended 1-11-2021 by Ord. No. 2-2021]
 
Description          Fee Ordinance No. Code Citation
See § 212-106 above.                 
 
§ 212-111. Construction codes: Residential Code.
[Amended 1-11-2021 by Ord. No. 2-2021]
 
Description          Fee Ordinance No. Code Citation
See § 212-106 above.                 
 
§ 212-112. Electric service.
 
Description                           Fee  Ordinance No. Code Citation
Inspection prior to reintroduction of $100 53-2010       §
electricity/power                                        201-108
 
§ 212-113. Fire prevention, fire protection and medical transportation.
[Adopted 5-29-2012 by Ord. No. 62-2012; amended 3-11-2013 by Ord. No. 12-2013;
2-17-2015 by Ord. No. 7-2015; 1-23-2017 by Ord. No. 6-2017; 9-12-2022 by Ord.
No. 79-2022; 9-26-2022 by Ord. No. 112-2022; 11-28-2022 by Ord. No. 125-2022;
2-24-2025 by Ord. No. 14-2025; 2-24-2025 by Ord. No. 15-2025; 2-24-2025 by Ord.
No. 16-2025]
   A.   Costs for emergency services provided by the City of Reading, PA -
Department of Fire and Services.
 
Apparatus
Engine:      $400 per hour
Ladder:      $450 per hour
Rescue:      $350 per hour
Deputy Chief $125/hour
Ambulance    $150/hour
 
Equipment/Service
Equipment/Service
Self-contained Breathing Apparatus      $75 each
(SCBA)
Fire hose (50 feet)                     $35
Gas/Co Detector/Heat Gun                $50 per use
Air monitoring/Thermal imager           $100
Deodorizer                              $25 per use
Fire Extinguisher (any class)           $100 per use
Fire Police Services                    $100 per hour
Hand Tools                              $50 each
Hydraulic Rescue Tools                  $300 each
Scene Lighting                          $100 per hour
Oil booms                               $50 each
Oil Absorbent Sheets                    $35 each
Oil Dry                                 $65 per bucket
Portable Pumps                          $45 per hour
Power Tools                             $50 each
Road Closing/Traffic Control            $100 per hour
Salvage Covers                          $45 each
Vehicle Fire Blanket                    $1,750 each
Mineral Fire Suppression Agent          $85
Battery Fires                            
   -Small drum (disposable)          $500
   -Large drum (disposable)          $600
Disposal of Battery Waste               $500
Battery Fire Response Kit (disposable)  $3,500
Debris Cleanup/Removal                  $275
Flares                                  $12 each
Ventilation Fans                        $100 each
IR Camera                               $100 each
Foam                                    $125 per gallon
Cribbing:                                
   -Passenger                        $150 each
   -Class B                          $250 each
   -Trucks-Class A                   $550 each
Stabilizing Struts                      $100 per use
Latex Gloves                            $12 per pair
Ladders                                 $75 per use
Medical Extrication (Using hydraulic    $1,750 per patient
tools)
Generator                               $50 per hour
Handlight                               $15 per use
Wetting Agent                           $30 per unit
Fire Line Tape                          $0.50 per foot
Manpower                                $75 per man per hour
Investigations                          $150 per hour
Fire Marshal Coveralls (if destroyed)   $75
Fire Marshal Over Gloves (single use)   $10
Evidence Cans                            
   -1 Pint Can                       $8
   -1 Quart Can                      $10
   -1-Gallon Can                     $15
   -5-Gallon Pail                    $50
Evidence Supplies                       $20
Straw Broom                             $15
Fire investigation boots (if destroyed/ $500
contaminated)
Electrical Cords                        $80
Portable Lighting                       $35 per unit
Camera Equipment                        $35 per use
Respiratory Supplies                    $125 per investigator
UAV Deployment                          $100/hour
                                        The fee for services provided pursuant
                                        to Section
Standby emergency medical services fee  36-115, fees for standby medical
                                        services; right of first refusal, shall
                                        be $175 per hour prorated to the
                                        nearest half hour.
 
   B.   Costs for nonemergency services provided by the City of Reading, PA -
Department of Fire and Services.
Section Description of Fee Fee
Section Description of Fee                                                       Fee
F-101   Administrative fee for retrieval of fire report                          $75
F-102   Engine for standpipe testing
        Engine - $125/hour (minimum 2 hours)                                     $250
       Two firefighters - $90/hour (minimum 2 hours)                            $360

       Each additional standpipe                                                $100
       Processing of detail                                                     $90
F-103   Water removal                                                             
          Engine - $125/hour                                                 $250
          Two firefighters - $90/hour (minimum 2 hours)                      $360
          Processing of detail                                               $90
F-104   Lock-out/accessing a property                                            $75
F-105   Consultation fees                                                         
           Testimony in any litigation                                        $75/hour
          In office discussion with insurance fire investigation, adjusters, $50/hour
        attorneys, etc. regarding civil litigation
          At scene discussion with insurance fire investigations, adjusters, $75/hour
        attorneys, etc. and/or regarding civil litigation
                                                                                 $100
F-107   Application for alternative design method                                (flat
                                                                                 fee)
F-108   Fire investigation                                                        
          Copies                                                             $1/page
        Photographs on medium                                              $75 per
                                                                                 incident
          Fee for reviewing files                                            $50
F-109   Health & Safety Inspection                                               $100/
                                                                                 hour
F-110   Service calls (not defined by other category)                            $125
          Firefighter charge                                                 $90/hour
          Engine charge (minimum 2 hours)                                    $125/
                                                                                 hour
          Ladder charge (minimum 2 hours)                                    $180/
                                                                                 hour
          Processing of detail                                               $75
F-111   Firewatch                                                                 
          Two firefighters -$90/hour(minimum 2 hours)                        $90/hour
          Engine charge (minimum 2 hours)                                    $125/
                                                                                 hour
          Ladder charge (minimum 2 hours)                                    $180/
                                                                                 hour
          Other/miscellaneous as determined by Fire Chief                    $75/hour
                                                                                 1st -
                                                                                 $75
F-112   No Show - Failure to request cancellation in writing no less than 24     2nd -
        hours prior to start of scheduled inspection                             $125
                                                                                 3rd -
                                                                                 $175
F-113   Re-inspection fee (failure to correct violations following 1st re-       $75
        inspection)
F-114   Late payment of inspection permit fee prior to 60 days (applicable to    $25
        pre and post collections process)
F-115   After hours inspections/tests normal work hours                          $75/hour
        8:00 a.m. to 4:30 p.m.
                                                                                 $75/hour
F-116   Emergency Responder Coverage Enhancement System (ERCES) - Signal Survey  (2 hour
                                                                                 minimum)
 
   C.   Other matters involving fee schedule.
      (1)   Appeals. Unless otherwise noted by law, to appeal a bill for a
service provided under the above fee schedule, the appellant must submit a
request in writing within three business days of receipt of the original bill
for service. The request must set forth the information on the bill and is to
be addressed to the City of Reading - Fire Marshal, 815 Washington Street, Room
1-41 Reading, Pennsylvania 19601. The Fire Marshal or in his/her absence the
Fire Prevention Lieutenant may address the appeal.
      (2)   Collections. All bills for services provided and billed under the
above fee schedule and as set forth herein which are not paid in full within 60
days of the original date of billing shall be turned over to a collection
agency for receipt. This provisions shall not apply to situations where
arrangements have been made and confirmed in writing prior to the expiration of
the aforesaid 60 days for payment to be made on such debt.
      (3)   Restitution. In addition to the fees set forth above, the City of
Reading - Department and Fire Rescue Service reserves the right to charge and
issue bills to recover costs and fees beyond that set forth herein when
required to mitigate, abate, render safe or respond to any situation, emergency
or nonemergency, which is a result of clear negligence or failure to comply
with and follow code requirements and verbal instructions provided to the
responsible party by the Department of Fire and Rescue Services.
   D.   Unnecessary/needless fire and medical alarm responses.
      (1)   Whereas, the Department of Fire and Rescue Services reserves the
right to bill for nonemergency and emergency calls. The determination of
"needless alarms" is in accordance with the language below and the opinion of
the Fire Code Official.
      (2)   Needless alarms/false alarms. The City of Reading - Department of
Fire and Rescue Services shall charge for response(s) to calls resulting from
the repeated activation of fire and medical alarm systems due to causes other
than smoke or fire or the intended use of the medical alarm system. Such cases
shall include, but are not limited to the following:
         (a)   Alarm activation for no apparent cause.
         (b)   Alarms resulting from failure to properly maintain or repair a
fire alarm system.
         (c)   Failure to protect devices from dust, dirt, and/or fumes as a
result of construction, fumigation or similar condition.
         (d)   Failure to use proper exhaust or ventilation equipment to
prevent activation of detection devices by cooking, smoke steam, fumes, etc.
         (e)   Intentional activation of alarm when no emergency exists.
Alarm in Calendar Year Fee
Alarm in Calendar Year                                     Fee
1                                                          Free (no charge)
2                                                          $60
3                                                          $80
4                                                          $130
5                                                          $130
6                                                          $180
7                                                          $180
8                                                          $180
9                                                          $180
10                                                         $280
11                                                         $280
12                                                         $280
13                                                         $530
For each alarm 14 and greater (over 13) in a calendar year $550 per alarm
 
   E.   Other matters involving fee schedule with the City of Reading through
ordinance bill.
      (1)   Appeals.
         (a)   Unless otherwise provided by law, to appeal a bill for a service
provided under the above fee schedule the owner/tenant must request a hearing
thereof by submitting a written request therefore within three business days of
receipt of the original bill for service. Said request must set forth the
information on the bill and shall be addressed to:
         Department of Fire and Rescue Services
         c/o Fire Marshal, Suite 1-41
         815 Washington Street
         Reading, Pennsylvania 19601
         (b)   The Fire Chief and/or Fire Prevention Lt. may address the appeal
in the absence of the Fire Marshal.
      (2)   Collections. All bills for services provided and billed under the
above fee schedule and as set forth herein which are not paid in full within 60
days of the original date of billing shall be turned over to a collection
agency for receipt. This provisions shall not apply to situations where
arrangements have been made and confirmed in writing prior to the expiration of
the aforesaid 60 days for payment to be made on such debt.
      (3)   Restitution. In addition to the fees set forth above, the City of
Reading - Department and Fire Rescue Service reserves the right to charge and
issue bills to recover costs and fees beyond that set forth herein when
required to mitigate, abate, render safe or respond to any situation, emergency
or nonemergency, which is a result of clear negligence or failure to comply
with and follow code requirements and verbal instructions provided to the
responsible party by the Department of Fire and Rescue Services.
   F.   Fire Code inspection fees. Annual fee for Fire Code inspection of use/
occupancy.
Section Description of Maintenance Inspection Fee
Section Description of Maintenance Inspection                        Fee
PI-101  Assembly occupancies                                          
          Class A - Occupant levels exceeding 1,000              $175
          Unless building is 30,000 square feet or greater       $275
          Class B - Occupant levels 301 - 1,000                  $150
          Class C - Occupant levels 50 - 300                     $125
PI-102  Apartment occupancies                                         
          Class A - Exceeding 22 units per building              $350
          Class B -10 to 21 units per building                   $200
          Class C - 3 to 9 units per building                    $125
PI-103  Business occupancies                                          
          Class A - Exceeding 30,000 square feet per building    $275
          Class B - 10,001 to 30,000 square feet per building    $175
          Class C - Less than 10,000 square feet per building    $125
PI-104  Daycare occupancies per building                              
          Class A daycare center (13 or more persons receiving   $175
        care)
          Class B group daycare (6 - 12 persons receiving care)  $125
          Class C home daycare (1-5 persons receiving care)      $100
PI-105  Educational occupancies                                       
          Class A - Less than 10,000 square feet                 $125
          Class B - More than 10,000 and less than 30,00 square  $175
        feet
          Class C - More than 30,000 square feet                 $250
PI-106  Factory occupancies                                           
          Class A - Exceeding 30,000 square feet per building    $300
          Class B - 10,001 to 30,000 square feet per building    $225
          Class C - Less than 10,000 square feet per building    $175
PI-107  Institutional occupancies                                     
          Class A - Occupant levels exceeding 401 per building   $300
          Class B - Occupant levels 201- 400 per building        $250
          Class C - Occupant levels less than 200 per building   $200
PI-108  Hotels/motels                                                 
          Class A - Exceeding 51 rooms per building              $325
          Class B - 26 - 50 rooms per building                   $275
          Class C - 5 to 10 rooms per building                   $225
PI-109  Lodging/rooming house                                         
          Class A - Exceeding 26 units per building              $275
          Class B - 11 to 25 units per building                  $225
          Class C - 5 to 10 units per building                   $175
PI-110  Mercantile                                                    
          Class A - Exceeding 30,000 square feet or 3 floors per $275
        building
          Class B - 5,000 to 30,000 square feet per building     $225
          Class C - Less than 5,000 square feet per building     $175
PI-111  Storage occupancies                                           
          Class A - exceeding 30,000 square feet per building    $275
          Class B - 10,001 to 30,000 square feet per building    $225
          Class C - less than 10,000 square feet per building    $175
PI-112  Other/miscellaneous as determined (per hour)                 $75
                                                                     1st - free
                                                                     2nd - $75
        Re-inspection fee (failure to correct violation noted after  3rd - $125
PI-113  1st re-inspection)                                           Additional
        (In addition to each respective legal action)                reinspections
                                                                     -
                                                                     $150/each
PI-114  Late payment of inspection fee prior to 60 days (applicable  $75
        to pre and post collections process)
 
   G.   Definitions of above terms (if not defined, see City of Reading Fire
Prevention Code, 2018 Edition. As used in this section, the following terms
shall have the meanings indicated:
   AFTER-HOURS INSPECTIONS/TESTS - Inspections performed and tests witnessed
after normal working hours.
   ASSEMBLY OCCUPANCIES - Buildings in which people gather for such purposes as
civic, social, religious functions, entertainment, digging, amusements or
awaiting transportation.
   CHRONIC VIOLATION - Including but not limited to a problem that continues to
exist over a period of time without mitigation, failure to correct or abate,
failure to cease action.
   EDUCATIONAL - Schools, academics, kindergarten and nursery.
   HEALTH AND SAFETY INSPECTION - Inspection includes written verification that
the building complies with the City of Reading Fire Prevention Code.
   HEALTH CARE FACILITIES - Hospitals, nursing homes, medical institutions.
   LODGING/ROOMING HOUSE - Guesthouse, bed-and-breakfast, and foster homes.
   REINSPECTION FEE - For each inspection that is required as a result of the
need to reschedule a scheduled inspection for one or more of the following
reasons:
       (1)   Work not constructed/completed in accordance with applicable code
(s)/standard(s)/approved construction document(s).
      (2)   Work incomplete at time of requested inspection.
      (3)   Access to work requiring inspection not provided.
      (4)   Failure to correct noted violations upon second and future
reinspection(s).
   H.   Operational permit fees. Permits required to perform operational
activities set forth herein as defined by the City of Reading Fire Prevention
Code (2018 Edition):
Section Operation Fee
Section  Operation                                                         Fee
105.6.1  Aerosol products                                                  $175
105.6.2  Amusement buildings                                               $175
105.6.3  Aviation facilities                                               $175
105.6.4  Carnivals and fairs                                               $175
105.6.5  Cellulose nitrate film                                            $175
105.6.6  Combustible dust-producing operations                             $175
105.6.7  Combustible fibers                                                $175
105.6.8  Compressed gases                                                  $175
105.6.9  Covered and open mall building                                    $175
105.6.10 Cryogenic fluids                                                  $175
105.6.11 Cutting and welding                                               $175
105.6.12 Dry-cleaning                                                      $175
105.6.13 Exhibits and trade shows                                          $175
105.6.14 Explosives                                                        $175
105.6.15 Fire hydrants and valves                                          $175
105.6.16 Flammable and combustible liquids                                 $175
105.6.17 Floor finishing                                                   $175
105.6.18 Fruit and crop ripening                                           $175
105.6.19 Fumigation and insecticidal fogging                               $175
105.6.20 Hazardous materials                                               $175
105.6.21 HPM facilities                                                    $175
105.6.22 High-piled storage                                                $175
105.6.23 Hot work operations                                               $175
105.6.24 Industrial ovens                                                  $175
105.6.25 Lumberyards and woodworking plants                                $175
105.6.26 Liquid- or gas-fueled vehicles or equipment in assembly buildings $175
105.6.27 LP gas                                                            $175
105.6.28 Magnesium                                                         $175
105.6.29 Miscellaneous combustible storage                                 $175
105.6.30 Mobile food preparation vehicles                                  $175
105.6.31 Motor fuel-dispensing facilities                                  $175
105.6.32 Open burning                                                      $175
105.6.33 Open flames and torches                                           $175
105.6.34 Open flames and candles                                           $175
105.6.35 Organic coatings                                                  $175
105.6.36 Outdoor assembly event                                            $175
105.6.37 Places of assembly                                                $175
105.6.38 Plant extraction systems                                          $175
105.6.39 Private fire hydrants                                             $175
105.6.40 Pyrotechnic special effects                                       $175
105.6.41 Pyroxylin plastics                                                $175
105.6.42 Refrigeration equipment                                           $175
105.6.43 Repair garages and motor fuel-dispensing facilities               $175
105.6.44 Rooftop heliports                                                 $175
105.6.45 Spaying or dipping                                                $175
105.6.46 Storage of scrap tires and tire by-products                       $175
105.6.47 Temporary membrane structures and tents                           $175
105.6.48 Tire-rebuilding plants                                            $175
105.6.49 Waste handling                                                    $175
105.6.50 Wood products                                                     $175
105.6.51 Fireworks (includes plan review fee and inspection)               $300
 
   I.   Other matters involving permits/inspection fees.
      (1)   Appeals. Unless otherwise provided by law, to appeal a bill for a
service provided under the above fee schedule, the appellant must submit a
request in writing within three business days of receipt of the original bill
for service. The request must set forth the information on the bill and is to
be addressed to the City of Reading - Fire Marshal, 815 Washington Street, Room
1-41 Reading, Pennsylvania 19601. The Fire Marshal or in his/her absence the
Fire Prevention Lieutenant may address the appeal.
      (2)   Collections. All bills for services provided and billed under the
above fee schedule and as set forth herein which are not paid in full within 60
days of the original date of billing shall be turned over to a collection
agency for receipt. This provisions shall not apply to situations where
arrangements have been made and confirmed in writing prior to the expiration of
the aforesaid 60 days for payment to be made on such debt.
      (3)   Penalties. Commencement of use or occupancy of a premise and any
system installation which require an inspection and permit thereto will result
in preclusion of use or occupancy of such premise or building until an
inspection has been performed and a permit issued. Additionally, such use or
occupancy may subject the violator to prosecution as authorized by law and / or
doubling of the permit fee.
      (4)   Refunds. The City of Reading will not issue refunds for fees/monies
paid following submission for review of a construction permit or plan review
whether or not the plan or project is built/completed.
      (5)   To acquire an operational permit an applicant must submit, in
addition to the appropriate fee, the documentation and information for such a
permit per the regulations established by the Fire Marshal for the Department
of Fire and Rescue Services. A permit will not be issued nor a plan therefore
reviewed until compliance with the established regulations occurs and the
appropriate fee received.
      (6)   Penalties. Performance of the aforesaid operation without a permit
or operation performed in excess of a permit will result in a change of 100% of
usual permit fee in addition to the normal fee (or doubling the cost of the
permit fee). Additionally, such performance pf operation may subject the
violator to prosecution as authorized by law.
      (7)   Refunds. The City of Reading will not issue refunds for fee/monies
paid following submission for review of the requirements for an operational
permit or plan review whether not the plan or project is built/completed.
      (8)   Restitution. In addition to the fees set forth above, the City of
Reading - Department of Fire and Rescue Services reserves the right to charge
and issue bills to recover costs and fees beyond that set forth herein when
required to mitigate, abate, render safe or respond to any situation, emergency
or nonemergency, which is a result of clear negligence or failure to comply
with and follow code requirements and verbal instructions provided to the
responsible party by the Department of Fire and Rescue Services.
   J.   Certificate of fitness program.
      (1)   No person shall engage in the following activities without firs
obtaining a certificate of fitness listing by the Fire Code Official (City of
Reading - Office of Fire Marshal).
      (2)   A certificate of fitness shall be obtained by all applicants/
vendors (companies or person(s)) for the purposes of conducting any operations
or performing an act for which a certificate of fitness is required as set
forth below:
         (a)   Application. The applicant shall meet the standards and
regulations established by the Fire Marshal including certificate of insurance
covering the work requested, workmen's compensation for employees as required
by federal, state or local mandated regulations, laws, and statutes.
Additionally, an exhibition of appropriate levels of education, training, and
certification, and experience shall be submitted to the Fire Marshal for review
and certificate of fitness issuance prior to any work commencing. The applicant
and all employees engaging in the specified work shall have a strong
familiarity and understanding of fire protection systems/fire code application
for which a certificate of fitness is requested. An application on a form
prescribed by the Fire Marshal and a fee ($150 per category applied for) as
established by resolution of City of Reading Council, shall be submitted to the
Department of Fire and Rescue Services - Office of Fire Marshal for review and
approval for each system described herein for which an applicant seeks to
obtain a certificate of fitness.
         (b)   Certificates of fitness shall be valid for one year beginning
January 1 through December 31 of each calendar year. Certificate holders must
reapply each calendar year, and provide the fee as established by City Council
for each category which the contractor seeks approval and listing. Performance
of work on a system described below in the City of Reading, PA; without a
certificate of fitness shall cause the violator to be precluded from applying
for a certificate of fitness for a period of one (1) calendar year, and subject
the violator to fines, double fee costs, citations, and additional costs as
provided for herein.
         (c)   Additional categories. The Fire Code Official may require a
Certificate of Fitness for certain process which pose an unusual risk to the
public safety or in cases or in cases or as part of the code modification
process.
         (d)   Certificate of fitness categories and fees:
   
CF -101 Automatic fire alarm systems (NRTL Installation/service/inspection
        listed)
CF -102 Sprinkler/standpipe                Installation/service/inspection
CF -103 Emergency Responder Coverage       Installation/service/inspection
        Enhancement Systems (ERCES)
CF -104 Automatic suppression systems      Installation/service/inspection
                                           Retransmission/record keeping/
CF -105 Central stations (NRTL listed)     reporting/runner's service(all
                                           elements per NFPA 72)
CF -106 Fire extinguishers                 Installation/ service/inspection
CF-107  Fireworks/pyrotechnics             Displays/demonstrations/ performance
CF -108 Blasting/explosives                Use/storage/transportation
CF -109 Other                              As defined by Fire Code Official
 
   K.   Fire protection systems - construction permits and plans examination
review fee.
      (1)   Permits shall be required from Department of Fire and Rescue
Services - Office of Fire Marshal for and prior to construction, installation,
etc for the following work as defined in the International Fire Code, 2018
Edition, as adopted by the City of Reading:
      105.7.1- Automatic Fire-Extinguishing Systems
      105.7.1.1 - Automatic Sprinkler Systems
      105.7.2 - Battery Systems
      105.7.3 - Capacitor Energy Storage Systems
      105.7.4 - Compressed Gases
      105.7.5 - Cryogenic Fluids
      105.7.6 - Emergency Responders Radio Coverage
      105.7.7 - Fire Alarm and Detection Systems and Related Equipment
      105.7.8- Fire Pumps and Related Equipment
      105.7.9- Flammable and Combustible Liquids
      105.7.10 - Fuel Cell Power Systems
      105.7.11 - Gas Detection Systems
      105.7.12 - Gates and Barricades Across Fire Apparatus Access Roads
      105.7.13 - Hazardous Materials
      105.7.14 - High-piled Combustible Storage
      105.7.15- Industrial Ovens
      105.7.16-LP-Gas
      105.7.17 - Motor Vehicle Repair Rooms and Booths
      105.7.18 - Plant Extraction Systems
      105.7.19 - Private Fire Hydrants
      105.7.20 - Smoke Control and Smoke Exhaust Systems
      105.7.21 - Solar Photovoltaic Power Systems
      105.7.22   Special Event Structure
      105.7.23 - Spraying or Dipping
      105.7.24- Standpipe Systems
      105.7.25- Temporary Membrane Structures and Tents
      (2)   The cost of the permit shall include plan review and inspection,
issuance of the permit as well as contact during plan review. The fee for a
plan review and issuance of a permit for construction as described herein shall
be the greater of 1.75% of job cost or a $125 minimum. Proof of job cost
required. If requested, expedited plan review is 3.50% cost of the job. The
plans will be reviewed and a permit letter indicating approval or denial will
be issued. The expedited plan review is for one submission only. 
      (3)   To acquire a construction permit a person/developer must submit an
application on the form prescribed by the Fire Marshal and comply with the
requirements set forth on the application and packet in which it is encompassed
including but not limited to submission of all necessary plans, documents, etc.
A plan will not be reviewed nor a permit issued without completed application
and receipt of all requisite documentation and fees.
      (4)   As-built drawings. If it is determined that the job costs greatly
differentiate from the as-built cost to save monies on the fee for the permit
and plan review, the Fire Marshal shall have sole discretion and reserves the
right to undertake any and all appropriate and applicable methods including but
not limited to commencement of legal action to obtain the difference of the fee
submitted for a permit and estimated job costs and the as-built costs.
      (5)   Consultation fee. In additional to the fee for a permit set forth
herein, a fee of $75 per hours shall be charged for consultation either in
person or video conference with the Fire Marshal or in his/her absence Fire
Prevention Lieutenant for consultation prior to submission of plans for review
and subsequent to approval of plans and issuance of permit beyond one hour
total time.
      (6)   Penalties. Commencement of a systems construction project prior to
plan review or working without a permit or work performed in excess of a permit
shall result in the permit fee being doubled.
      (7)   Refunds. The City of Reading - Department of Fire and Rescue
Services will not issue refunds for fees/monies paid for plan review for a
system construction permit following payment of the fee and submission of a
plan regardless if the system is built.
      (8)   Revised plans. Should a person/contractor or developer elect not to
proceed with construction of a project following submission and review of plan
and/or receipt of approval/denial therefore but rather redesign the plan on
their own, they shall be required to recommence the process of obtaining a
permit and review including but not limited to payment of the fee in full.
   L.   Plans examination fee for architectural construction plan review.
      (1)   Review of architectural plans to ensure compliance with all
applicable laws, regulations, statutes and ordinances enforced or overseen by
the Department of Fire and Rescue Services - Office of Fire Marshal based on
the International Fire Code (2018 Edition) as adopted by the City of Reading.
      105.7.26- Architectural Construction Plan Review:
      The cost of a permit shall include plan review and inspection, issuance
of the permit as well as consultation during plan review. The fee for a plan
review and issuance of a permit for construction shall be based on the value of
the project as described herein:
 
Value of the Project              Fee
Up to and including $500,000      $300
$500,001 - $1,000,000             $600
For each $500,000 over $1,000,000 $250
 
      (2)   To acquire a construction permit a person/developer must submit an
application on the form prescribed by the Fire Marshal and comply with the
requirements set forth on the application and packet in which it is encompassed
including but not limited to submission of all necessary plans, documents, etc.
A plan will not be reviewed nor a permit issued without completed application
and receipt of all requisite documentation and fees.
      (3)   As-built drawings. If it is determined that the job costs greatly
differentiate from the as-built cost to save monies on the fee for the permit
and plan review, the Fire Marshal shall have sole discretion and reserves the
right to undertake any and all appropriate and applicable methods including but
not limited to commencement of legal action to obtain the difference of the fee
submitted for a permit and estimated job costs and the as-built costs.
      (4)   Consultation fee. In additional to the fee for a permit set forth
herein, a fee of $75 per hours shall be charged for consultation either in
person or video conference with the Fire Marshal or in his/her absence Fire
Prevention Lieutenant for consultation prior to submission of plans for review
and subsequent to approval of plans and issuance of permit beyond one hour
total time.
      (5)   Penalties. Commencement of a systems construction project prior to
plan review or working without a permit or work performed in excess of a permit
shall result in the permit fee being doubled.
      (6)   Revised plans. Should a person/contractor or developer elect not to
proceed with construction of a project following submission and review of plan
and/or receipt of approval/denial therefore but rather redesign the plan on
their own, they shall be required to recommence the process of obtaining a
permit and review including but not limited to payment of the fee in full.
   M.   Costs for emergency services (EMS) provided by the City of Reading, PA
- Department of Fire and Rescue Services. The purpose of this Part is to
establish uniform criteria for the billing of emergency medical services as per
the terms defined herein as provided by the City of Reading Fire Department EMS
Division.
 
             EMS - 911 Service Calls      Ordinance No. Code Citation
Type of Call Current Fee                                
BLS          $700 to $865                               
ALS 1        $850 to $1,180                             
ALS 2        $900 to $1,210                             
Mileage      $10 per mile to $16 per mile               
 
   As used in this section, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
   ADVANCED LIFE SUPPORT ASSESSMENT - Advanced life support (ALS) assessment is
an assessment performed by an ALS crew as part of an emergency response that
was necessary because the patient's reported condition at the time of dispatch
was such that only an ALS crew was qualified to perform the assessment. An ALS
assessment does not necessarily result in a determination that the patient
require an ALS level of service but does allow for an ALS level of payment.
   ADVANCED LIFE SUPPORT, LEVEL 1 EMERGENCY (ALS1-EMERGENCY) - The provision of
an ALS assessment by an ALS provider and/or the provision of one or more ALS
interventions, unless otherwise defined by the Centers for Medicare and
Medicaid Services, in which such definition shall be incorporated herein by
reference.
   ADVANCED LIFE SUPPORT, LEVEL 2 EMERGENCY (ALS2-EMERGENCY) - The
administration of at least three medications or in some cases allowable
multiple doses of the same medications and/or the provision of one or more of
the following ALS procedures: Manual defibrillation, cardioversion, cardiac
pacing, intubation of the airway, central venous line, chest decompression,
surgical airway, or intraosseous line; unless otherwise defined by the Centers
for Medicare and Medicaid Services, in which such definition shall be
incorporated herein by reference.
   ALS TREAT, NO TRANSPORT CHARGE - A charge to a patient (which may be paid by
the patient's insurance in some cases) who has received an ALS assessment or an
ALS level of treatment by an EMS provider at a scene, through actual, implied
or informed consent, but who has refused transport to a hospital for any
reason.
   ALS: ADVANCED LIFE SUPPORT - The provision of an advanced level of care and/
or resuscitation efforts utilizing advanced skills, medical equipment and/or
techniques by an individual who is trained to provide prehospital emergency
medical care at the paramedic, nurse or physician level; which includes, but is
not limited to: the administration of intravenous fluids, medications, manual
defibrillation, pacing, intubation of the airway and cardiac monitoring and/or
the skill of providing an advanced life support assessment.
   BLS: BASIC LIFE SUPPORT - The provision of a basic level of initial care
and/or resuscitation effort provided by an individual who is trained to provide
emergency medical care which includes but is not limited to: CPR, opening and
oxygenating the airway, attempting to control external bleeding, applying and
operating an AED, bandaging, splinting and other basic skills of the first
responder, emergency responders or EMT. (Paramedics, nurses and physicians may
also perform BLS skills even though they have a higher level of training.)
   DISPOSABLE SUPPLIES - Disposable supplies utilized in excess of the
customary amount and not exchanged/replenished from hospital stock or billed by
the receiving hospital.
   EMS PROVIDER - A person or persons who have been trained to any recognized
level of competency as defined by the Pennsylvania Department of Health,
including: ambulance attendant, first responder, emergency responder, emergency
medical technician, advanced emergency medical technician, paramedic, critical
care paramedic, pre-hospital registered nurse (PHRN), nurse, physician
extenders or physician.
   EMS: EMERGENCY MEDICAL SERVICES - The services utilized in responding to
those persons presumed to be in need of immediate medical care within the
jurisdiction of, and areas adjacent to the City of Reading, provided by the
City of Reading Fire Department EMS Division.
   EXTERNAL AUTOMATED DEFIBRILLATION - The application of an automated external
defibrillator (AED) used to attempt to convert lethal abnormal electrical heart
rhythms.
   MILEAGE - Distance traveled by an ambulance from the point where the patient
is picked up ending at the destination, facility, usually a hospital.
   OXYGEN ADMINISTRATION - The administration of oxygen for the treatment of
conditions resulting from oxygen deficiency.
   PATIENT - Person receiving emergency medical services.
   REASONABLE COLLECTION EFFORTS - The issuance of a bill to the patient or to
the party responsible for the patient's personal financial obligations, and
subsequent billings, collection letters and telephone calls or personal
contacts which constitute a genuine, rather than token, collection effort.
   RESCUE - Active utilization of fire department or EMS rescue tools and
equipment to facilitate extrication of a patient from an entrapped or access-
limited area.
   SPECIAL EVENT STANDBY - The utilization of an ambulance or squad vehicle and
one or more EMS providers to standby at a planned and organized activity, event
or contest, where a large group or gathering is expected, when the likely
potential for the provision of emergency medical services may exist.
   THIRD-PARTY PAYER - An insurance carrier or other coverage provider having a
responsibility or other obligation to pay for medical services rendered to a
patient as a result of that patient's accident, injury or illness.
   1.   The City recognizes the need to bill for these services to aid in the
provision of emergency medical services.
   2.   No person requiring emergency medical services shall be denied service
due to a lack of insurance or ability to pay. The City shall not balance bill
when prohibited by law.
   3.   The City will allow reasonable payment arrangements in the event a
patient cannot pay a bill all at once.
   4.   A patient who received payment for City EMS bills from a third-party
payor is obligated to remit such monies to the City of Reading Fire Department
EMS Division (provided that the patient has not paid the bills directly). The
City shall hold any patient who does not do so liable for any costs or fees
related to the City's expenses of recovering the patient's EMS service fee.
      Procedure for billing emergency medical services.
   1.   After a patient encounter, the responding EMS personnel will prepare a
detailed patient record or chart describing the encounter through a
computerized records management system that adheres to state reporting
standards. The federal Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act
(HIPAA) hall govern the use, distribution and security of all patient records.
This chart of information will be transmitted to the bureau or agency
responsible for billing with the following information if available:
      (1)   Name and address of patient and guarantor.
      (2)   Social security number of the patient and guarantor.
      (3)   Name and address of patient and/or guarantor's insurance carrier
(if applicable).
      (4)   Date, time and EMS run number.
      (5)   Point of origin and destination.
      (6)   Suspected illness or injury.
      (7)   Signature of the patient (when possible).
      (8)   Description of service provided.
§ 212-114. Food Code.
[Amended 1-11-2021 by Ord. No. 2-2021]
Description Fee Ordinance No. Code Citation
Description                           Fee           Ordinance No. Code Citation
Small restaurant                      $220 yearly   124-2012      §
                                                                  251-0901.03
Large restaurant                      $400 yearly   124-2012      §
                                                                  251-0901.03
Ancillary restaurant - includes       $100 yearly   124-2012      §
nonprofits and concessions                                        251-0901.03
Itinerant restaurant                  $220 yearly   72-2011        
Small grocery (less than 1,500 gross  $220 yearly   124-2012      §
square feet)                                                      251-0901.03
Large grocery (1,500 to 2,500 gross   $500 yearly   124-2012      §
square feet)                                                      251-0901.03
Supermarket (greater than 2,500 gross $1,000 yearly 124-2012      §
square feet)                                                      251-0901.03
Bakery                                $500 yearly   2-2013         
Mobile vending                        $250 yearly   124-2012      §
                                                                  251-0901.03
Catering/commissary license           $500 yearly   124-2012      §
                                                                  251-0901.03
Food vendor for special event         $10 per event 5-2015        §
                                                                  251-0901.03
                                      1st    $75
Reinspection fee                      2nd    $150124-2012       
                                      3rd   $150
Noncorrected item at first            $10           124-2012       
reinspection
Noncorrected item after first         $25           124-2012       
reinspection
Per establishment processing fee      $50           124-2012       
 
§ 212-115. Food vending machines and businesses.
[Amended 1-11-2021 by Ord. No. 2-2021]
 
Description              Fee                        Ordinance No. Code Citation
Enclosed vending machine                                          §
or vending machine bank  $50                        94-2010       583-107
(annual permit)
Vending machine on the                                            §
public right-of-way      $100                       94-2010       583-107
(annual permit)
Inspection fee           Per machine: $100          94-2010       §
                                                                  583-112
                         Vending machine bank: $50
                         plus $10 for each
                        additional machine located               
                         within the vending machine
                         bank
 
§ 212-116. Housing.5
[Amended 12-18-2017 by Ord. No. 114-2017]
Description Fee Ordinance No. Code Citation
Description                                                                  Fee       Ordinance Code
                                                                                       No.       Citation
Annual housing registration fee                                              $100 per  79-2015   §
                                                                             parcel              308-103
   Reduced fee on or before February 27th                                 $90 per   114-2017  §
                                                                             parcel              308-104
   Flat fee due on or before April 1st                                    $100 per  114-2017  §
                                                                             parcel              308-104
                                                                                       105-2012;
   Surcharge for failure to submit annual housing renewal form and annual $150 per  34-2013;  §
housing fee by April 1                                                       parcel    79-2015;  308-104
                                                                                       114-2017
Administrative fee for failure to apply for a housing registration                              
   Noncompliance surcharge for failure to apply for necessary housing     $100 per  34-2013;  §
registration                                                                 unit      79-2015;  308-112
                                                                                       114-2017
                                                                             $250 per
                                                                             unit per  34-2013;  §
   Continuing noncompliance surcharge until housing registration is complemonth or  79-2015;  308-112
                                                                             portion   114-2017
                                                                             thereof
                                                                             $100                §
   Deposit for appeal                                                     (security 79-2015   308-119
                                                                             deposit)
Abandoned real property registration                                         $200      48-2013   §
                                                                                                 308-303
Disruptive conduct appeal                                                    $50       25-2014;  §
                                                                                       79-2015   308-132
 
5.   Editor's Note: The following fees, previously included in this section,
were repealed as follows: The fee for a handicapped permit, most recently
amended by Ord. No. 31-2009, was repealed 12-16-2013 by Ord. No. 78-2013. The
fee for failure of owner or authorized agent to appear for scheduled
inspections, most recently amended by Ord. No. 92-2012, and the fee for annual
vacant property registration, most recently amended by Ord. No. 72-2012, were
repealed 11-23-2015 by Ord. No. 79-2015.
§ 212-117. Lead-based paint.
 
Description                          Fee  Ordinance No. Code Citation
Lead-based paint inspections                           
Initial inspection                   $100 76-2009       §
                                                        328-104
First inspection extension           $50  76-2009       §
                                                        328-104
Each subsequent inspection extension $50  76-2009       §
                                                        328-104
Administrative fee for no show       $50  76-2009       §
                                                        328-104
 
§ 212-118. Massage therapists.
 
Description                  Fee  Ordinance No.    Code Citation
Massage therapist permit fee $125 11-2005; 38-2011 §
                                                   364-104
 
§ 212-119. Miscellaneous.
 
Description                Fee                      Ordinance No. Code Citation
City of Reading Code       $600                     78-2013       N/A
(purchase of Code)
Tax, water and sewer       $35                      78-2013       N/A
certifications
Dishonored check fee       $35                      78-2013       N/A
Payment in coin surcharge  20%                      78-2013       N/A
Law Department: Lien
statement request received
by the City's Law
Department from            $25                      41-2009       N/A
individuals and/or
entities, except requests
from City employees in the
course of their duties
                           5% of contract award
Bid protest fee            amount, or, if the       100-2014       
                           contract value cannot be
                           determined, $1,250
 
§ 212-120. Parks and recreation.6
[Amended 8-26-2024 by Ord. No. 57-2024]
     CITY                        RRC City For-profit Deposit Notes
Item RESIDENT NON-PROFIT SCHOOLS RSD Non-resident
             CITY                           RRC City For-
                                                profit       Deposit    Notes
Item         RESIDENT  NON-PROFIT SCHOOLS   RSD Non-resident
Pendora                                                      equal to
Fieldhouse   $275.00   $275.00    $275.00   n/c $325.00      rental fee  
(6 hours)
additional   25.00 P/H 25.00 P/H  25.00 P/H n/c $25.00 per   equal to    
hours over 6                                    hour         rental fee
Schlegel                                                     equal to
Fieldhouse   $225.00   $225.00    $225.00   n/c $275.00      rental fee  
(6 hours)
additional   25.00 P/H 25.00 P/H  25.00 P/H n/c $25.00 per   equal to    
hours over 6                                    hour         rental fee
Keffer Park                                                  equal to
Fieldhouse   $250.00   $250.00    $250.00   n/c $300.00      rental fee  
(6 hours)
additional   25.00 P/H 25.00 P/H  25.00 P/H n/c $25.00 per   equal to    
hours over 6                                    hour         rental fee
                                                                        during
3rd and      35.00P/H  35.00P/H   20.00P/H  n/c 75.00P/H     equal to   normal
Spruce Gym                                                   rental fee working
                                                                        hours
(minimum 2                                                              outside
hour rentals 50.00P/H  50.00P/H   50.00P/H  n/c 90.00P/H     equal to   normal
only)                                                        rental fee working
                                                                        hours
Tournaments                                                  equal to
(3rd and     50.00P/H  50.00P/H   50.00P/H  n/c 90.00P/H     rental fee  
Spruce)
(minimum 6
hours up to                              n/c                        
12 per day)
 
     CITY                        RRC City For-profit Deposit Notes
Item RESIDENT NON-PROFIT SCHOOLS RSD Non-resident
            CITY                         RRC City For-
                                             profit       Deposit    Notes
Item        RESIDENT NON-PROFIT SCHOOLS  RSD Non-resident
                                                                     during
11th and    25.00P/H 25.00P/H   15.00P/H n/c 65.00P/H     equal to   normal
Pike Gym                                                  rental fee working
                                                                     hours
(minimum 2                                                           outside
hour        40.00P/H 40.00P/H   40.00P/H n/c 80.00P/H     equal to   normal
rentals                                                   rental fee working
only)                                                                hours
                                                               
Tournaments 40.00P/H 40.00P/H   40.00P/H n/c 80.00P/H     equal to    
(Pike)                                                    rental fee
(minimum 6
hours up to                                                     
12 per day)
Large                                                     equal to   *includes
Pavilions   200.00*  200.00*    200.00*  n/c 250.00*      rental fee $50.00
                                                                     electric
Small       $75.00   $75.00     $75.00   n/c $125.00      equal to    
pavilions                                                 rental fee
3rd and                                                   equal to   $50.00 for
Spruce      $75.00   $75.00     $75.00   n/c $125.00      rental fee electric
Pavilion                                                             (optional)
 
 
     CITY                        RRC City For-profit Deposit Notes
Item RESIDENT NON-PROFIT SCHOOLS RSD Non-resident
            CITY                         RRC City For-
                                             profit    Deposit    Notes
Item        RESIDENT NON-PROFIT SCHOOLS  RSD Non-
                                             resident
                                                                  **Approved
                                                                  community
                                                                  service
Ballfield                                                         project
Rentals                                                           approved by
excluding                                                         Seth
Egelman's   10       10**       10       n/c 20                  Sechristin
Baer, and                                                         lieu of fees
Pendora                                                           at a rate of
                                                                  $7.25 per
                                                                  hour or as
                                                                  designated
                                                                  by the RRC
(minimum 2  25*      25*        25*         35                  *includes
hours)                                                            electric
Egelman's,
Baer, and                                    $25P/H +             no community
Pendora     $15P/H + $25 attendant fee   n/c $25P      equal to   service
Ballfield                                    attendant rental fee option
before 8:00                                  fee
p.m.
Egelman's,
Baer, and                                    $40P/H +             no community
Pendora     $30P/H + $25 attendant fee   n/c $25P      equal to   service
Ballfield                                    attendant rental fee option
before 8:00                                  fee
p.m.
Volleyball  10P/H    10P/H      10P/H    n/c 20P/H                
Court
Tennis      5P/H     5P/H       5P/H     n/c 10P/H                
Courts
Basketball  10.00P/H 10.00P/H   10.00P/H n/c 20.00P/H  equal to    
courts                                                 rental fee
                                                                  exception
with lights 25       25         25       n/c 35.00P/H            City Park
                                                                  (priced per
                                                                  event)
 
6.   Editor's Note: The following fees, previously included in this section,
were repealed as follows: The fees for chairs and tables, bingo cage, PA system
and popcorn machine, all most recently amended by Ord. No. 20-2008, and pool
rental and lifeguard, were repealed 12-16-2013 by Ord. No. 78-2013.
§ 212-121. Peddling and soliciting.
 
Description                          Fee  Ordinance No. Code Citation
Transient retail merchants (monthly) $200 78-2013       §
                                                        410-108
 
§ 212-122. Poles.
 
Description     Fee Ordinance No. Code Citation
Pole permit fee $80 31-2009       §
                                  424-106
 
§ 212-123. Police Department miscellaneous fees.
Description Fee Ordinance No. Code Citation
Description               Fee                       Ordinance No. Code Citation
Use of pistol range       $25 per person            38-2011       N/A
Certified copy of police  $15                       43-2015       N/A
report
Extensive case file       Sum of actual costs       23-2015       N/A
duplication
Phone call/dispatch       Sum of actual costs       43-2015       N/A
recording
Local criminal background $20                       23-2015       N/A
report
Bomb squad/K-9 squad      Sum of costs and manpower 38-2011       N/A
                          used
Standby charges           $88 per hour per officer  38-2011       N/A
 
§ 212-124. Portable home storage units.
[Amended 1-11-2021 by Ord. No. 2-2021]
 
Description                                  Fee Ordinance No. Code Citation
Permit for placement on residential property $50 19-2008       §
for five days                                                  502-103
Permit extension for two days                $10 19-2008       §
                                                               502-104
 
§ 212-125. Post fire fees.
 
Description                          Fee           Ordinance No. Code Citation
Post-fire inspection fee             $70           29-2013       N/A
Post-fire reinspection               $70           29-2013       N/A
Fee to arrange for securing building $25           29-2013       N/A
Fee to issue citation                $25           29-2013       N/A
Structure fire response fee          $250          29-2013       N/A
Unstable structure monitoring fee    $125 per hour 29-2013       N/A
 
§ 212-126. Property sales: certificate of transfer; health and safety
inspections.
[Amended 3-14-2016 by Ord. No. 11-2016; and 1-11-2021 by Ord. No. 2-2021]
Description Fee Ordinance No. Code Citation
Description                                  Fee    Ordinance No. Code Citation
Health and safety inspection fee             $150   63-2012       §
                                                                  431-205
Health and safety vacant lot inspection fee  $75    11-2016       §
                                                                  431-205
Health and safety extension inspection fee   $75    63-2012       §
                                                                  431-205
Administrative fee for failure to submit     $150   63-2012       §
certificate of transfer application                               431-215
Administrative fee for failure to appear for                     
an inspection:
First offense                                $150   63-2012       §
                                                                  431-204
Second offense                               $250   63-2012       §
                                                                  431-204
Third offense                                $400   63-2012       §
                                                                  431-204
Subsequent offenses                          $1,000 63-2012       §
                                                                  431-204
 
§ 212-127. Public records.
[Amended 5-23-2011 by Ord. No. 25-2011]
Description Fee Ordinance No. Code Citation
Description                          Fee            Ordinance No. Code Citation
Photocopy                            $0.25 per page 25-2011       §
                                                                  442-108
Certification of a public record     $5 per record  25-2011       §
                                                                  442-108
Copying records onto electronic      Actual cost    25-2011       §
media                                                             442-108
Specialized documents                Actual cost    25-2011       §
                                                                  442-108
Postage                              Actual cost    25-2011       §
                                                                  442-108
Facsimile, microfiche or other media Actual cost    25-2011       §
                                                                  442-108
Printed original or photocopied plan $3 each        15-2008       N/A
or map not more than 24" x 36"
Printed original or photocopied plan $5 each        15-2008       N/A
or map 24" x 36" or larger
Copying SALDO records off-site       $20                         N/A
If these costs are expected to be                                 §
greater than $100, payment of 50% of               25-2011       442-108
expected cost is due in advance
 
§ 212-128. Rental housing inspection.
[Added 12-10-2012 by Ord. No. 123-2012; amended 7-10-2017 by Ord. No. 62-2017;
and 1-11-2021 by Ord. No. 2-2021]
   A.   Fees.
Description Fee Ordinance No. Code Citation
Description                       Fee              Ordinance No. Code Citation
Boarding house                                                  
   Initial inspection          $200             123-2012; 80- N/A
                                                   2015
   Reinspection (if it passes) $150             123-2012; 80- N/A
                                                   2015
                                  $350 if it
   First noncompliance         fails, + $25 per 123-2012      N/A
                                  open violation
                                  If it fails,
   Second noncompliance penalty$100 + $25 per   123-2012      N/A
                                  open violation
                                  If it fails,
   Third noncompliance penalty $100 + $25 per   123-2012      N/A
                                  open violation
                                  If it fails,
   Subsequent penalties        $1,000 + $25 per 123-2012      N/A
                                  open violation
   Delinquency fee             15% of billing   123-2012      N/A
Single-family one-unit property                                 
   Initial inspection          $150             123-2012;     80-2015
   Reinspection (if it passes) $125             123-2012; 80- N/A
                                                   2015
                                  $350 if it
   First noncompliance penalty fails, + $25 per 123-2012      N/A
                                  open violation
                                  If it fails,
   Second noncompliance penalty$100 +$25 per    123-2012      N/A
                                  open violation
                                  If it fails,
   Third noncompliance penalty $100 + $25 per   123-2012      N/A
                                  open violation
   Subsequent penalties (if it If it fails,
fails)                            $1,000 +$25 per  123-2012      N/A
                                  open violation
   Delinquency fee             15% of billing   123-2012      N/A
Two-unit property                                               
   Initial inspection          $200             123-2012;     N/A
                                                   80-2015
   Reinspection                $175             123-2012;     N/A
                                                   80-2015
                                  $350, if it
   First noncompliance penalty fails, +$25 per  123-2012      N/A
                                  open violation
                                  If it fails,
   Second noncompliance penalty$100 + $25 per   123-2012      N/A
                                  open violation
                                  If it fails,
   Third noncompliance penalty $100 + $25 per   123-2012      N/A
                                  open violation
                                  If it fails,
   Subsequent penalties        $1,000 + $25 per 123-2012      N/A
                                  open violation
   Delinquency fee             15% of billing   123-2012      N/A
Three- and four-unit properties                                N/A
   Initial inspection          $225             123-2012;     N/A
                                                   80-2015
   Reinspection                $200             123-2012;     N/A
                                                   80-2015
                                  $350, if it
   First noncompliance penalty fails, + $25 per 123-2012      N/A
                                  open violation
                                  If it fails,
   Second noncompliance penalty$100 + $25 per   123-2012      N/A
                                  open violation
                                  If it fails,
   Third noncompliance penalty $100 + $25 per   123-2012      N/A
                                  open violation
                                  If it fails,
   Subsequent penalties        $1,000 + $25 per 123-2012      N/A
                                  open violation
   Delinquency fee             15% of billing   123-2012      N/A
Five- and six-unit properties                                   
   Initial inspection          $295             123-2012;     N/A
                                                   80-2015
   Reinspection                $250             123-2012;     N/A
                                                   80-2015
                                  $350 if it
   First noncompliance penalty fails, + $25 per 123-2012      N/A
                                  open violation
                                  If it fails,
   Second noncompliance penalty$100 + $25 per   123-2012      N/A
                                  open violation
                                  If it fails,
   Third noncompliance penalty $100 + $25 per   123-2012      N/A
                                  open violation
                                  If it fails,
   Subsequent penalties        $1,000 + $25 per 123-2012      N/A
                                  open violation
   Delinquency fee             15% of billing   123-2012      N/A
Seven- to fifteen-unit properties                              N/A
   Initial inspection          $395             123-2012;     N/A
                                                   80-2015
   Reinspection                $300             123-2012;     N/A
                                                   80-2015
                                  $350 If it
   First noncompliance penalty fails, + $25 per 123-2012      N/A
                                  open violation
                                  If it fails,
   Second noncompliance penalty$100 + $25 per   123-2012      N/A
                                  open violation
                                  If it fails,
   Third noncompliance penalty $100 + $25 per   123-2012      N/A
                                  open violation
                                  If it fails,
   Subsequent penalties        $1,000 + $25 per 123-2012      N/A
                                  open violation
   Delinquency fee             15% of billing   123-2012      N/A
Properties with 16 or more units                                
   Initial inspection          $450 + $10 per   123-2012;     N/A
                                  unit             80-2015
   Reinspection                $400 + $10 per   123-2012;     N/A
                                  unit             80-2015
                                  $350 if it
   First noncompliance penalty fails, + $25 per 123-2012      N/A
                                  open violation
                                  If it fails,
   Second noncompliance penalty$100 + $25 per   123-2012      N/A
                                  open violation
                                  If it fails,
   Third noncompliance penalty $100 + $25 per   123-2012      N/A
                                  open violation
                                  If it fails,
   Subsequent penalties        $1,000 + $25 per 123-2012      N/A
                                  open violation
   Delinquency fee             15% of billing   123-2012      N/A
Appeal fee                        $100             62-2017       180-1301
 
   B.   Failure to appear or gain access.
Description Fee Ordinance No. Code Citation
Description            Fee                     Ordinance No.     Code Citation
Administrative fee for
failure to appear or
gain entry for
scheduled inspection:
1 to 15 units (base                            123-2012          N/A
penalty)
First occurrence       $150                    123-2012; 80-2015 N/A
Second occurrence      $250                    123-2012; 80-2015 N/A
Third and subsequent
occurrence -
combination of failure $400                    123-2012; 80-2015 N/A
to appear, gain entry
and/ or cancellation
16 to 49 units         $200 + base penalty for 123-2012; 80-2015 N/A
                       occurrence
50+ units              $300 + base penalty for 123-2012; 80-2015 N/A
                       occurrence
 
§ 212-129. Roadside and utility pole signs.
 
Description                 Fee Ordinance No. Code Citation
Permit for a temporary sign $50 8-2010        §
                                              485-206
 
§ 212-130. Sales: mobile vendors.
 
Description                                   Fee  Ordinance No. Code Citation
Application for mobile vendor's license       $50  42-2010       §
                                                                 453-306
Filing an appeal to the Vending License Board $275 42-2010       §
of Appeals                                                       453-310
 
§ 212-131. Sales: sidewalk sales.
 
Description                 Fee Ordinance No. Code Citation
Annual sidewalk sale permit $0  46-2015       §
                                              453-107
 
§ 212-132. Sales: sidewalk vendors.
 
Description                                   Fee  Ordinance No. Code Citation
Application for sidewalk vendor's license     $50  63-2007       §
                                                                 453-206
Filing an appeal to the Vending License Board $275 63-2007       §
of Appeals                                                       453-210
 
§ 212-133. Sewers and sewage disposal.
 
Description                  Fee Ordinance No. Code Citation
Monthly meter service charge    78-2013       §
                                               467-103
 
                 Monthly    2014 Monthly                     Monthly Meter
Water Meter Size Volumetric Meter Service 2015 Monthly Meter Service Charge
                 Allowance  Charge        Service Charge     After 2015
                 (Gallons)
                 Monthly    2014 Monthly                     Monthly Meter
Water Meter Size Volumetric Meter Service 2015 Monthly Meter Service Charge
                 Allowance  Charge        Service Charge     After 2015
                 (Gallons)
No meter         N/A        150% of RAWA  150% of RAWA rates 150% of RAWA rates
                            rates
5/8-inch         2,000      $27.82        $28.93             4% annual increase
3/4-inch         3,000      $37.99        $39.51             4% annual increase
1-inch           5,000      $56.09        $58.33             4% annual increase
1.25-inch        6,660      $71.11        $73.96             4% annual increase
1.5-inch         10,000     $101.34       $105.39            4% annual increase
2-inch           16,000     $155.64       $161.86            4% annual increase
3-inch           30,000     $282.34       $293.63            4% annual increase
4-inch           50,000     $463.34       $481.87            4% annual increase
6-inch           100,000    $915.84       $952.47            4% annual increase
8-inch           160,000    $1,458.84     $1,517.19          4% annual increase
10-inch          230,000    $2,092.34     $2,176.03          4% annual increase
 
 
Description               Fee Ordinance No. Code Citation
Volumetric service charge    78-2013       §
                                            467-103
 
 
                  2014 Monthly       2015 Monthly
                  Volumetric Service Volumetric Service
Volumetric Rates  Charge             Charge                Monthly Volumetric
Based on Customer (Per 1,000 Gallons (Per 1,000 Gallons in Service Charge After
Meter Size        in Excess of       Excess of Volumetric  2015
                  Volumetric         Allowance)
                  Allowance)
5/8-inch uniform  $8.49              $8.83                 4% annual increase
rate
For meters larger
than 5/8-inch
First 750,000     $9.05              $9.41                 4% annual increase
gallons
Next 3,000,000    $7.24              $7.53                 4% annual increase
gallons
Over 3,750,000    $6.83              $7.10                 4% annual increase
gallons
 
Description Fee Ordinance No. Code Citation
Description                                                                 Fee        Ordinance Code
                                                                                       No.       Citation
Initial industrial waste discharge permit application for categorical       $500       17-1998   §
industries, each site                                                                            467-215C
Reapplication or revision to and industrial waste discharge permit for      $250       17-1998   §
categorical industries, each site                                                                467-215C
Initial industry's waste discharge permit application for noncategorical    $100       17-1998   §
industries, each site                                                                            467-215C
Reapplication or revisions to an industrial waste discharge permit for      $50        17-1998   §
noncategorical industries                                                                        467-215C
Scheduled or industry requested sampling and analysis and/or inspection — $300       17-1998   §
minimum per site                                                                                 467-215C
                                                                            $300; for
                                                                            each
Sampling of multiple discharge points                                       additional 17-1998   §
                                                                            sampling             467-215C
                                                                            over one
                                                                            $250
                                                                            $300 per
                                                                            sample
                                                                            plus out-
                                                                            of- pocket
                                                                            expenses
                                                                            for                  §
Unscheduled sampling and analysis                                           testing    17-1998   467-215C
                                                                            and
                                                                            related
                                                                            costs, if
                                                                            there is a
                                                                            permit
                                                                            exceedance
 
§ 212-134. Sexually oriented businesses.
 
Description                             Fee  Ordinance No. Code Citation
Operator's license fee (new or renewal) $500 41-2004       §
                                                           473-106
Employee license fee (new or renewal)   $50  41-2004       §
                                                           473-106
 
§ 212-135. Sidewalk cafes.
 
Description                        Fee Ordinance No. Code Citation
Sidewalk cafe permit (annual)      $0  46-2015       §
                                                     479-108
Sidewalk mini-cafe permit (annual) $0  46-2015       §
                                                     479-108
 
§ 212-136. Curbside waste collection.
[Amended 12-16-2013 by Ord. No. 78-2013; 11-23-2015 by Ord. No. 72-2015; 2-22-
2016 by Ord. No. 6-2016; 2-27-2017 by Ord. No. 20-2017; 7-10-2017 by Ord. No.
62-2017; 12-18-2017 by Ord. No. 114-2017; 6-25-2018 by Ord. No. 17A-2018; 11-
23-2020 by Ord. No. 77-2020; 12-27-2021 by Ord. 99-2021; 10-24-2022 by Ord. No.
120-2022; 10-23-2023 by Ord. No. 97-2023; 10-28-2024 by Ord. No. 68-2024]
 
Description                                Fee     Ordinance No. Code Citation
Municipal waste collection fee, all                49-2020;      §
services (trash, recycling, clean city*)   $360.66 97-2023;      496-203
                                                   68-2024
                                                   49-2020;      §
Municipal waste collection fee, all        $180.33 97-2023;      496-203
services with senior discount                      68-2024       §
                                                                 496-207A
                                                   49-2020;      §
Municipal waste collection fee, recycling* $63.65  97-2023;      496-208
                                                   68-2024
Purchase of additional recycling cart, 65  $65.50  49-2020;      §
gallon or similar                                  97-2023       496-207A
Purchase of additional recycling cart, 35  $51.52  49-2020;      §
gallon or similar                                  97-2023       496-207A
Appeal fee                                 $100    62-2017;      §
                                                   97-2023       496-207
 
§ 212-137. (Reserved) 7
§ 212-138. Solid waste: dumpsters.
 
Description           Fee                      Ordinance No.    Code Citation
Temporary dumpster    $5 per day               23-2007          §
permit                                                          496-104
                     Not to exceed $75 for 10                  
                      days
                     Minimum of $25                            
Permanent dumpster    $150 per year            23-2007          §
permit                                                          496-104
Permanent cart permit $75 per year             23-2007; 27-2025 §
                                                                496-104
Trash receptacle      $75 per year             27-2025          §
                                                                496-104
 
7.   Editor's Note: Former §
212-137, Solid waste and recycling fees 2001 through 2011, adopted 8-8-2011 by
Ord. No. 40-2011, was repealed 3-10-2014 by Ord. No. 21-2014.
§ 212-139. Stormwater management.
 
Description               Fee                      Ordinance No. Code Citation
Filing fee                $100                     49-2008       §
                                                                 505-161
Review of documentation   $250                     49-2008       §
in support of exemption                                          505-161
Review of stormwater                                             §
management report and     $1,000                   49-2008       505-161
drainage plan
                          Fee will be made part of
                          the improvements                       §
Construction observations agreements established   49-2008       505-161
                          for the construction
                          project
 
§ 212-140. Streets and sidewalks.
Description Fee Ordinance No. Code Citation
Description             Fee                      Ordinance No.    Code Citation
Curb permit (feet)                              31-2009          §
                                                                  508-301B
0 to 24                 $250                                      
25 to 49                $300                                      
50 to 99                $350                                      
                        $350 for every 100 feet
100 to no limit         plus $3.50 per foot for                   
                        every foot over 100 feet
Street restoration                              31-2009          §
                                                                  508-302A
1 foot wide             $35/foot                                  
2 feet wide             $70/foot                                  
Building line survey,                           31-2009          §
first side (feet)                                                 508-304B
0 to 49                 $200                                      
50 to 99                $250                                      
100 to no limit         $250 plus $2.50 for                       
                        every foot over 100 feet
Second, third or fourth Repeat rates                              
sides
Residential driveway    $400                     31-2009          §
permit fee                                                        508-305B(1)
Commercial driveway     $450                     31-2009          §
permit fee                                                        508-305B(1)
Driveways spanning
property line for joint $250 for each user                        
use of abutting
properties
Reconstruction of       $50                      31-2009          §
driveway                                                          508-305B(2)
Sidewalk cut permit     $100 per cut             78-2013           
Vault, areaway,                                                   §
basement stairs or      $200                                     508-306A(1)
structure (each)
Sidewalk vault fee      $80                      31-2009          §
                                                                  508-306A(1)
Sidewalk repair         $80                      31-2009          §
construction permit                                               508-307A(1)
Time limit extension    $10                      35-2008          §
                                                                  508-309A
Annual license for      $5 per space with $25    35-2008          §
commercial parking lot  minimum                                   508-403
Street cut permit                               78-2013           
Street cut permit       $10/permit                                
Street cut inspection   $100/street cut                           
fee
Pavement restoration                            44-2015          §
fee                                                               508-702B
0 to 5 square yards     $150/square yard                          
Over 5 square yards,
per additional square   $120/square yard                          
yard
Premature degradation                           44-2015          §
fee                                                               508-702C
For cuts on streets     Add 100% of the pavement
paved within 5 years of restoration fee                           
the application date
For cuts on streets     Add 80% of the pavement
paved 6 to 10 years of  restoration fee                           
the application date
Bore hole fee           $5 per bore hole         35-2008; 44-2015 §
                                                                  508-709A
Ahead of paving permit  $10 per block and/or     35-2008; 44-2015 §
                        street intersection                       508-709C
Time extension fee      $10 per month or         35-2008; 44-2015 §
                        fraction thereof                          508-709D
Steel plate placement                                             §
fees (winter, November                          44-2015          508-707
through March)
First 5 days            $0 each                                   
Days 6 to 10            $300 each                                 
Subsequent              $90 per day (each)                        
Steel placement fees                                              §
(summer, April through                          44-2015          508-707
October)
First 5 days            $0 each                                   
Days 6 to 10            $150 each                                 
Subsequent              $45 per day (each)                        
 
§ 212-141. Subdivision and land development.
[Amended 12-28-2020 by Ord. No. 96-2020]
Description Fee
Description                          Fee
   Subdivision/Land Development: Residential
SKETCH PLAN                          $1,000
PRELIMINARY PLAN                     $2,000 plus $100 per 10,000 sq. ft.
                                     impervious coverage
New construction                     $30 per unit
Redevelopment/reuse                  $40 per unit
FINAL PLAN                           $1,500 plus $100 per 10,000 sq. ft.
                                     impervious coverage
New construction                     $30 per unit
Redevelopment/reuse                  $40 per unit
   Subdivision/Land Development: Nonresidential/Mixed Use
SKETCH PLAN                          $1,500
PRELIMINARY PLAN                     $4,000 plus $100 per 10,000 sq. ft.
                                     impervious coverage
New construction                     $30 per unit
Redevelopment/reuse                  $40 per unit
FINAL PLAN                           $3,000 plus $100 per 10,000 sq. ft.
                                     impervious coverage
New construction                     $30 per unit
Redevelopment/reuse                  $40 per unit
   Other Fees
Plans exempted by standard procedure $1,000
   On-Lot Sewage Suitability
Reading and recording 2 deep probes  $300
Additional soil proves               $50
Observation to 6 hold percolation    $500
Permit processing                    $150
Reapplication fee                    $50
On-lot sewage planning module        $50 per lot
Sanitary sewer planning module       $750
   Minimum Escrow*
Residential                          $4,000
Nonresidential/Mixed Use             $6,000
* A minimum deposit as shown above will be required to cover the filing fees
stated above, in addition to MPC costs including, but not limited to planning,
legal and engineering reviews. As escrow deposit for expenses incurred is
expended, applicant shall make further deposits upon notice from the City.
Upon plan completion, as determined by the City, uncommitted escrow funds on
deposit shall be returned after the City has been reimbursed from the account
for costs of collecting, expending, and accounting for these funds. The
reimbursement to the City shall be in the amount of 15% of the total escrow
funds expended.
 
§ 212-141.1. Tattoo establishments.
[Added 9-23-2013 by Ord. No. 42-2013]
 
Description              Fee                       Ordinance No. Code Citation
Tattoo establishment and $100                      42-2013       §
inspection fee                                                   540-106
                        Note: The $50 application               
                         fee also applies
 
§ 212-142. Taxation.
 
Description                    Fee Ordinance No. Code Citation
Amusement permit                                
Temporary or annual permit fee $25 37-1998       §
                                                 549-703C
Renewal fee                    $25 37-1998       §
                                                 549-703F
Renewal fee for not-for-profit $1  37-1998       §
                                                 549-703F
Duplicate permit fee           $10 37-1998       §
                                                 549-703F
 
§ 212-143. Trees.
 
Description       Fee Ordinance No. Code Citation
Shade tree permit $0  42-1973       §
                                    555-104C(7)
 
§ 212-144. Vehicles and traffic.
Description Fee Ordinance No. Code Citation
Description                Fee                Ordinance No.       Code Citation
Reclamation cost for       $25                14-2001             §
impounded vehicle                                                 576-806
Booting fee                $100               Res. No. 18-A-2006; §
                                              3-2021              576-816
Residential parking permit                                      §
                                                                  576-417J
First year (initial)       $30 per vehicle                        
Annual renewal             $25 per vehicle                        
                           $25/day nonmetered
                           $25/ day metered
                           $10/day funeral
                           $10/day owner in
                           front of his/her
                           non- residence
                           property
                           $1/day resident in 14-2001; 19A-2018;  §
Daily parking permit       front of his/her   3-2021; 36-2023     576-419C
                           personal residence
                           $1/day church
                           $1/day city
                           agencies and
                           authorities
                           $2/sign lamination
                           (optional added
                           cost per sign)
Commercial contractor      $30 monthly                           §
parking permit                                                    576-706A
Pushcart permit (annual)   $30                14-2001             §
                                                                  576-1002
Special event with                            30-2011; 38-2011;   §
applicant's proof of       $50                32-2022             576-1205A(1)
nonprofit status
Special event without                         30-2011; 38-2011;   §
applicant's proof of       $100               32-2022             576-1205A(2)
nonprofit status
Security deposit           $500               32-2022              
                           (a) Special event
                           applications
                           submitted between
                           60 and 89 days
                           prior to the event
                           date will be
                           subject to a $25
Late fee, per § 576-1205A late fee.          32-2022              
(1)                        (b) Special event
                           applications
                           submitted between
                           30 and 59 days
                           prior to the event
                           date will be
                           subject to a $50
                           late fee.
Fee for block parties      $75                30-2011; 32-2022    §
requiring City barricades                                         576-1205B
Administrative fee for     $10                14-2001             §
retrieval of towed vehicle                                        576-826E
Parking meter fee          $2 per hour        42-2015; 3-2021     §
                                                                  576-508
Reclamation cost for                                              §
impounded ATV, snow        $50                46-2021             576-1305
mobile, dirt bike
Towing/relocation fee for  $120               46-2021             §
ATV, snow mobile                                                  576-1305
Towing/relocation for dirt $120               46-2021             §
bike                                                              576-1305
Storage fee for ATV, snow  $25 per day        46-2021             §
mobile, dirt bike                                                 576-1305
 
 
§ 212-145. Vehicle storage.
 
Description                                    Fee Ordinance No. Code Citation
Temporary recreational vehicle parking permit  $50 14-2007       §
                                                                 564-105
Administrative fee to remedy noncompliance (in $50 79-1999       §
addition to abatement costs)                                     564-107
 
§ 212-146. Vending.
[Added 7-10-2017 by Ord. No. 62-2017]
 
Description Fee  Ordinance No. Code Citation
Appeal fee  $100 62-2017       §
                               212-136
 
§ 212-147. Zoning and Historic Preservation.
[Amended 7-10-2017 by Ord. No. 62-2017; 12-18-2017 by Ord. No. 116-2017; 7-23-
2018 by Ord. 23-2018; and 12-28-2020 by Ord. No. 96-2020; 3-11-2024 by Ord. No.
15-2024]
Description                        Fee
Zoning Permit Application Fees
Single-family residential: change
of use and improvements, including
fence/wall, deck, garage, gazebo,  $75
above ground pool, shed, solar
panels, patio, building addition,
accessory structure.
Commercial and non-single family
residential: change of use and
improvements, including fence/
wall, deck, garage, gazebo, above  $150
ground pool, shed, solar panels,
patio, building addition,
accessory structure.
In-ground pool                     $150
Parking areas (all, including      $150
driveways and parking lots)
No-impact home based business      $75
Home occupation                    $150
Yard sales                         $0
                                   $150 for the first sign
Sign                               $75 for each additional sign for the same
                                   project and permit
Temporary zoning permit or         $75
extension
Demolition                         $75
Zoning Hearings
Special exception                  $1,200
Appeal of zoning officer action    $1,200
Conditional use                    $1,200
Accessory structure (single-family  
residential)
Accessory paved areas under 160
sq. ft. (single- family             
residential)
Resubmitted/corrected plan (for
commercial and non-single-family   $150
residential)
Wireless communications facility   see ‘Wireless Communications Facilities’
                                   below
Data Requests
Black and white electronic format  $120
CD, per tile
Contour data electronic format CD, $120
per tile
Printed format, black and white,   $30
per tile
Wireless Communications Facilities
WCF Application Fee - New Pole or  $1,000
Tower
WCF Application Fee - Existing     $500 (single application including up to 5
Poles/Towers                       WCFs
                                   $100 (per additional WCF)
WCF annual right-of-way            $270
compensation, per WCF
Access fees for WCF on City-owned  To be determined pursuant to City Purchasing
real property (not in ROW)         Policy
Applicants shall be responsible to reimburse the municipality for all
administrative, legal and engineering review fees for WCF application permits
expended by the municipality in excess of the application permit fees listed
above.
Zoning Ordinance/Map Amendments
Zoning ordinance text amendment    $2,000
Zoning map amendment               $2,000
Zoning curative amendment          $2,000
Other Fees
Zoning verification (standard      $75
form)
Zoning verification letter         $150
(custom)
Zoning permit extension            $75
Violations
   If application is submitted after a violation is reported and work has
already commenced:
Zoning permit application fee      Double the standard fee amount
Certificate of appropriateness     $100
application fee
Failure to appear/gain access      $250
 
 
 
Chapter 219
FIREARMS
Part 1
General Provisions
§
219-101.   Definitions.
§
219-102.   (Reserved)
§
219-103.   Discharge of firearms.
§
219-104.   Use of air rifles, bow and arrows or similar devices restricted.
§
219-105.   Permits for limited discharge of firearms.
§
219-106.   Violations and penalties.
Part 2
Unlawful Manufacture of Firearms
§ 219-201.   Definitions.
§ 219-202.   Restrictions on possession, use, transfer, or manufacture.
§ 219-203.   Penalties and criminal violations.
[HISTORY:1 Adopted by the City Council of the City of Reading 7-27-2015 by Ord.
No. 37-2015. Amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fireworks — See
Ch. 225.
STATE LAW REFERENCES
Uniform Firearms Act — See 18 Pa.C.S.A. § 6101 et seq.
Authority of City — See 53 P.S. §§ 3703 and 37403.
1.   Editor's Note: Former
Ch. 219, Firearms, adopted 12-10-2007 by Ord. No. 83-2007 (Ch. 6, Part 4A, of
the 2001 Code of Ordinances), was repealed 1-26-2015 by Ord. No. 2-2015. This
chapter was later reenacted, in part, 7-27-2015 by Ord. No. 37-2015.
Part 1
General Provisions
§ 219-101. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following words shall have the meanings indicated:
   DISCHARGE — The expulsion of a projectile from a firearm or the operation of
a firearm in such a manner so as to lead one to reasonably conclude, by sight
or sound, that a projectile was expelled from a firearm. If the firearm used is
capable of the expulsion of a projectile, its firing alone shall be sufficient
to constitute a discharge and no further proof of the expulsion of a projectile
shall be necessary.
   FIREARM — Any device which is designed and intended to expel a projectile by
action of gun powder, any other explosive, compressed air, compressed gas or
mechanical device, including any device which, when discharged, would by sound
or otherwise: lead another to reasonably conclude by sight or sound that the
device expelled a projectile; or give the appearance of the expulsion of a
projectile even though no expulsion of a projectile occurred. By way of example
and not limitation, items that are to be considered firearms under this Part
include guns, pistols, rifles and shotguns. The definition of "firearm" shall
not be deemed to include items that are traditionally considered to be
children's toys when used in the manner for which they were designed. The
definition of "firearm" shall not include starter pistols when used in the
manner in which they were intended; i.e., to signify the start of a race or
other similar event.
§ 219-102. (Reserved)
§ 219-103. Discharge of firearms.
   A.   Except in necessary defense of person or property, or as provided in
the exceptions set forth in Subsection B of this section, it shall be unlawful
for any person to use, fire, or discharge any gun or other firearm within the
City.
   B.   The following acts shall not constitute a violation as set forth in
this section:
      (1)   The discharge of a firearm by a law enforcement officer or military
personnel acting within the line of duty including, but not limited to, active
operations, training exercises and ceremonies.
      (2)   The discharge of a firearm for purposes of hunting or other
activities regulated by and conducted in accordance with the Game and Wildlife
Code of Pennsylvania, 34 Pa.C.S.A. § 101 et seq.
      (3)   The discharge of a firearm within a properly constructed and
legally permitted firing range duly established within the City of Reading.
      (4)   The discharge of a firearm at an event, for which the party
organizing or promoting such event has obtained a special permit issued by the
Chief of Police of the City of Reading.
§ 219-104. Use of air rifles, bow and arrows or similar devices restricted.
   A.   Except as provided in Subsection B of this section, it shall be
unlawful for any person to discharge any air rifle, air pistol, spring gun,
spring pistol, BB gun, bow and arrow, or similar device, or any implement that
is not a firearm but which impels a pellet of any kind with a force that can
reasonably be expected to cause bodily harm, at any place within the City,
except as provided in this section, and except on a target range which is
properly constructed to trap or stop the projectile as ascertained by the Chief
of Police.
   B.   The following acts shall not constitute a violation as set forth in
this section:
      (1)   The discharge of a firearm by a law enforcement officer or military
personnel acting within the line of duty including, but not limited to, active
operations, training exercises and ceremonies.
      (2)   The discharge of a firearm for purposes of hunting or other
activities regulated by and conducted in accordance with the Game and Wildlife
Code of Pennsylvania, 34 Pa.C.S.A. § 101 et seq.
      (3)   The discharge of a firearm within a properly constructed and
legally permitted firing range duly established within the City of Reading.
      (4)   The discharge of a firearm at an event, for which the party
organizing or promoting such event has obtained a special permit issued by the
Chief of Police of the City of Reading.
§ 219-105. Permits for limited discharge of firearms.
The Chief of Police of the City of Reading may issue a permit to allow the
limited discharge of firearms for events or activities within the City of
Reading, upon application of the party responsible for the organization or
promotion of such event or activity. The Chief of Police shall only issue a
permit once he/she has determined in his/her judgment that adequate safety
measures have been or will be taken such that the discharge of firearms during
the event or activity will not pose a significant risk to the health and safety
of the residents of the City, or the participants and spectators during the
event or activity. The issuance of a permit under this section shall not be
unreasonably withheld or delayed. By way of example and not limitation, the
events or activities for which permits may be issued include target shooting
competitions or demonstrations, fireworks demonstrations and block shoots.
§ 219-106. Violations and penalties.
Any person who shall violate any provision of this chapter shall, upon
conviction thereof, be fined $1,000 for each offense and the cost of
prosecution and shall be ordered to pay restitution, in an amount determined by
the court, for damages to person or properties suffered by a victim as a result
of the violation of this chapter and shall serve a term of imprisonment of not
to exceed 90 days for each offense. Each discharge as defined herein shall
constitute a separate and distinct offense, and sentences therefor shall be
imposed for each offense. The fines collected by the Magisterial District Judge
for a violation of provisions of this chapter shall be paid over to the City of
Reading.
Part 2
Unlawful Manufacture of Firearms
[Added 8-26-2024 by Ord. No. 54-2024]
§ 219-201.   Definitions.
The following words, when used in this Part, shall, unless the context clearly
indicates otherwise, mean or indicate as follows:
   ADDITIVE MANUFACTURING — A manufacturing process in which material is laid
down in succession in order to produce the product, including but not limited
to three-dimensional printing.
   FEDERAL FIREARMS LICENSEE — A person who is licensed by the Bureau of
Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms and Explosives to engage in the business of
manufacturing, importing or dealing of firearms.
   FINISHED FRAME OR RECEIVER — Any frame or receiver that does not require
additional milling or other modification to be capable of expelling a
projectile when combined with additional components such as a barrel.
   FIREARM — Any item classified as a firearm as defined in 18 Pa. C.S. §6120
(b).
   FIREARM FINISHING DEVICE — Any device, such as a firearm finishing mill or
jig, which has as its primary purpose to aid the conversion of an unfinished
frame or receiver into a finished frame or receiver.
   FIREARM FINISHING JIG — A jig designed to aid the conversion of an
unfinished frame or receiver into a finished frame or receiver.
   FIREARM FINISHING MILL — Any computer numerical control mill or other
automated device designed to aid the conversion of an unfinished frame or
receiver into a finished frame or receiver.
   REGULATED ITEMS — Unfinished frames or receivers and firearm finishing
devices.
   THREE-DIMENSIONAL PRINTER — A computer-driven machine capable of producing a
three- dimensional object from a digital model.
   UNFINISHED FRAME OR RECEIVER — A piece of any material that does not
constitute a firearm, but that has been shaped or formed in any way for the
purpose of becoming the frame or receiver of a firearm.
§ 219-202.   Restrictions on possession, use, transfer, or manufacture.
   A.   No person, unless licensed to manufacture firearms under federal law,
shall:
      (1)   Use a three-dimensional printer to create any firearm, or any piece
or part thereof or attachment thereto;
      (2)   Use any additive manufacturing process in order to produce a
firearm; or
      (3)   Convert an unfinished frame or receiver into a finished firearm.
   B.   No person shall sell or otherwise transfer a firearm finishing device
or an unfinished frame or receiver unless the transferor and transferee are
both federal firearms licensees.
   C.   No person shall purchase or otherwise accept transfer of a firearm
finishing device or an unfinished frame or receiver unless the transferor and
transferee are both federal firearms licensees.
§ 219-203.   Penalties and criminal violations.
Any person who shall violate any provision of this Part shall, upon conviction
thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of not less than $500 nor more than $1,000
for each offense plus costs of prosecution for each offense, and in default of
payment thereof shall be imprisoned for not more than 90 days. Each violation
of this Part shall constitute a separate violation without the requirement of a
prior judicial finding of guilt. The fines collected by the Magisterial
District Judge for a violation of provisions of this Part shall be paid over to
the City of Reading.
Chapter 225
FIREWORKS
§
225-101.    Banning the use of fireworks within the City.
§
225-102.    Definitions.
§
225-103.    Sale of fireworks within City.
§
225-104.    Banning the use of aerial fireworks.
§
225-105.    Supervised public displays.
§
225-106.    Operational permit.
§
225-107.   Violations and penalties.
 
[HISTORY: Adopted by the City Council of the City of Reading 12-20-1954 by Ord.
No. 67-1954 (Ch. 7, Part 1, of the 2001 Code of Ordinances); amended in its
entirety 5-29-2012 by Ord. No. 60-2012 and 8-27-2018 by Ord. No. 45-2018.
Amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Firearms — See
Ch. 219.
Fire prevention and protection — See
Ch. 237.
STATE LAW REFERENCES
Fireworks Law — See 35 P.S. § 1271 et seq.
§ 225-101. Banning the use of fireworks within the City.
Prohibiting any person from igniting or discharging consumer fireworks on the
streets of the City, the sidewalks of the City or any property owned by the
City, including, without limitation, all of the City's parks and public
buildings without a permit from the City Fire Chief, or his designee, in
accordance with the Pennsylvania Fireworks Law, Act 43 of 2017.
§ 225-102. Definitions.
The following words and phrases when used in this article shall have the
meanings given to them in this section unless the context clearly indicates
otherwise:
APA 87-1 - The American Pyrotechnics Association Standard 87-1: Standard for
Construction and Approval for Transportation of Fireworks, Novelties, and
Theatrical Pyrotechnics, 2001 edition, or any subsequent edition.
Consumer fireworks -
(1)   Any aerial device of combustible or explosive composition or any
substance or combination of substances which is intended to produce visible or
audible effects by combustion, is suitable for use by the public, complies with
the construction, performance, composition and labeling requirements
promulgated by the Consumer Products Safety Commission in 16 CFR (relating to
commercial practices) or any successor regulation and complies with the
provisions for “consumer fireworks” as defined in APA 87-1 or any successor
standard, the sale, possession and use of which shall be permitted throughout
this Commonwealth.
(2)   The term does not include devices as “ground and hand-held sparkling
devices,” “novelties” or “toy caps” in APA 87-1 or any successor standard, the
sale, possession and use of which shall be permitted at all times throughout
this Commonwealth.
Display fireworks -
(1)   All aerial fireworks to include but not be limited to: aerial mortar
shells, mortar cakes, bottle rockets, roman candles.
(2)   Other display pieces that exceed the limits of explosive materials for
classification as consumer fireworks and are classified as fireworks UN0333,
UN0334 or UN0335 under 49 CFR 172.101 (relating to purpose and use of hazardous
materials table).
NFPA 1124 - The National Fire Protection Association Standard 1124, Code for
the Manufacture, Transportation and Storage of Fireworks and Pyrotechnic
Articles, 2006 edition, or any subsequent edition.
Occupied structure - A structure, vehicle or place adapted for overnight
accommodation of persons or for conducting business whether or not a person is
actually present.
§ 225-103. Sale of fireworks within City.
The sale of fireworks within the City is prohibited, unless an operational
permit is issued by the City Fire Marshal or his designee and a license from
the PA Department of Agriculture.
§ 225-104. Banning the use of aerial fireworks.
The use of all aerial fireworks to include but not be limited to aerial mortar
shells, mortar cakes, bottle rockets, roman candles is strictly prohibited,
regardless of the distance from the structure.
§ 225-105. Supervised public displays.
[Amended 11-13-2018 by Ord. No. 72-2018]
In accordance with Title 35, Health and Safety, Chapter 13A, Fireworks and
Explosives,1 the Fire Marshal, within his/her discretion, may authorize and
grant special permission for supervised public display of fireworks by a
competent operator, in accordance with this code. The operator shall be
required to obtain a certificate of fitness and provide proof of insurance or
post a bond with the City Clerk in a sum of not less than $1,000,000
conditioned for the payment of all damages which may be caused either to a
person or persons, or to property by reason of the licensed display and arising
from any acts of such operator, his agents, employees or subcontractors.
1. Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 1271 et seq.
§ 225-106. Operational permit.2
The operator shall obtain an operational permit for the sale and use of all
fireworks and pay the fee set forth in Chapter 212, Fees.
2. Editor's Note: Added during codification (see Ch. 1, General Provisions,
Part 2).
§ 225-107. Violations and penalties.
   A.   Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any provision of this
chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be guilty of a summary offense and
shall, upon conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine by the Magisterial
District Judge not to exceed $500 and be subject to a term of imprisonment not
in excess of 90 days if they fail to pay such fine. Each day that a violation
of this chapter continues shall constitute a separate offense.
   B.   Any fireworks found to be in violation of this Section shall be seized
by the City Police Department.
   C.   The owner of the fireworks and fireworks display shall be held liable
for the costs to remove, transport, store and/or dispose of the fireworks.
   D.   In addition to the above penalties all other actions are hereby
reserved, including an action in equity for the proper enforcement of this
chapter. The imposition of a fine or penalty for any violation of, or
noncompliance with, this chapter shall not excuse the violation or
noncompliance or permit it to continue and all such persons shall be required
to correct or remedy such violations and noncompliances within a reasonable
time.
Chapter 231
FIRE INSURANCE PROCEEDS
Part 1
Fire Insurance Proceeds Escrow Procedures
§
231-101.   Municipal Officer; definitions.
§
231-102.   Payment of claims.
§
231-103.   Adoption of procedures and regulations.
§
231-104.   Violations and penalties.
Part 2
Control of Fire Insurance Proceeds
§
231-201.   Municipal Officer; definitions.
§
231-202.   Payment of claims; procedure.
§
231-203.   Proceeds transferred to Municipal Officer.
§
231-204.   Violations and penalties.
[HISTORY: Adopted by the City Council of the City of Reading as indicated in
part histories. Amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fire and rescue services — See
Ch. 36.
STATE LAW REFERENCES
Municipal certificate required prior to payment of fire loss claims — See 40
P.S. § 638.
Part 1
Fire Insurance Proceeds Escrow Procedures
[Adopted 2-1-1995 by Ord. No. 6-1995 (Ch. 1, Part 7A, of the 2001 Code of
Ordinances)]
§ 231-101. Municipal Officer; definitions.
[Amended 2-26-1996 by Ord. No. 8-1996]
A.   The Finance Director or his designee (hereafter, the "Municipal Officer")
is hereby appointed as the designated officer who is authorized to carry out
all responsibilities and duties of the City stated herein. [Amended 7-8-2013 by
Ord. No. 32-2013]
B.   A fire loss or claim for fire damage is defined as any loss occurring
after the effective date of this Part and covered under a policy of fire
insurance, including any endorsements or riders to the policy.
§ 231-102. Payment of claims.
[Amended 5-29-2001 by Ord. No. 14-2001]
   A.   No insurance company, association or exchange (hereinafter the
"insurer") doing business in the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania shall pay a claim
of a named insured for fire damage to a structure located within the City of
Reading (hereinafter the "Municipality") where the amount recoverable for the
fire loss to the structure under all policies exceeds $7,500, unless the
insurer is furnished by the Municipal Officer with a municipal certificate
pursuant to § 508(b) 1  and unless there is compliance with §§ 508(c) and (d)
and the provisions of Part 2 of this chapter, dealing with payment of
delinquent taxes. [Amended 7-8-2013 by Ord. No. 32-2013]
   B.   After full compliance with the requirements of § 508(b)(1)(i) 2  and
Part 2 of this chapter, the insurer shall pay the claim of the named insured;
provided, however, that if the loss is agreed upon by the named insured and the
insurer equals or exceeds 60% of the aggregate limits of liability on all fire
policies covering the building structure, the following procedures shall be
followed:
      (1)   The insurer shall transfer from the insurance proceeds to the
Municipal Officer the aggregate of $2,000 for each $15,000 of a claim and for
each fraction of that amount of a claim, provided:
         (a)   That this section is to be applied such that if the claim is
$15,000 or less, the amount transferred to the City shall be $2,000; and
         (b)   That, if at the time of a loss report the named insured has
submitted a contractor's signed estimate of the costs of removing, repairing or
securing the building or other structure in an amount less than the amount
calculated under the foregoing transfer formula, the insurer shall transfer to
the City from the insurance proceeds the amount based upon the estimate.
      (2)   The transfer of proceeds shall be on pro rata basis by all
companies, associations or exchanges insuring the building or other structure.
Policy proceeds remaining after the transfer to the City shall be disbursed in
accordance with the policy terms.
   C.   After the transfer, the named insured may submit a licensed
contractor's signed estimate of the costs of removing, repairing or securing
the building or other structure, and the designated officer shall return the
amount of the funds transferred to the City in excess of the estimate to the
named insured, if the City has not commenced to remove, repair or secure the
building or other structure. [Amended 7-8-2013 by Ord. No. 32-2013]
   D.   Upon receipt of proceeds under this section, the City shall do the
following: [Amended 7-8-2013 by Ord. No. 32-2013]
      (1)   The Municipal Officer shall place the proceeds in the separate fund
to be used solely as security against the total costs of removing, repairing,
or securing the building or structure which are incurred by the City,
including, but not limited to, any engineering, legal or administrative costs
incurred by the City in connection with such removal, repair or securing of the
building or any proceedings related thereto.
      (2)   It is the obligation of the insurer when transferring the proceeds
to provide the City with the name and address of the named insured. Upon
receipt of the transferred funds and the name and address of the named insured,
the Municipal Officer shall contact the named insured, certify that the
proceeds have been received by the City and notify the named insured that the
procedures under this subsection shall be followed. If the insured transfers
title to the property or assigns the escrow to a new owner, the original
insured shall notify the City about the title transfer or assignment within 30
days of the transfer or assignment.
      (3)   The named insured shall have two years from the date the City
provides the notice required under Subsection D(2) to complete the
rehabilitation of the property, with a one-year extension available after
receiving written approval from the City's Fire Marshal and Chief Building
Inspector. If the insured chooses demolition rather than rehabilitation, he
shall have six months to complete the demolition, which includes clearing all
debris.
      (4)   When repairs, removal or securing of the building or other
structure have been completed in accordance with all applicable regulations and
orders of the City and the required proof of such completion received by the
Municipal Officer, and if the City has not incurred any costs for repairs,
removal or securing, the fund shall be returned to the named insured. If the
City has incurred costs for repairs, removal or securing of the building or
other structure, the costs shall be paid from the fund and, if excess funds
remain, the City shall transfer the remaining funds to the named insured.
      (5)   To the extent that interest is earned on proceeds held by the City
pursuant to this section, and retained by it, such interest shall belong to the
City. To the extent that proceeds are returned to the named insured, interest
earned on such proceeds shall be distributed to the named insured at the time
that the proceeds are returned.
      (6)   Prior to the release of any funds under Subsection D(4), the
property must be inspected by a City of Reading Building Code inspector and an
inspector from the office of the Fire Marshal who shall certify that all the
required work has been done to repair, remove and/or secure the property. No
property shall be considered repaired, removed or secured unless both the
exterior and interior of the property meet the minimum standards for safety
under all City, state and federal laws and regulations, including, but not
limited to, the Pennsylvania Uniform Construction Code as adopted and amended
by the City of Reading, the City of Reading Property Maintenance Code, and the
Fire Prevention Code of the City of Reading.
      (7)   Nothing in this section shall be construed to limit the ability of
the City to recover any deficiency. Furthermore, nothing in this Part shall be
construed to prohibit the City and the named insured from entering into an
agreement that permits the transfer of funds to the named insured if some other
reasonable disposition of the damaged property has been negotiated.
      (8)   The City of Reading may adopt procedures and regulations to
implement the provisions of this Part and may by ordinance fix reasonable fees
to be charged for municipal activities and services provided pursuant to this
Part; including but not limited to issuance of certificates and bills,
performance of inspections and opening separate fund accounts.
   E.   The Fire Insurance Escrow Act (herein "the Act") refers to the
Insurance Company Law of 1921 as amended by Act 98 of 1992 and Act 93 of 1994
(NOTE: 40 P.S. § 638), and adopted by the City of Reading pursuant to Ord. 7-
1995. [Added 7-8-2013 by Ord. No. 32-2013]
1.   Editor's Note: See 40 P.S. § 638(b).
2.   Editor's Note: See 40 P.S. § 638(b)(1)(i).
§ 231-103. Adoption of procedures and regulations.
[Amended 5-29-2001 by Ord. No. 14-2001; 8-26-2013 by Ord. No. 35-2013]
The City of Reading may by ordinance adopt procedures and regulations to
implement § 508 3  and this Part and may by ordinance fix reasonable fees to be
charged for municipal activities or services provided pursuant to § 508 and
this Part; including but not limited to issuance of certificates and bills,
performance of inspections and opening separate fund accounts.
§ 231-104. Violations and penalties.
[Amended 5-29-2001 by Ord. No. 14-2001]
Any owner of property, any named insured or any insurer who violates this Part
shall be, upon conviction thereof, sentenced to pay a fine of not more than
$1,000 plus costs and, in default of payment of said fine and costs, to a term
of imprisonment not to exceed 30 days.
Part 2
Control of Fire Insurance Proceeds
[Adopted 2-1-1995 by Ord. No. 7-1995 (
Ch. 1, Part 7B, of the 2001 Code of Ordinances)]
§ 231-201. Municipal Officer; definitions.
[Amended 2-26-1996 by Ord. No. 9-1996]
   A.   The Finance Director or his designee (hereinafter "Municipal Officer")
is hereby appointed as the designated officer who is authorized to carry out
all responsibilities and duties of the City stated herein.
   B.   A fire loss or claim for fire damage is defined as any loss occurring
after the effective date of this Part and covered under a policy of fire
insurance, including any endorsements or riders to the policy.
§ 231-202. Payment of claims; procedure.
   A.   No insurance company, association or exchange (hereinafter the
"insurer") doing business in the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania shall pay a claim
of a named insured for fire damage to a structure located within the City of
Reading (hereinafter the "municipality") where the amount recoverable for the
fire loss to the structure under all policies exceeds $7,500, unless the
Insurer and the named insured comply with the provisions of § 508(b) 4  and the
provisions of Part 1 of this chapter enacted contemporaneously herewith dealing
with payment of delinquent taxes.
   B.   The Municipal Officer shall, upon the written request of the named
insured specifying the tax description of the property, name and address of the
insurer and the date agreed upon by the insurer and the named insured as the
date of the receipt of a loss report of the claim, furnish the insurer either
of the following within 14 working days of the request:
      (1)   A certificate, or at the discretion of the City, a verbal
notification which shall be confirmed in writing by the insurer to the effect
that, as of the date specified in the request, there are no delinquent taxes,
assessments, penalties or user charges against the property and that, as of the
date of the Municipal Officer's certificate or verbal notification, the City
has not certified any amount as total costs incurred by the City for the
removal, repair or securing of a building or other structure on the property.
      (2)   A certificate and bill showing the amount of delinquent taxes,
assessments, penalties and use charges against the property as of the date
specified in the request that have not been paid as of the date of the
certificate and also showing, as of the date of the Municipal Officer's
certificate, the amount of the total costs, if any, certified to the Municipal
Officer that have been incurred by the City for the removal, repair or securing
of a building or other structure on the property. For the purposes of this
subsection, the City shall provide to the Municipal Officer the total amount,
if any, of such costs, if available, or the amount of costs known to the City
at the time of the Municipal Officer's certificate.
      (3)   A tax, assessment, penalty or user charge becomes delinquent at the
time and on the date a lien could otherwise have been filed against the
property by the City under applicable law.
   C.   Upon the receipt of a certificate pursuant to Subsection B(1) of this
section, the insurer shall pay the claim of the named insured in accordance
with the policy terms. Provided, however that the Insurer shall also comply
with the provisions of Part 1 of this chapter dealing with escrow funds for
certain fire losses.
   D.   Upon the receipt of a certificate and bill pursuant to Subsection B(2)
of this section, the insurer shall return the bill to the Municipal Officer and
transfer to the Municipal Officer an amount from the insurance proceeds
necessary to pay the taxes, assessments, penalties, proceeds, whichever is the
lesser amount. The City shall receive the amount and apply or credit it to
payment of the items shown in the bill.
   E.   Nothing in this section shall be construed to limit the ability of the
City to recover any deficiency.
   F.   The City of Reading may adopt procedures and regulations to implement
the provisions of this Part and may by ordinance fix reasonable fees to be
charged for municipal activities and services provided pursuant to this Part;
including but not limited to issuance of certificates and bills, performance of
inspections and opening separate fund accounts. [Amended 8-26-2013 by Ord. No.
35-2013]
§ 231-203. Proceeds transferred to Municipal Officer.
   A.   The transfer of proceeds to the Municipal Officer shall be on a pro
rata basis by all insurers with applicable policies of insurance providing
protection for fire loss.
   B.   The City of Reading may by ordinance adopt additional procedures and
regulations to implement § 508 5  and this Part and may by resolution fix
reasonable fees to be charged for municipal activities or services provided
pursuant to § 508 and this Part; including, but not limited to, issuance of
certificates and bills. [Added 8-26-2013 by Ord. No. 35-2013]
5.   Editor's Note: See 40 P.S. § 638.
§ 231-204. Violations and penalties.
[Amended 5-29-2001 by Ord. No. 14-2001]
Any owner of property, any named insured or any insurer who violates this Part
shall be, upon conviction thereof, sentenced to a fine of not more than $1,000
plus costs and, in default of payment of said fine and costs, to a term of
imprisonment not to exceed 30 days.
Chapter 237
FIRE PREVENTION AND PROTECTION
Part 1
Smoke, Cinders, Noxious Acids, Fumes and Gases
§
237-101.   Definitions.
§
237-102.   Emission of dense smoke prohibited; nuisance declared.
§
237-103.   Exceptions.
§
237-104.   Escape of soot, cinders, noxious acids, fumes and gases prohibited;
nuisance declared.
§
237-105.   Health Officer duties.
§
237-106.   Appeals.
§
237-107.   Interference with performance of duty of Health Officer.
§
237-108.   Ringelmann Chart as standard.
§
237-109.   Violations and penalties.
[HISTORY: Adopted by the City Council of the City of Reading as indicated in
part histories. Amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fireworks — See
Ch. 225.
Part 1
Smoke, Cinders, Noxious Acids, Fumes and Gases
[Adopted 7-26-1961 by Ord. No. 7-1961 (Ch. 7, Part 3, of the 2001 Code of
Ordinances)]
§ 237-101. Definitions.
As used in this Part, certain terms are defined as follows:
   CINDERS, DUST, FLY ASH, NOXIOUS ACIDS, FUMES AND GASES — All matter other
than dense smoke, including coke, cinders, dust and soot formed as a result of
the combustion of fuel, which are carried in the gas stream so as to reach the
external air and which have not been completely consumed by the combustion
process.
   DENSE SMOKE — That smoke which has a density of No. 2 or greater as
established by the
Ringelmann Chart, hereinafter referred to and adopted.
   HEALTH OFFICER — The City Health Officer of the City of Reading or any
officer or employee of the Property Improvement Division of the City of
Reading.
   PERSON, FIRM or CORPORATION — Any individual, partnerships, firms,
associations, companies, corporations, syndicates or other groups or groups of
organized or unorganized individuals who may employ, own, use or operate any
fuel-consuming device.
   PROPERTY IMPROVEMENT DIVISION — Property Improvement Division of the City of
Reading. [Amended 5-29-2001 by Ord. No. 14-2001]
   RINGELMANN CHART — That standard published by the United States Bureau of
Mines to determine the density of smoke.
   SMOKE — The gaseous products of burning organic materials rendered visible
by the presence of small particles of carbon or other substances therein.
§ 237-102. Emission of dense smoke prohibited; nuisance declared.
No person, firm or corporation shall permit the emission of any smoke from any
source whatever of a density equal to or greater than that density described as
No. 2 on the Ringelmann Chart, published by the United States Bureau of Mines,
the standards of which are hereby fully adopted by the enactment of this Part.
The emission of such dense smoke is hereby further declared to be a public
nuisance and may be summarily abated by the Health Officer, or by anyone whom
he may designate for such purpose; provided, however, that this section shall
not be applicable to the circumstances set forth in §
237-103.
§ 237-103. Exceptions.
The provisions of §
237-102 shall not be applicable:
   A.   To private residences in which no more than two families are or can be
housed. To all larger dwellings, of whatever type, however, this Part shall be
fully effective and applicable.
   B.   When a fire box, furnace, boiler, locomotive or other fuel-consuming
device is being cleaned out and a new fire is being built therein, in which
event a smoke of a density greater than that described as No. 2 of the
Ringelmann Chart shall be permitted for a period of not to exceed six minutes
in any single period of 60 minutes.
§ 237-104. Escape of soot, cinders, noxious acids, fumes and gases prohibited;
nuisance declared.
No person, firm or corporation shall permit or cause the escape of such
quantities of soot, cinders, noxious acids, fumes and gasses in such place or
manner as to be detrimental to any person or to the public or to endanger the
health, comfort and safety of any such person or of the public, or in such
manner as to cause or have a tendency to cause injury or damage to property or
business. Council, sitting as a Board of Health, may, after complaint and
hearing, declare a public nuisance to exist and may order the same to be abated
summarily in such manner as is provided by law for the abatement of public
nuisance.
§ 237-105. Health Officer duties.
The duties of the Health Officer shall be:
   A.   To investigate all complaints of violation of this Part and to
institute necessary proceedings in case of violation.
   B.   To investigate and make recommendations from time to time to Council
with respect to needed revisions in this Part or any ordinance pertaining to
smoke control and air pollution.
   C.   May make regular inspections of all fuel-consuming devices within the
City to determine whether compliance is being had with the provisions of this
Part.
   D.   May promulgate and publish rules and regulations under which this Part
shall be administered, providing in detail and with clarity the necessary
information by which the public is to be guided. Copies of the Ringelmann chart
shall be made available to the public without charge. The rules and regulations
herein prescribed to be adopted shall be prepared only after a thorough
consideration of the air pollution problem as it exists in the City.
   E.   To notify all parties concerned of any decision he may render.
   F.   To do any and all other acts which may be necessary for the successful
prosecution of the purposes of this Part and such other acts as may be
specifically enumerated therein as his duties.
§ 237-106. Appeals.
[Amended 5-29-2001 by Ord. No. 14-2001]
Any person aggrieved by any ruling rendered by the Health Officer shall, within
10 days thereof, have the right to appeal to the City Board of Health who shall
serve as a body to which appeals may be made from the decisions of the Health
Officer. They shall decide all appeals properly before them, and shall either
affirm, modify or overrule the decision of the Health Officer which they may be
called upon to review. On all appeals taken to the Board, appropriate hearings
shall be held after due notice thereof to the parties concerned. All pertinent
papers in the files of the Property Improvement Division shall be made
available to the Board in each case. Such hearing shall afford the person
aggrieved with a full opportunity to present any evidence which he may desire
to support his position.
§ 237-107. Interference with performance of duty of Health Officer.
Any person, firm or corporation interfering in any manner or impeding the
performance of duty of the Health Officer shall be subject to the penalties
hereinafter provided for the violation of the provisions of this Part. This
section shall likewise apply to the performance of duty of those employees and
representatives of the Health Officer.
§ 237-108. Ringelmann Chart as standard.
The standard by which the density of smoke is to be measured is to the
Ringelmann Chart, published by the United States Bureau of Mines. Use of the
chart shall be made by placing it at such distance from the observer so that
the squares appear as even shades of coloring or where no white space between
the lines are visible; such observation may be made by the chart itself or by
the use of an optical device approved by the Board of Health utilizing
Ringelmann chart standards, and by this Part the optical device, being known as
"Smokescope," manufactured by the Mine Safety Appliance Company of Pittsburgh,
Pennsylvania, is hereby declared to be approved as an optical device for such
testing. Comparison of the smoke under observation with the various shades of
the chart shall then indicate the density of the smoke. Observation distances
shall be not less than 100 feet nor more than 1/4 mile from the smoke observed.
§ 237-109. Violations and penalties.
[Amended 7-21-1993 by Ord. No. 78-1993; 5-29-2001 by Ord. No. 14-2001]
Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any provision of this Part
shall, upon conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of not less than
$1,000 plus costs and, in default of payment of said fine and costs, to a term
of imprisonment not to exceed 30 days. Each day that a violation of this Part
continues shall constitute a separate offense.
Chapter 251
FOOD CODE
Part 1
Model Food Code
§
251-0101.01   Adoption of Title 7 Chapter 46, of the Pennsylvania Code, also
known as the Food Code.
§
251-0101.02   State law and regulations.
§
251-0101.03   Provisions to be continuation of existing regulations.
§
251-0101.04   Publication.
§
251-0101.05   Amendments to the Food Code.
[HISTORY: Adopted by the City Council of the City of Reading 3-13-2023 by Ord.
No. 26-2023. Amendments noted where applicable.]
Part 1
Model Food Code
§ 251-0101.01. Adoption of Title 7 Chapter 46, of the Pennsylvania Code, also
known as the Food Code.
A certain document, three copies of which are on file in the office of the City
Clerk of the City of Reading, Pennsylvania being marked and designated as the
2022 Food Code edition, as published by the United States Food and Drug
Administration, and as adopted by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania in Chapter
46, Food Code, Subpart A, Section 46.4 of the Pennsylvania Code, is hereby
adopted and incorporated herein by reference and is hereby made the City of
Reading Food Code. A copy is also available at www.tcla.gov. Each and all of
the regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of said Food Code
on file in the office of the City of Reading are hereby referred to, adopted,
and made a part hereof, as if fully set out in this Part, with the additions,
insertions, deletions and changes, if any, prescribed herein.
§ 251-0101.02. State law and regulations.
In all matters that are regulated by the law of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania or by regulations of departments or agencies of the Commonwealth
promulgated by authority of law, such laws or regulations, or other ordinances
of the City of Reading, Pennsylvania, as the case may be, shall control where
the requirements thereof are the same as or in excess of the provisions of this
Part. This code shall control in all cases where the State requirements, or the
requirements of other ordinances of this City, are not as strict as those
contained in this Part.
§ 251-0101.03. Provisions to Be Continuation of Existing Regulations.
Nothing in this Part or in the Food Code hereby adopted shall be constructed to
affect any suit or proceeding impending in any court, or any rights acquired,
or liability incurred, or any cause or causes of action acquired or existing,
under any act or ordinance as repealed by this Part; nor shall any just or
legal right or remedy of any character be lost, impaired or affected by this
Part.
§ 251-0101.04. Publication.
The City Clerk is hereby ordered and directed to cause this Part to be
published as required by all applicable statutes, laws, regulations, charters
and ordinances.
§ 251-0101.05. Amendments to the Food Code.
The 2022 Food Code, is modified and amended in the following respects, and the
following amendments, modifications and additions so made are hereby adopted to
the same intent and effect as if originally incorporated in that Code:
   § 1-101.10 Food Code, is amended by deleting § 1-101.10 in its entirety and
substituting in place thereof the following: These provisions shall be known as
the "Reading Food Code," hereinafter referred to as "this Code."
   § 1-201.10(B) Regulatory Authority is amended to add the following after the
first sentence: The term shall also include but not be limited to the City of
Reading, the City of Reading Property Maintenance Department and its assigned
Health Inspector(s), as well as the Health Inspector's designees.
   Chapter 8 is amended by adding the following sections:
   § 8-601.10. Enforcement.
      (A)   Enforcement authority. The Food Code shall be enforced by the
REGULATORY AUTHORITY as defined by § 1-201.10, or its designee.
      (B)   Inspections. Inspections of FOOD ESTABLISHMENTS shall be conducted
by the REGULATORY AUTHORITY, including but not limited to the City of Reading
Health Inspector, or his/her designee, as specified in § 8-401 of this Code.
      (C)   Training. In addition to requirements set out in § 8-402.10 of this
Code, Health Inspectors assigned by the REGULATORY AUTHORITY shall be provided
with training courses paid for by the City of Reading, and shall achieve
certification offered by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania and/or other
certifying agencies, as required by LAW.
      (D)   Equipment. All Health Inspectors assigned by the REGULATORY
AUTHORITY to conduct inspections pursuant to this Code shall be provided with a
vehicle and thermometer registering range of -20° F. to +220° F., plus all the
equipment and tools necessary to inspect FOOD ESTABLISHMENT, as the term is
defined by this Code.
   § 8-601.20. Method of service of notice of violation, suspension or
revocation.
      (A)   Service. Notice shall be deemed to be properly served if a copy
thereof is:
         (1)   Handed to the PERMIT HOLDER, PERSON IN CHARGE, or PERSON as
these terms are defined by this Code, or his/her designee, operating the FOOD
ESTABLISHMENT, or by posting such notice in a conspicuous place on the FOOD
ESTABLISHMENT and/or PREMISES;
         (2)   Sent by first-class mail addressed to the last known address of
the PERMIT HOLDER or PERSON operating a FOOD EST AB LIS HM ENT; or
         (3)   Delivered by any other another manner of service authorized by
LAW of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
   § 8-601.30. Permit.
      (A)   Requirement of a Food Employee Certification. In addition to the
requirements and procedures set out in § 8-3 of this Code, the following
provisions shall apply:
         (1)   No person shall operate a FOOD ESTABLISHMENT in the City of
Reading without a valid Food EMPLOYEE certification from the Department of
Agriculture. New FOOD ESTABLISHMENTS will have 90 days to comply with said
requirement; existing FOOD ESTABLISHMENTS which are not in compliance due to
lack of current certification, employee turnover or other loss of certified
person shall have 90 days from the effective date of this section or the date
of loss of certified person to comply.
         (2)   Several types of FOOD ESTABLISHMENTS are exempt from complying
with the EMPLOYEE certification requirement under this section. Exempt FOOD
ESTABLISHMENTS include:
            (a)   FOOD ESTABLISHMENTS where only commercially prepackaged food
is handled and sold;
            (b)   FOOD ESTABLISHMENTS that do not handle potentially hazardous
foods;
            (c)   Food manufacturing facilities engaged in the manufacture of
prepackaged non-potentially hazardous food;
            (d)   An organization classified as tax-exempt under § 501(c)(3) of
the Internal Revenue Code of 1986;
            (e)   FOOD ESTABLISHMENTS managed on a not-for-profit basis by a
volunteer fire company or an ambulance, religious, charitable, fraternal,
veterans, civic, agriculture fair or agricultural association or any separately
chartered auxiliary of any of the above;
            (f)   FOOD ESTABLISHMENTS managed on a not-for-profit basis by
organizations supporting extracurricular recreational activities for youth of
all public, private and parochial school systems. Examples: school booster
clubs, Little League or Midget Football Associations.
      (B)   Application. PERMIT application shall be on a form prepared and
provided by the City of Reading Property Maintenance Codes Enforcement Office,
submitted thereto and accompanied by a $50 processing fee. Upon approval,
payment of an applicable fee as established in Chapter 212, Fees, is further
required to obtain a PERMIT.
      (C)   Permit Renewal. Failure of the REGULATORY AUTHORITY to issue an
application for renewal of a PERMIT shall not be a defense in any legal
proceeding. The responsibility of timely renewing a PERMIT is solely on the
FOOD ESTABLISHMENT and/or PERMIT HOLDER.
      (D)   Failure to renew a PERMIT may result in suspension or revocation of
said PERMIT. Such suspension or revocation will result in closure of the FOOD
ESTABLISHMENT pending compliance with this Code.
   § 8-601.40 Inspections.
      (A)   Access to food establishment and records. The person operating the
FOOD ESTABLISHMENT shall upon request of the REGULATORY AUTHORITY permit access
to all parts of the FOOD ESTABLISHMENT and shall permit copying of any and all
records of food purchased by the FOOD ESTABLISHMENT. The FOOD ESTABLISHMENT
shall also permit the taking of food samples for the purpose of scientific
testing.
      (B)   Violation notice. If during an inspection the REGULATORY AUTHORITY,
or his/her designee, determines that the FOOD ESTABLISHMENT is in violation of
any provision of this Code, the REGULATORY AUTHORITY shall serve written notice
upon such FOOD ESTABLISHMENT of the violation(s) found. The violation notice
may be in conjunction with, or as part of, the inspection report provided it
meets the criteria set forth in this section. The violation notice shall:
         (1)   Be in writing;
         (2)   Include a description of the FOOD ESTABLISHMENT and/or PREMISES
sufficient for identification;
         (3)   Include a statement of the violation or violations;
         (4)   Include a correction order allowing a reasonable time to make
the repairs and improvements required to bring the FOOD ESTABLISHMENT into
compliance with the provisions of this Code;
         (5)   Inform the PERMIT HOLDER of the right to appeal; and
         (6)   Include a statement that failure to correct the violation may
result in suspension/revocation of the PERMIT causing closure of FOOD
ESTABLISHMENT.
      (C)   Appeal of violation notice. An appeal from a violation notice may
be made by requesting a hearing in writing within 10 days of receipt of the
notice addressed to the City of Reading Health Office, Room 1-30, City Hall,
815 Washington Street, Reading, PA 19601.
         (1)   Hearing of appeal of violation notice. Hearing of appeal of
violation notice shall be conducted in the manner prescribed by § 8-601.60 of
this Code.
      (D)   Re-inspection. Upon expiration of the time provided to abate/cure/
correct the violation(s) as set forth on the violation notice, the REGULATORY
AUTHORITY, or his or her designee, shall return to the FOOD ESTABLISHMENT to
perform a re-inspection to determine if the violation(s) continues to exist.
   § 8-601.50. Suspension and revocation of permit.
      (A)   Suspension and revocation of permit. If the REGULATORY AUTHORITY
determines through inspector, or examination of EMPLOYEES, FOOD, records, or
other means as specified in this Code, that any of the provisions of this Code
have been or are being violated, in an egregious or continuing manner that
possesses an IMMINENT HEALTH HAZARD, it may suspend the PERMIT to operate a
FOOD ESTABLISHMENT.
      (B)   Reinstatement of permit. Reinstatement of suspended or revoked
PERMIT shall not be made unless the act, default or omission which was grounds
for suspension or revocation shall have been remedied prior to the time of
reinstatement.
   § 8-601.60. Hearing.
      (A)   Hearing Officer. The REGULATORY AUTHORITY may appoint a PERSON,
such as a staff member of the Property Maintenance Department, hereafter
referred to as the hearing officer, who presides over a proceeding initiated by
the REGULATORY AUTHORITY.
         (1)   The hearing officer shall be knowledgeable of the provision of
this Code and be a REGULATORY AUTHORITY representative other than the PERSON
that inspected the FOOD ESTABLISHMENT, or who has any other role in making the
decision that is being contested.
      (B)   Notice. The order or notice of suspension or revocation of a
PERMIT, and/or the notice of violation(s) of this Code, shall set forth the
date for a hearing requiring the PERMIT HOLDER and/or his/her representative to
appear before a hearing officer to show cause why such PERMIT shall not be
suspended or revoked and/or the violation of this Code did not exist. Such
notice shall contain a brief statement of the violation, and the time and place
of hearing, which shall be held within 10 days of the notice.
      (C)   Hearing. The PERMIT HOLDER, and/or his/her representative, may
appear in person or with counsel and present evidence regarding the violation
and show cause why the violation did not exist and/or the PERMIT should not be
suspended or revoked. The REGULATORY AUTHORITY, and/or its representative, may
also appear in person or with counsel and show cause why the violation did
exist and/or the PERMIT should be suspended or revoked. The hearing officer
shall receive such information, evidence and testimony, and the formal rules of
evidence shall not apply.
      (D)   Determination. Within 10 days of completion of the violation/
suspension/revocation hearing, the hearing officer shall issue notice in
writing of his/her determination.
   § 8-601.70. Judicial Enforcement Proceedings.
      (A)   Institution of Proceedings. Proceeding to enforce this Code may be
instituted by the Regulatory Authority according to LAW of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania by issuing a citation or summons, or by any other means authorized
by the LAW of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
      (B)   Violations of this Code. A PERSON, PERMIT HOLDER, and/or FOOD
ESTABLISHMENT that violates a provision of this Code shall, upon conviction
thereof in a summary proceeding, be sentenced to pay a fine of not less than
$200 and not exceeding $1000.
         (1)   Each day that a violation continues, after due notice has been
served, shall be deemed a separate offense punishable by a separate fine as set
forth herein.
      (C)   Injunctive Proceeding. The REGULATORY AUTHORITY may, according to
LAW, petition a court of competent jurisdiction for a temporary or permanent
injunctive relief to achieve compliance with the provisions of this Code or its
orders.
      (D)   Civil Proceedings. The REGULATORY AUTHORITY may petition a court of
competent jurisdiction to enforce the provisions of this Code or its
administrative orders and according to law collect penalties and fees for
violations.
         (1)   In addition to any fines and sentences imposed as specified in
this section, or to being enjoined as specified in this section, a PERSON who
violates a provision of this Code, any rule or regulation adopted in accordance
with LAW related to FOOD ESTABLISHMENTS within the scope of this Code, or to
any term, condition, or limitation of a PERMIT issued as specified in §§ 8-
303.10 and 8-303.20 is subject to a civil penalty not exceeding $1,000.
         (2)   Each day that a violation continues, after due notice has been
served, shall be deemed a separate offense punishable by a separate penalty as
set forth herein.
      (E)   Nonexclusive remedy. The penalty provisions of this section and the
PERMIT nonrenewal, suspension and revocation procedures provided in this
chapter shall be independent, non-mutually exclusive separate remedies, all of
which shall be available to the City of Reading as may be deemed appropriate
for carrying out the purposes of this Code. The remedies and procedures
provided in this Code for violation hereof are not intended to supplant or
replace to any degree the remedies and procedures available to the City of
Reading in the case of a violation of any other City of Reading Code or
ordinance, whether or not such other code or ordinance is referenced in this
Code, and whether or not an ongoing violation of such other code or ordinance
is cited as the underlying ground for a finding of a violation of this Code.
   § 8-601.80 Other codes.
      (A)   Nothing in this Code shall be construed to cancel, modify or set
aside any provision of any other Code or ordinance of the City of Reading.
Compliance with all other codes and/or ordinances of the City of Reading shall
continue to apply and govern other aspects of FOOD ESTABLISHMENT operation,
including but not limited to compliance with the City of Reading's
Construction, Zoning, and Property Maintenance Codes.
Chapter 272
GRAFFITI
§
272-101.   Purpose.
§
272-102.   Definitions.
§
272-103.   Prohibited activities.
§
272-104.   Exemptions.
§
272-105.   Removal of graffiti.
§
272-106.   Graffiti abatement hearing.
§
272-107.   Antigraffiti Trust Fund.
§
272-108.   Reward.
§
272-109.   Enforcement procedure.
§
272-110.   Violations and penalties; restitution.
[HISTORY: Adopted by the City Council of the City of Reading 3-23-1998 by Ord.
No. 5-1998; amended in its entirety 9-22-2003 by Ord. No. 30-2003 (Ch. 6, Part
3, of the 2001 Code of Ordinances). Subsequent amendments noted where
applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Property maintenance — See
Ch. 180, Parts 12 and 13.
§ 272-101. Purpose.
Graffiti contributes to the deterioration of property values, unsightliness and
general disorder in a community. Recognizing this community problem, the
purpose of this Part is to promote safety and general welfare of the residents/
citizens of the City by helping to create a graffiti-free environment.
§ 272-102. Definitions.
As used in this Part, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
   DIRECTOR — The Director of the Department of Public Works.
   GRAFFITI —
   A.   Any inscription, work, symbol, figure, making or design, including but
not limited to tags, throw-ups and pieces, that is marked, etched, scrawled,
stained, drawn or painted stuck on or adhered to any surface on public or
private property without the express permission of the owner or owner's agent
of such property including, but not limited to, any wall, underpass, overpass,
trestle, tree, sign, pole, playground apparatus, utility box, building,
structure, fixture or other improvement whether permanent or temporary,
regardless of the content or nature of the material that has been applied, and
which is visible from any public property or the public right-of-way, or from
any private property other than the property on which the graffiti exists.
   B.   Graffiti shall not be construed to apply to easily removable chalk
markings on the public sidewalks and streets used in connection with
traditional children's games.
   GRAFFITI ABATEMENT COSTS AND EXPENSES — The costs and expenses of having the
defaced property repaired or replaced when the City determines that removal of
the graffiti would not be cost effective; and the law enforcement costs and
expenses incurred in identifying and apprehending a responsible party; and the
related administrative, overhead and incidental costs incurred in performing or
causing the performance of the enforcement, abatement or collection procedures
described in this Part and related court costs and attorneys fees.
   GRAFFITI IMPLEMENT — Any implement capable of marking a surface to create
graffiti, including, but not limited to, aerosol or pressurized paint
containers, markers, gum labels, paint brushes or etching tools capable of
scarring glass, metal, concrete or wood.
   GUM LABELS — Any material such as, but not limited to, decals, stickers,
posters or labels which contain a substance commonly known as adhesive or glue,
which cannot be removed from the surface in an intact condition and with
minimal efforts.
   MARKER — Any indelible or permanent marker or similar implement with a
point, brush, applicator or other writing surface which at its broadest width
is 3/8 of an inch or greater and contains ink that is not water soluble.
   MINOR — Any person under the age of 18 years.
   PAINT STICK or GRAFFITI STICK — Any device containing a solid form of paint,
chalk, wax, epoxy, or other similar substances capable of being applied to a
surface by pressure and, upon application, leaving a visible mark and that is
not water soluble.
   PERSON — Every natural person, firm, corporation, partnership, association
or institution.
   PIECES — Forms of graffiti represented by detailed, multicolored murals,
ranging in size.
   PRIVATE PROPERTY — Any land and the improvements thereon owned by any person
and includes front, side and rear yards, vacant lots, buildings and other
structural improvements, walkways and alleyways and parking areas designed or
used either wholly or in part for private residential, industrial or commercial
purposes, whether inhabited or temporarily or continuously uninhabited or
vacant, including any yard, grounds, walk, driveway, porch, steps, vestibule or
mailbox belonging or appurtenant to such dwelling, house, building or
structure.
   PUBLIC OFFICER — Any police officer or any public official authorized to
enforce laws of the City of Reading as set forth in the Code of the City.
   TAGS — A form of graffiti represented by stylized signatures of a writer's
chosen name.
   THROW-UPS — A form of graffiti represented by large names or figures written
in a bubble style, often with an outline written in a different color than the
interior of the letters.
§ 272-103. Prohibited activities.
   A.   It shall be unlawful for any person to commit any overt act resulting
in or attempting to result in an application of graffiti.
   B.   It shall be unlawful for any person to intentionally, maliciously or
wantonly expose or tend to expose another to risk of violence, contempt or
hatred on the basis of race, color, creed or religion by the use of what is
commonly known as graffiti.
   C.   It shall be unlawful for any parent, legal guardian or other person
having custody and care of any minor child under the age of 18 years to
knowingly assist, aid, abet, allow permit or encourage said minor to violate
the provisions of this Part, as herein defined, either by words, overt act or
by failing to act.
   D.   All persons directly or indirectly involved in acts of graffiti
vandalism may be found to be equally responsible and guilty of the act, in
addition to the individual who may personally deface the object or area, such
as others in the group who knowingly make available the tools, writing
materials, ladders, lookouts, materials or assistance, or who knowingly
supplies funds to acquire such materials for such purposes.
   E.   Every person who owns, conducts, operates or manages a retail,
commercial establishment selling aerosol containers of spray paint or broad-
tipped indelible markers shall place a sign in clear public view at or near the
display of such products stating:
   GRAFFITI IS A CRIME. ANY PERSON DEFACING REAL OR PERSONAL PROPERTY NOT HIS
OR HER OWN WITH PAINT OR ANY OTHER LIQUID OR DEVICE IS GUILTY OF A CRIME
PUNISHABLE BY A FINE OF UP TO $1,000 OR A PRISON SENTENCE.
   F.   It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of 18 to have in
their possession any graffiti implement while on any public highway, street,
alleyway, sidewalk, park, playground, swimming pool or other public place or
property or on private property unless the owner of that property consented to
the presence of the paint or marker, whether such person is or not in any
automobile, vehicle or other means or method of conveyance.
   G.   It shall be unlawful for any person to have, in his or her possession,
a graffiti implement while in any public park, playground, swimming pool,
recreational facility (other than highway, street, alleyway or sidewalk) except
authorized employees of the City of Reading or an individual or authorized
employee of an individual or company under contract with the City of Reading.
   H.   It is unlawful for any person to have in his or her possession any
graffiti implement on private property closed to the public without permission
from the owner or his lawful agent.
§ 272-104. Exemptions.
This prohibition shall not apply to a child using paint or a marker while under
the immediate supervision of their parent or legal guardian, a student under
direct supervision of their teacher or an employee using paint or a maker at
the direction and under the supervision of their employer.
§ 272-105. Removal of graffiti.
   A.   Wherever a public officer becomes aware of the existence of graffiti on
any property, structures or improvements within the City that is visible to the
public, the Director, upon such discovery, shall give or cause to be given,
notice to remove or effectively obscure such graffiti within five days from
receipt of any notice given by the City, and will then inform the Director that
such notice has been given. This notice shall include a description of the City
of Reading Graffiti Program. This description shall include methods approved
for graffiti removal that do not require the use of chemicals. The notice shall
be given to the owner, agent or manager of said property, structure or
improvement who shall:
      (1)   Cause the graffiti to be removed or effectively obscured.
      (2)   Provide written consent and waiver of liability to authorize the
Director to remove or effectively obscure any graffiti at no cost to the
property owner.
      (3)   Have the graffiti removed by the City without the owner's consent,
consistent with provisions of this Part.
   B.   The notice may be served by:
      (1)   Handing the notice to the owner of the property in person.
      (2)   Posting the notice on or near the front door of the property that
is defaced with graffiti.
      (3)   If the property defaced with the graffiti does not consist of a
building, the notice shall be on a placard attached to a stake driven into the
ground on the property.
   C.   Where property defaced by graffiti is owned by a public entity other
than the City, the Director shall cause removal of the graffiti only after
securing the consent of an authorized representative of the public entity that
has jurisdiction over the structure.
   D.   Whenever the City becomes aware or is notified and determines that
graffiti is located on publicly or privately owned property viewable from a
public or quasi-public place, the City shall be authorized to use public funds
for the removal of the graffiti, or for the painting or repairing of the
graffiti, but shall not authorize or undertake to provide for the painting or
repair of any more extensive an area than that where the graffiti is located,
unless the Director of Public Works determines in writing that a more extensive
area is required to be repainted or repaired in order to avoid an aesthetic
disfigurement to the neighborhood or community, or unless the property owner or
responsible party agrees to pay for the costs of repainting or repairing the
more extensive area.
   E.   Prior to entering upon private property or property owned by a public
entity other than the City for the purpose of graffiti removal, the City shall
attempt to secure the consent of the property owner or responsible party and a
release of the City from liability for property damage or personal injury. If
the property owner or responsible party fails to remove the offending graffiti
within the time specified by this chapter and the notice, or if the City has
requested consent to remove or paint over the offending graffiti and the
property owner or responsible party has refused consent for entry on terms
acceptable to the City and consistent with the terms of this section, the City
shall commence to remove or repair the graffiti without the consent of the
owner.
   F.   Section 302.9 of the International Property Maintenance Code shall
govern unless the property owner or responsible party shall consent and release
the City from liability for purposes of graffiti removal.1,2
1.   Editor's Note: See
Ch. 180, Construction Codes, Part 13, International Property Maintenance Code.
2.   Editor's Note: Added during codification (see
Ch. 1, General Provisions, Part 2).
§ 272-106. Graffiti abatement hearing.
At a hearing requested by the property owner, the owner shall be entitled to
present evidence and argue that his or her property does not contain graffiti.
The determination of the Director after the hearing shall be final and not
appealable. After the hearing, if the Director determines that the property
contains graffiti, the Director may order that the graffiti be abated.
§ 272-107. Antigraffiti Trust Fund.
There is hereby created the City of Reading Antigraffiti Trust Fund. Civil and
criminal penalties assessed against violators of this Part and public and
private sector contributions and grants to the City for graffiti abatement
efforts shall be placed in the fund. The Director shall direct the expenditures
of monies in the fund which shall be limited to the payment of the cost of
removal of graffiti, the costs of administering this Part, public awareness
programs and any such other public purpose as may be approved by City Council
and the Mayor.
§ 272-108. Reward.
The Mayor or his designee may grant awards up to the sum of $200 for
information leading to the arrest and/or conviction of any individual for
violating provisions of this Part. Reward funds are to be paid from the
Antigraffiti Trust Fund.
§ 272-109. Enforcement procedure.
[Added 11-24-2008 by Ord. No. 74-2008]
   A.   If the party cited for a violation of this Part is a minor/juvenile, a
citation may be issued to the minor/juvenile and the parent(s) and/or guardian
(s). If cited, the minor/juvenile and parent(s) or guardian(s) shall appear in
District Justice Court. The parent(s) or guardian(s) shall be forwarded a copy
of the citation of the juvenile, and said citation will be mailed via certified
mail, return receipt requested, and will include a warning that the parent(s)
is (are) responsible and liable as the juvenile's parent(s). Any and all
records of such citations shall be maintained in the City's database. Each
violation shall constitute a separate offense.
   B.   If the parent(s) or guardian(s) has (have) been warned pursuant to
Subsection A hereof, then the officer may issue a citation to the parent(s) or
guardian(s) for every subsequent violation of this Part. Each violation shall
constitute a separate offense.
   C.   Once a citation is issued, pursuant to Subsection B hereof, each and
every subsequent violation of this Part is cause for an officer to issue a
citation to the parent(s) or guardian(s) of the juvenile.
   D.   If any operator of an establishment or any agents or employees of any
operator fail to comply with the provisions of this Part, a police officer
shall issue a citation for said violation. Each violation shall constitute a
separate offense.
§ 272-110. Violations and penalties; restitution.
[Amended 11-24-2008 by Ord. No. 74-2008]
   A.   Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate §
272-103, Prohibited activities, shall be, upon conviction thereof, sentenced to
pay a fine of $300 for the first offense and a fine of $1,000 plus costs and,
in default of payment of said fine and costs, to a term of imprisonment not to
exceed 30 days for a second or subsequent offense.
   B.   In addition to any penalty in accordance with this Part, the defendant
shall make restitution to the victim for damages or loss caused directly or
indirectly by the defendant's offense in reasonable amount or manner to be
determined by the court.
   C.   In addition to such penalty, the court may, in imposing sentence, order
the defendant to perform community service no less than 50 hours and not to
exceed 100 hours.
Chapter 288
HEALTH AND SAFETY
Part 1
Health Code
§
288-101.   Purpose.
§
288-102.   Definitions.
§
288-103.   Inspections.
§
288-104.   Notice of violation; hearings and appeals.
§
288-105.   Reporting health violations; false reports; obstructing inspectors.
§
288-106.   Rodent and insect infestation.
§
288-107.   Sanitary sewer connection; toilet facilities.
§
288-108.   Incinerators.
§
288-109.   Animal bite incidents.
§
288-110.   Communicable diseases.
§
288-111.   Animal maintenance.
§
288-112.   Dangerous gases.
§
288-113.   Property, structure, fence and sign maintenance; weeds.
§
288-114.   Enforcement; rules and regulations.
§
288-115.   Violations and penalties.
Part 2
Indoor Furniture
§
288-201.   Intent and purpose.
§
288-202.   Definitions.
§
288-203.   Outside placement of indoor furniture prohibited.
§
288-204.   Enforcement.
§
288-205.   Violations and penalties.
§
288-206.   Remedy cumulative.
Part 3
Boarded-Up Structures
§
288-301.   Definitions.
§
288-302.   Reporting requirements.
§
288-303.   Boarding requirements; conformity.
§
288-304.   Enforcement.
§
288-305.   Compliance notice.
§
288-306.   Work by City; costs as lien.
§
288-307.   Violations and penalties.
Part 4
Stagnant Water Pools
§
288-401.   Definitions.
§
288-402.   Stagnant water pool declared to be public nuisance.
§
288-403.   Enforcement.
§
288-404.   Compliance notice; appeal.
§
288-405.   Work by City; costs as lien.
§
288-406.   Violations and penalties.
Part 5
Unprotected Vehicle Tires
§
288-501.   Definitions.
§
288-502.   Unprotected vehicle tire declared to be public nuisance.
§
288-503.   Enforcement.
§
288-504.   Compliance notice; appeal.
§
288-505.   Work by City; costs as lien.
§
288-506.   Violations and penalties.
[HISTORY: Adopted by the City Council of the City of Reading as indicated in
part histories. Amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Property maintenance — See
Ch. 180, Part 13.
Food code — See
Ch. 251.
STATE LAW REFERENCES
Health Officer duties — See 53 P.S. § 37306.
Powers of Board of Health — See 53 P.S. § 37308 et seq.
Disease prevention and control — See 35 P.S. § 521.1 et seq.
Solid waste storage — See 35 P.S. § 6018.104.
Rodent and insect control information — See 71 P.S. § 450.
Releasing poison gas — See 18 P.S. §§ 3302, 3304.
Sewage Facilities Act — See 35 P.S. § 750.1 et seq.
Air pollution — See 35 P.S. § 4001 et seq.
Power to regulate junkyards — See 53 P.S. § 37403(63).
Dog Law — See 3 P.S. § 459-101 et seq.
Part 1
Health Code
[Adopted 9-19-1973 By Ord. No. 40-1973 1 (Ch. 10, Part 1, Of The 2001 Code Of
Ordinances)]
1.   Editor's Note: Ordinance No. 28-2010, Adopted 6-28-2010, Repealed This
Part 1, Health Code, To The Extent Inconsistent With Or In Direct Contrast To
The Property Maintenance Rules And Regulations, Enacted And Authorized By Ord.
No. 28-2010 (
Ch. 180, Part 12).
§ 288-101. Purpose.
This Part is enacted for the protection of the health, safety and welfare of
the people of the City of Reading.
§ 288-102. Definitions.
[Amended 5-29-2001 by Ord. No. 14-2001]
As used in this Part, certain terms are defined as follows:
   APPROVED — Approved by the Health Officer or his duly appointed
representative.
   BOARD OF HEALTH — The Board of Health of the City of Reading, Pennsylvania.
   CESSPOOL — The unapproved means used, or intended to be used, for the
disposal of sewage.
   DEBRIS — Any material upon the premises that is a residue of structural
demolition, or any other material that is not neatly stored, stacked or piled
in such a manner so as not to create a nuisance or become a harboring place or
food supply for insects and rodents.
   EMERGENCY — Whenever a condition exists which represents imminent danger to
the health, safety and morals of the City.
   EXTERMINATION — The control and elimination of insects, rodents or other
pests by eliminating their harboring places; by removing or making inaccessible
materials that may service as their food or harboring place; by poisoning,
spraying or trapping; or by any other recognized legal pest elimination method
approved by the Health Officer.
   GARBAGE — The animal and vegetable wastes resulting from the handling,
preparation, cooking or consumption of food.
   HEALTH OFFICER — The Health Officer appointed by the City or his duly
authorized representative.
   INFESTATION — The presence, within or around any structure, or evidence
thereof upon the land parcel, any rats, harmful insects, bacteria or other
pests.
   INSPECTOR — The authorized inspector of the City.
   JUNK — Any discarded material or article and shall include, but not be
limited to, scrap metal, scrapped, abandoned, junked motor vehicles, including
the commercial storage of wrecked automobiles, pending disposition thereof,
machinery, equipment, paper, glass, containers and structures. It shall not
include, however, refuse or garbage kept in proper containers for the purpose
of prompt disposal.
   JUNKYARD — Any place where any junk as hereinafter defined, is stored,
disposed of or accumulated.
   OWNER — Any person, who alone or jointly with others:
   A.   Shall have legal title or equitable title to the premises; or
   B.   Shall have charge, care, custody or control of any parcel of land and
the structures thereupon, as owner, or agent of the owner, executor, executrix,
administrator, administratrix, trustee or guardian of the estate of the owner.
   PERSON — Includes any individual, firm, corporation, association or
partnership.
   PREMISES — Includes any structure within and all land about such structures,
including any parcels contiguous and owned or maintained by the same person.
Premises shall also be construed as though it were followed by the words "or
any part thereof."
   PROPERTY IMPROVEMENT DIVISION — Property Improvement Division of the City of
Reading, Pennsylvania.
   SEWER CONNECTION — The connection of sanitary waste lines to the sanitary
sewer system of the City.
   SOLID WASTE — All materials, both organic and inorganic, that are intended
for disposal.
§ 288-103. Inspections.
   A.   The Health Officer and his duly authorized representative are
authorized to make necessary inspections of commercial and private premises
located within the City, in order to safeguard the health and safety of the
general public. He is authorized to enter, for the purpose of examining and
surveying, all areas of suspected health hazards in order to determine the
degree of threat of such suspected health hazards to the community.
   B.   If permission to enter upon any premises for the purpose of inspection
is denied, the inspecting officer shall apply for a search warrant. He shall
supply all necessary affidavits containing knowledge of probable cause for the
issuance of a search warrant.
   C.   Probable cause shall mean:
      (1)   The affiant has knowledge of a violation of any Health Code
provision that may endanger or otherwise affect the health and safety of the
inhabitants of the City.
      (2)   That such entry is for the purpose of reinspecting, necessitated by
a previous notice of a health violation.
   D.   A warrant shall not be required for entry when:
      (1)   Emergency measures are required when there is imminent danger to
public health and safety.
      (2)   When entry is by permission of, or at the request of, the owner or
occupant.
      (3)   Where an inherent condition requires immediate inspection to
determine if an imminent danger to health or safety exists.
      (4)   When inspections can be made without entering any locked structure
or enclosure.
   E.   No inspector who gains entrance to a dwelling unit for the purpose of
inspection, may obtain or furnish evidence of, or testify to, any offense other
than a codes violation, except with respect to a misdemeanor or felony
involving an act of violence which has been committed in his presence.
§ 288-104. Notice of violation; hearings and appeals.
   A.   Whenever the Health Officer has cause to believe that a violation
exists, contrary to the rules and regulations adopted by this Part, he shall
give notice of the violation to the responsible person thereof in the following
manner:
      (1)   The notice shall be in writing, and shall state the place and
manner of the violation.
      (2)   State the nature or condition of it.
      (3)   State the name of the person who he deems responsible thereof,
together with the name of the owner of the premises involved.
      (4)   State the date of the notice and the number of days allowed for
compliance.
      (5)   Such notice shall be served upon the owner, his agent or occupant,
as the case may be, by personal service or by posting the same in a conspicuous
place on or about the premises, or by first class mail to the last known
address.
   B.   When in the opinion of the Health Officer an emergency condition
exists, a verbal order to the person or persons believed to be responsible
shall be as binding as if written notice was given.
   C.   Any person affected by the notice issued under this Part or any rule or
regulation adopted pursuant to it shall, upon request in writing, be granted a
hearing by the Health Officer. Such request for hearing shall be filed in the
office of the Health Officer within five days after the date the notice of
violation was served. Upon request, such person shall contain a brief statement
of grounds for a hearing thereon.
   D.   Upon receipt of a request for hearing, the Health Officer shall within
15 days thereof, set a time and place for such hearing. At the hearing, the
petitioner shall be given an opportunity to be heard and show cause why the
notice of violation should be modified or withdrawn.
   E.   After such hearing, the Health Officer shall issue an order sustaining,
modifying or withdrawing the notice of violation. Any notice served pursuant to
Subsection A of this section shall become a final order if a written request
for hearing is not filed within the prescribed time.
   F.   Any person affected by the Health Officer's final order after hearing
thereon pursuant to the provision of Subsections C and D of this section shall
have the right to appeal such order within five days in writing with Council,
who sitting as a Board of Health, shall review such decision and take testimony
and hear such witnesses and make such findings as they shall deem appropriate,
and sustain, modify or withdraw the notice of violation. Provided by law,
further appeal may be had by any person affected by the final order of Council
sitting as the Board of Health to the Court of Common Pleas as provided,
however, any appeal to the Court of Common Pleas shall not act as a supersede
as to the final order of the Board of Health unless so provided in the order of
appeal.
§ 288-105. Reporting health violations; false reports; obstructing inspectors.
[Amended 5-29-2001 by Ord. No. 14-2001]
   A.   All persons reporting violations of this Health Code shall be required
to state their name, address and telephone number for the purpose of validating
the complaint.
   B.   No person shall knowingly make to or file with the Property Improvement
Division or Health Officer any false, untruthful or misleading statements
relative to the application of this Health Code.
   C.   No person shall willfully resist, obstruct, abuse or interfere with any
inspector engaged in the execution of his duties. 2
2.   Editor's Note: Original § 10-106, Solid and liquid wastes, which
immediately followed this section, was repealed during codification (see
Ch. 1, General Provisions, Part 2).
§ 288-106. Rodent and insect infestation.
   A.   Each person shall be responsible for the extermination and control of
insect and rodent infestation occurring upon any premises under his care,
control or custody.
   B.   Insect and rodent extermination and control measures used shall be only
those approved by the Health Officer, unless such extermination and control
measures shall be performed by an approved and licensed professional
exterminator.
   C.   Nonprofessional use of rodenticides shall be limited to anticoagulant-
based bait, unless otherwise approved by the Health Officer.
   D.   Treatment for the extermination and control of insects shall be done
only with the use of an approved insecticide.
   E.   Each person shall be responsible to prevent the ponding, or to correct
the condition of surface conditions that cause the ponding and stagnation of
water to eliminate breeding places for mosquitoes, bacteria, aquatic growth or
other insects.
   F.   Rain water and surface water shall be properly conducted to the gutter
or storm sewer system.
§ 288-107. Sanitary sewer connection; toilet facilities.
   A.   All premises containing water closet facilities and all premises
containing toilet facilities including hand lavatories, urinals and bathtubs or
showers shall have waste lines conducted to the City sanitary sewer system,
where municipal sewer lines are available.
   B.   Where toilet facilities are provided for the public, or where toilet
facilities are provided for employees, toilet facilities shall be provided for
each sex, and shall include hand-washing facilities with hot and cold water,
soap dispenser, single-service towels or hand-drying facilities, and approved
waste receptacles.
   C.   The floors and walls of provided toilet facilities shall be impervious
to water, smooth and easily cleanable.
   D.   Toilet rooms without natural light and ventilation shall be provided
with an exhaust system activated by the operation of the light switch, capable
of changing the total number of cubic feet of air every five minutes.
   E.   On-lot sewage systems are permitted only where municipal sewer lines
are not available. On-lot sewage shall be constructed in accordance with the
Pennsylvania Sewage Facilities Act,3 and shall be approved by the Health
Officer.
   F.   Each property owner shall be responsible for the correction of
malfunction of any on-lot sewage system.
   G.   Potable water, when made available by the City, shall be used in
preference to any other water source.
3.   Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 750.1 et seq.
§ 288-108. Incinerators.
[Amended 5-29-2001 by Ord. No. 14-2001]
   A.   Both indoor and outdoor, commercial and noncommercial incinerators
shall be of a type approved by the State Department of Environmental
Protection.
   B.   Incinerators used for the reduction of solid waste volumes shall not
emit noxious fumes or odors, and the visible effluent shall not exceed the
limitations of Ringelmann Chart No. 2 for particulate matter such as smoke,
soot and fly ash.
   C.   The ash, or other residue, from the burning of combustibles in an
approved incinerator shall be stored in the same manner as other solid wastes.
   D.   Incinerators located within structures shall provide a separate room
containing storage facilities for materials to be incinerated. Each room shall
be provided with adequate ventilation and fire first aid as required by the
City Fire Marshal; except for dwelling structures containing no more than two
dwelling units.
§ 288-109. Animal bite incidents.
[Amended 5-29-2001 by Ord. No. 14-2001; 7-27-2009 by Ord. No. 39-2009; 10-12-
2020 by Ord. No. 65-2020]
   A.   Animal bite incidents shall be reported to the Property Maintenance
Division and the City Health Officer by the animal owner or the victim
providing the name and address of the victim, telephone number if known, age of
the victim, the time and the date of the biting incident, the type of animal
and the name and address of the attending physician. When known, the report
shall include the name and address of the animal owner.
   B.   Any animal which bites or attacks a human being shall be confined in
quarters approved by the City's animal control authority, property maintenance
inspector or a police officer. The animal shall be detained and isolated in an
approved kennel or at the animal owner's property or at another location
approved by the investigating officer. Where the animal is detained is at the
discretion of the investigating officer. All animals so detained must be
isolated for a minimum of 10 days. Any costs incurred in the detaining and
isolation of the animal shall be paid by the offending animal's owner or keeper
or both. If the animal's owner or keeper is not known, the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania is responsible for all reasonable costs for holding and detaining
the animal.
      (1)   Within the ten-day quarantine period, the owner shall arrange to
have the animal examined by a licensed veterinarian, and return his signed
diagnosis and/or opinion to the Property Maintenance Division and the City
Health Officer on the notice form provided.
      (2)   In the event that the animal dies within the quarantine period, it
shall be the owner's responsibility to report the animal's death to the
examining veterinarian and to the Property Maintenance Division and the City
Health Officer, and further make available the dead carcass for further
examination.
      (3)   No person shall destroy, or have destroyed, any animal involved in
a biting incident that is being held within the ten-day quarantine period,
unless approved by the Health Officer.
      (4)   No person shall house, maintain or kennel any animal involved in a
biting incident during the ten-day quarantine period unless the owner or
operator or person maintaining such housing facility shall be made aware of the
animal biting incident and isolation facilities are provided for the animal.
Please also refer to
Chapter 141 Animals, Part 2 Animal Control, §
203 Animal Bites and Attacks, §
211 Restraining of Dangerous Dogs, Aggressive Dogs and Vicious Animals and §
216 Aggressive Dog Vicious Animal and Dangerous Dog determination/permit
required.
§ 288-110. Communicable diseases.
   A.   It shall be the responsibility of every physician practicing within the
confines of the City to report immediately to the Health Officer any of the
notifiable diseases as listed by the State Department of Health.
   B.   The Health Officer is empowered to declare any person to be quarantined
when the nature of his illness is determined to be a threat to public health.
      (1)   When an emergency exists that threatens the public health, the
Health Officer is authorized and empowered to enforce stricter quarantine
regulations than herein declared.
      (2)   The period of quarantine shall be that period of time that the
Health Officer considers the disease of the infected person communicable.
   C.   No person suffering from a quarantinable disease shall enter any hired
or public conveyance or common carrier, nor enter upon public areas or places
of public gathering.
   D.   The Health Officer shall order adequate terminal disinfection,
cleansing and renovation of premises in all such cases where there was death or
removal of a person suffering from quarantinable communicable diseases. 4
4.   Editor's Note: Original § 10-112, Launderettes, laundromats and/or coin-
operated laundries, which immediately followed this section, was repealed
during codification (see
Ch. 1, General Provisions, Part 2).
§ 288-111. Animal maintenance.
[Amended 11-28-2005 by Ord. No. 88-2005]
   A.   All persons shall be responsible for the sanitary maintenance of the
premises on which any animals are housed, maintained or kenneled.
   B.   The number of animals housed or maintained within a structure, or upon
any premises, shall be limited only to those animals that can be adequately
maintained in a clean and sanitary condition as determined by the Health
Officer.
   C.   Animal shelters, or areas in which animals are maintained, shall be
permitted only as approved by the Health Officer. Animal shelters shall not be
constructed or located in such a manner that it creates a health hazard or
nuisance to the adjoining property owners.
   D.   People owning, harboring or keeping an animal within the City shall not
permit any waste matter from the animal to collect and remain on the property
of the owner or custodian, or on the property of others so as to cause or
create an unhealthy, unsanitary, dangerous or offensive living condition on the
owner's or custodian's property, or to abutting property of others.
   E.   Excess animal food shall not be allowed to accumulate in such a manner
as to create a food source for bacteria, insects or rodents.
   F.   No person shall maintain, transport or carry any animal or pet in any
eating and drinking establishment, food manufacturing or food service facility,
except trained guide dogs for the blind.
   G.   Owners of leashed or unleashed animals shall be responsible for the
removal and disposal of fecal matter deposited by his animal anywhere within
the City. 5
5.   Editor's Note: Original § 10-114, Salvage operations and junkyards, which
immediately followed this section, was repealed during codification (see
Ch. 1, General Provisions, Part 2).
§ 288-112. Dangerous gases.
No person shall use, set off, handle, sell, offer to sell or possess for any
purpose, any substance, liquefied gas or gasses designed to incapacitate or
render helpless any human being by means of drawing tears, creating nausea,
coughing or for creating hysteria or panic or for the purpose of making any
building or area untenable by human beings, or any device or apparatus designed
to liberate, set off, explode or use such substances, except as permitted by
Council.
§ 288-113. Property, structure, fence and sign maintenance; weeds.
[Amended 4-25-2005 by Ord. No. 3-2005]
   A.   Compliance. All commercial, industrial and business properties shall be
maintained in such a manner as to comply with the City Health and Sanitary
Codes.
   B.   Fences. All fences and enclosures shall be maintained in a structurally
safe and sound condition, and where necessary, shall be covered with a
protective coating such as paint, in order to prevent deterioration by the
elements.
   C.   Garages. Private passenger automobile parking garages or enclosures
shall be maintained in such a manner that they do not create an accident, fire,
health or safety hazard; or to be operated in such a manner as to create excess
noise or exhaust fumes that constitute a health hazard or nuisance. All
structures shall be maintained in a clean and sanitary condition and where
necessary as determined by the Health Officer, shall have a protective covering
to prevent deterioration.
   D.   Signs. Signs located upon any premises or attached to any structure
shall be maintained in a structurally safe condition and any loose or
overhanging objects that are unsecure shall be removed.
   E.   Vacant property. All vacant structures shall be secured in such a
manner so as to prevent access. All ground-level windows, doors and hatch ways
shall be secured, and upper floor doors and windows closed in such a manner so
that the building does not constitute a health, fire or safety hazard.
   F.   Weeds and rodent control. All premises shall be free from excessive
weed and grass growth and dead trees and shall have insect and rodent control
so that the property does not constitute a fire, health and safety hazard.
   G.   It shall be the responsibility of commercial businesses located in
residential neighborhoods to maintain the following:
      (1)   Pavements and curbs shall be clear, clean and free of litter and
debris, including glass, cinder, dirt and paper products.
      (2)   A minimum of 50% of each window must be unlittered with products
and signs that would limit a persons view of the interior of the business.
      (3)   Store windows, doors and entranceways will be clean, tidy in
appearance, and will be operable and in good repair.
      (4)   Entrance doors equipped with a window to provide visual access to
the business.
      (5)   Graffiti on the building and surrounding structures shall be abated
in accordance with
Chapter 272, Graffiti, of the Code of the City of Reading.
      (6)   Each commercial business which sells consumable products having
wrappings or packaging, such as food, beverages, snacks, toys, sundries, will
have one thirty-gallon trash receptacle near the exterior entrance to the
building. The business proprietor shall be responsible for the disposal of all
trash and litter.
      (7)   Loitering at commercial businesses located within residential
neighborhoods shall be prohibited, in accordance with
Chapter 353, Loitering; Obstructing Public Places, of the Code of the City of
Reading. 6
6.   Editor's Note: Original Subsection H, regarding enforcement and
violations, which immediately followed this section, was repealed during
codification (see
Ch. 1, General Provisions, Part 2).
§ 288-114. Enforcement; rules and regulations.
[Amended 5-29-2001 by Ord. No. 14-2001]
The Health Officer shall administer and enforce the provisions of this Part and
may make rules and regulations necessary for its administration. Such rules and
regulations shall not be in conflict with this Part and shall be submitted to
Council for approval. If the rules and regulations so submitted to Council are
approved by Council, the same shall be filed in the Property Improvement
Division and in the office of the City Clerk as an addenda to this Part. Such
rules and regulations as may be adopted shall then be deemed to be a part of
this Part and to have the same effect as this Part.
§ 288-115. Violations and penalties.
[Amended 7-21-1993 by Ord. No. 73-1993; 5-29-2001 by Ord. No. 14-2001]
Whoever violates or fails to comply with the provisions of this Part or any
other rule or regulation made in connection with it, shall be, upon conviction
thereof, sentenced to a fine of not more than $1,000 plus costs and, in default
of payment of said fine and costs, to a term of imprisonment not to exceed 30
days. Each day that a violation continues shall constitute a separate offense.
Part 2
Indoor Furniture
[Adopted 9-10-2001 By Ord. No. 32-7(Ch. 10, Part 6, Of The 2001 Code Of
Ordinances)]
§ 288-201. Intent and purpose.
Council finds that placement of indoor furniture at any location except inside
a structure, residential or otherwise, is detrimental to the well-being of the
City residents, as well as to their safety and being therefore a public health
and welfare hazard, hereby declares it to be necessary to provide for
regulation of placement of said indoor furniture.
§ 288-202. Definitions.
As used in this Part, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated,
unless a different meaning clearly appears from the context.
   INDOOR FURNITURE — Any and all pieces of furniture which are made for only
inside use including, but not limited to, upholstered chairs and sofas, etc.
   PERSON — Includes any individual, firm, corporation, association or
partnership.
§ 288-203. Outside placement of indoor furniture prohibited.
No person shall place or use outside of any structure any indoor furniture,
except if said placement is temporary to facilitate maintenance therein.
§ 288-204. Enforcement.
This Part shall be enforced by City Departments of Community Development and
Police.
§ 288-205. Violations and penalties.
Any person who shall violate any provision of this Part shall, upon conviction
thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of not less than $100 nor more than $500,
for the first violation, and not less than $200 nor more than $1,000 for the
second and subsequent offenses, plus restitution and costs, or in default of
payment, to imprisonment for a term not to exceed 30 days. Continuing
violations will be subject to citations every five days.
§ 288-206. Remedy cumulative.
The remedies provided herein for the enforcement of this Part, or any remedy
provided by law or City ordinance shall not be deemed mutually exclusive;
rather, they may be employed simultaneously or consecutively, at the option of
the City.
7.   Editor's Note: Ordinance No. 28-2010, Adopted 6-28-2010, Repealed This
Part 2, Indoor Furniture, To The Extent Inconsistent With Or In Direct Contrast
To The Property Maintenance Rules And Regulations, Enacted And Authorized By
Ord. No. 28-2010 (
Ch. 180, Part 12).
Part 3
Boarded-Up Structures
[Adopted 8-26-2002 By Ord. No. 43-2002 (Ch. 10, Part 7, of the 2001 Code of
Ordinances)]
§ 288-301. Definitions.
As used in this Part, certain terms are defined as follows:
   BOARD UP — To cover and/or secure structures'/premises' windows, doors and
similar type access points with plywood in such a manner to prevent access and/
or creation of a health, fire or safety hazard.
   PREMISES — A lot, plot or parcel of land, including any structures thereon.
STRUCTURE — That which is built or constructed or a portion thereof.
   TITLED OWNER — Any person, firm, partnership or corporation having legal
title or interest in a structure and/or premises as recorded in the official
records of the state, county or City; or guardian of the estate of any such
person, and the executor or administrator of the estate of such person if
ordered to take possession of real property by a court.
§ 288-302. Reporting requirements.
Titled owners of any and all structures and/or premises shall:
   A.   Notify the City of Reading Property Maintenance Division of the
Department of Community Development, 815 Washington Street, Rm. 1-30, Reading,
Pennsylvania
19601, in person or by letter, of the addresses of any and all boarded up
(totally or partially) structures and/or premises within seven days of initial
boarding up and/or replacement of boarding.
   B.   Provide information, in person or by letter, for said addresses to the
City of Reading Property Maintenance Division of the Department of Community
Development during the first 15 days of May and November of each year whether
subject structures and/or premises are or remain boarded up and any
rehabilitation work performed and/or planned therein. Where no rehabilitation
work has been performed or planned, proof that subject structures and/or
premises are offered for sale must also be provided as set forth above in this
subsection.
   C.   Notify the Property Maintenance Division of the Department of Community
Development, in person or by letter, within seven days whenever boarding is
removed.
§ 288-303. Boarding requirements; conformity.
   A.   Titled owners who now or subsequently own boarded up, board up, or
cause to be boarded up, structures and/or premises shall be responsible for the
appearance and conformity of any and all boarding and make sure that all
boarding is cut to conform with the size of the opening covered and is painted
the color to conform with the exterior paint of the structure and/or premises.
   B.   Titled owners shall be responsible for maintaining painted surfaces in
good condition and correct or repaint any peeling, worn, or unpainted surfaces
of the boarding materials.
§ 288-304. Enforcement.
The Property Maintenance Division of the Department of Community Development
for the City of Reading, Pennsylvania, shall enforce this Part and its sections
through its officers, inspectors and/or authorized agents.
§ 288-305. Compliance notice.
Whenever a violation of this Part is found or believed to exist, the
enforcement official shall notify the titled owner in writing by mail addressed
to him/her at his/her last known address or by posting written notice thereof
upon the structure and/or premises involved.
§ 288-306. Work by City; costs as lien.
Upon failure, neglect or refusal of any titled owner so notified to comply with
any and all applicable sections of this Part, the enforcement official is
authorized to prepare appropriate work orders for performance of work by
authorized City of Reading employees or contracted workers to effect
compliance. After said compliance work is completed, statements for work
performed shall be prepared by appropriate City employees and delivered to the
City Treasurer. Said statements shall indicate the description of the premises,
titled owner, the cost of work performed and material and shall thereafter
constitute a charge and lien against the premises affected, and such lien shall
continue in force until the full amount thereof, together with interest at the
rate of 6% per annum is paid in full.
§ 288-307. Violations and penalties.
In addition to the lien provided for herein, whoever violates or fails to
comply with the provisions of this Part shall be, upon conviction thereof,
sentenced to pay a fine of not less than $300, nor more than $1,000, plus
costs, and restitution as determined for work performed and material, and in
default of payment of said fine, costs and restitution, to a term of
imprisonment not to exceed 30 days. All fines imposed and collected under the
provisions of this Part shall be paid into the City Treasury. Each day that an
offense/violation continues shall constitute a separate offense/violation.
Part 4
Stagnant Water Pools
[Adopted 5-27-2003 By Ord. No. 17-2003 (Ch. 10, Part 9, of the 2001 Code of
Ordinances)]
§ 288-401. Definitions.
As used in this Part, certain terms are defined as follows:
   PREMISES — A lot, plot or parcel of land including any structures thereon.
   STAGNANT WATER POOL — Stagnant water in pools in which mosquitoes, flies or
other insects may multiply including, but not limited to, open containers,
sewage lagoons, ditches, roof gutters, wheelbarrows, bird baths, ornamental
pools, and swimming pools.
   STRUCTURE — That which is built or constructed or a portion thereof.
   TITLED OWNER — Any person, firm, partnership or corporation having legal
title or interest in a structure and/or premises as recorded in the official
records of the state, county or City; or guardian of the estate of any such
person, or the executor, or administrator, of the estate of such person if
ordered to take possession of real property by a court.
§ 288-402. Stagnant water pool declared to be public nuisance.
Any stagnant water pool:
   A.   Is detrimental to the safety and welfare of the public.
   B.   Creates a public health risk/hazard in light of the West Nile virus
problem.
   C.   Shall be deemed a public nuisance constituting a violation.
§ 288-403. Enforcement.
The Property Maintenance Division of the Department of Community Development
for the City of Reading, Pennsylvania, shall enforce this Part and its sections
through its officers, inspectors and/or authorized agents.
§ 288-404. Compliance notice; appeal.
   A.   Whenever a violation of this Part is found or believed to exist, the
enforcement official shall give written notice to the titled owner personally,
or by mail addressed to him/her at his/her last known address, or by posting
said written notice thereof upon the premises involved.
   B.   Required notice shall identify the premises, specifically state the
reason why notice is being issued with relevant section(s) of this Part,
include a correction order allowing a reasonable time to achieve compliance
with this Part, and set forth that any appeal requesting an appeal must be in
writing to the Manager of the Property Maintenance Division of the Department
of Community Development, City Hall, Rm. 1-130, 815 Washington Street, Reading,
Pennsylvania 19601, within the time set forth for compliance. Failure to timely
request an appeal in writing will be deemed a waiver of the same.
§ 288-405. Work by City; costs as lien.
Upon failure, neglect or refusal of any titled owner so notified to comply with
any and all applicable sections of this Part, the enforcement official is
authorized to prepare appropriate work orders for performance of work by
authorized City of Reading employees or contracted workers to effect compliance
and abatement of any nuisance on the subject premises, including entry onto
private property. After said compliance work is completed, statements for work
performed shall be prepared by appropriate City employees and delivered to the
City Treasurer. Said statements shall indicate the description of the premises,
titled owner, the cost of work performed, administrative charge, disposal
costs, and all other costs, if any, and shall constitute a charge and lien
against the premises affected, and such lien shall continue in force until the
full amount thereof, together with interest at the rate of 6% per annum is paid
in full.
§ 288-406. Violations and penalties.
In addition to the lien provided for herein, whoever violates or fails to
comply with the provisions of this Part shall be, upon conviction thereof,
sentenced to pay a fine not less than $300, nor more than $1,000, plus costs,
and restitution as determined for work performed and charges assessed and/or
paid by the City of Reading, and in default of payment of said fine, costs,
restitution, to a term of imprisonment not to exceed 30 days. All fines,
restitution, and City charges imposed and collected under the provisions of
this Part shall be paid into the City Treasury. Each day that an offense/
violation continues shall constitute a separate offense/ violation.
Part 5
Unprotected Vehicle Tires
[Adopted 5-27-2003 By Ord. No. 18-2003 (Ch. 10, Part 8, of the 2001 Code of
Ordinances)]
§ 288-501. Definitions.
As used in this Part, certain terms are defined as follows:
   PREMISES — A lot, plot or parcel of land including any structures thereon.
STRUCTURE — That which is built or constructed or a portion thereof.
   TITLED OWNER — Any person, firm, partnership or corporation having legal
title or interest in a structure and/or premises as recorded in the official
records of the state, county or City; or guardian of the estate of any such
person, or the executor, or administrator, of the estate of such person if
ordered to take possession of real property by a court.
   UNPROTECTED VEHICLE TIRE — Any uncovered vehicle tire, abandoned or not,
which is located on a premises in such a manner as to expose it to the
elements, i.e., rain, snow, etc.
§ 288-502. Unprotected vehicle tire declared to be public nuisance.
Any vehicle tire:
   A.   Is detrimental to the safety and welfare of the public.
   B.   Creates a public health risk/hazard in light of the West Nile virus
problem.
   C.   Creates a potential fire hazard.
   D.   Produces urban blight adverse to the maintenance and continuing
development of municipalities.
   E.   Shall be deemed a public nuisance constituting a violation.
§ 288-503. Enforcement.
The Property Maintenance Division of the Department of Community Development
for the City of Reading, Pennsylvania, shall enforce this Part and its sections
through its officers, inspectors and/or authorized agents.
§ 288-504. Compliance notice; appeal.
   A.   Whenever a violation of this Part is found or believed to exist, the
enforcement official shall give written notice to the titled owner personally,
or by mail addressed to him/her at his/her last known address, or by posting
said written notice thereof upon the premises involved.
   B.   Required notice shall identify the premises, specifically state the
reason why notice is being issued with relevant section(s) of this Part,
include a correction order allowing a reasonable time to achieve compliance
with this Part, and set forth that any appeal requesting an appeal must be in
writing to the Manager of the Property Maintenance Division of the Department
of Community Development, City Hall, Rm. 1-130, 815 Washington Street, Reading,
Pennsylvania 19601 within the time set forth for compliance. Failure to timely
request an appeal in writing will be deemed a waiver of the same.
§ 288-505. Work by City; costs as lien.
Upon failure, neglect or refusal of any titled owner so notified to comply with
any and all applicable sections of this Part, the enforcement official is
authorized to prepare appropriate work orders for performance of work by
authorized City of Reading employees or contracted workers to effect compliance
and abatement of any nuisance on the subject premises, including entry onto
private property. After said compliance work is completed, statements for work
performed shall be prepared by appropriate City employees and delivered to the
City Treasurer. Said statements shall indicate the description of the premises,
titled owner, the cost of work performed, administrative charge, disposal
costs, and all other costs, if any, and shall constitute a charge and lien
against the premises affected, and such lien shall continue in force until the
full amount thereof, together with interest at the rate of 6% per annum, is
paid in full.
§ 288-506. Violations and penalties.
In addition to the lien provided for herein, whoever violates or fails to
comply with the provisions of this Part shall be, upon conviction thereof,
sentenced to pay a fine not less than $300, nor more than $1,000, plus costs,
and restitution as determined for work performed and charges assessed and/or
paid by the City of Reading, and in default of payment of said fine, costs,
restitution, to a term of imprisonment not to exceed 30 days. All fines,
restitution, and City charges imposed and collected under the provisions of
this Part shall be paid into the City Treasury. Each day that an offense/
violation continues shall constitute a separate offense/ violation.
Chapter 295
HISTORICAL AND CONSERVATION DISTRICTS
§
295-101.   Purpose.
§
295-102.   Word usage; definitions.
§
295-103.   Scope.
§
295-104.   District Map.
§
295-105.   Boundaries.
§
295-106.   Enforcement and administration.
§
295-107.   Required permits and certificates.
§
295-108.   Review process and procedure for a certificate of appropriateness.
§
295-109.   Approval and issuance of a certificate of appropriateness by
Preservation Officer.
§
295-110.   Issuance of a certificate of appropriateness for applications
referred to Board.
§
295-111.   Reading Board of Historical Architectural Review.
§
295-112.   Functions of Board of Historical Architectural Review.
§
295-113.   Proper maintenance and demolition by neglect.
§
295-114.   Hazardous structures.
§
295-115.   Emergency issuance of a certificate of appropriateness.
§
295-116.   Financial hardship.
§
295-117.   Conflict with other provisions.
§
295-118.   Interpretation.
§
295-119.   Appeals.
§
295-120.   Relief from City employee and appointee liability.
§
295-121.   Amendments.
§
295-122.   Notice and prosecution.
§
295-123.   Violations and penalties.
[HISTORY: Adopted by the City Council of the City of Reading 5-23-2005 by Ord.
No. 35A-2005 (
Ch. 4, Part 1, of the 2001 Code of Ordinances). Amendments noted where
applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Construction codes — See
Ch. 180.
Zoning — See
Ch. 600.
STATE LAW REFERENCES
Historic Districts — See 53 P.S. § 8001 et seq.
§ 295-101. Purpose.
   A.   For the general purpose of protecting those historical areas, buildings
and structures within the City which have distinctive character recalling the
rich architectural and historical heritage of the City of Reading and
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, and of making those historical areas, buildings
and structures a source of inspiration to our citizens by awakening interest in
our historic past, and to promote the general welfare, education and culture of
the City, the following sections, subsections, provisions, regulations,
limitations, restrictions, sentences, clauses, phrases and words be and hereby
are enacted into law by authority of the Charter of the City of Reading.
   B.   This chapter is enacted for the following specific purposes:
      (1)   To protect those areas, buildings and structures of the City which
reflect the cultural, economical, social, political and architectural history
of the City, commonwealth and nation.
      (2)   To awaken, in our citizens, an interest in our historic past.
      (3)   To foster civic pride in the architectural, historical, cultural
and educational accomplishments of Reading.
      (4)   To promote the use and reuse of the historic areas, buildings and
structures of the City for the culture, education, pleasure and the general
welfare of the people of the City, commonwealth, and nation.
      (5)   To strengthen the economy of the City by improving property values
within the historic districts and City at large and by enhancing the City's
attractiveness to visitors.
      (6)   To encourage new buildings and developments that shall be
harmonious with existing historic and architecturally important areas,
buildings and structures.
      (7)   To enable the City to participate actively in the National Register
of Historic Places program and procedures and the National Certified Local
Government Program to qualify for grant assistance and to conform to state and
federal standards and guidelines established by statute and regulation.
§ 295-102. Word usage; definitions.
   A.   For the purposes of this chapter, all words used in the present tense
include the future tense. All words in the plural number include the singular
number and all words in the singular number include the plural number, unless
the natural construction of the word clearly indicates otherwise. The word
"shall" is mandatory and not directory. The word "used" includes "designated,
intended, built or arranged to be used."
   B.   The following words and phrases shall have the meanings ascribed to
them in this section.
   ALTER or ALTERATION — Any change, modification or addition to a part of or
all of the exterior of any building, structure, site or object which is not
otherwise covered by the definition of demolition.
   ANTENNA — An antenna that is one meter (39.37 inches) or less in diameter or
diagonal measurement and is designed to receive video programming service via
broadband radio service, to receive or transmit fixed wireless signals other
than via satellite, or designed to receive local television broadcast signals.
Such antennas may be mounted on masts to reach the height needed to establish
line-of-sight contact with the transmitter. Masts higher than antennas used for
AM/FM radio, amateur (ham) radio, CB radio, digital radio services (DARS), or
antennas used as part of a hub to relay signals among multiple locations are
not covered by these rules. [Amended 6-8-2009 by Ord. No. 16-2009]
   BOARD — The Reading Board of Historical Architectural Review.
   BUILDING — Any enclosed or open structure, its site and appurtenances, which
is a combination of materials to form a construction for occupancy and/or use,
including mobile homes and trailers, to be used for any reason whatsoever.
   BUILDING INSPECTOR — The Chief Building Inspector of the City or his
designee.
   BUILDING PERMIT — The authorization statement to construct, alter,
reconstruct, repair, restore, demolish or raze all or part of any building,
structure, site or object.
   CERTIFICATE OF APPROPRIATENESS — The approval statement issued by the
Preservation Officer, as authorized by the Board or Council, which certifies
the appropriateness of a particular request for the construction, alteration,
reconstruction, restoration, demolition or razing of all or a part of any
building or structure within a historical district and which authorizes the
issuance of a building permit for such request.
   CITY — The City of Reading.
   CITY CLERK — The Clerk of the City of Reading.
   COMMONWEALTH — The Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
   CONSTRUCT or CONSTRUCTION — Any activity affecting the general design,
arrangement, texture, materials or colors of a building, structure or object,
including the erection of a new building, structure or object upon a site.
   CONTRIBUTING BUILDING, STRUCTURE, SITE OR OBJECT — A building, structure,
site or object within a district that reflects the historical or architectural
character of the district, and which received a "significant," "good" or
"outstanding" rating in the Comprehensive Historical Sites Survey, conducted in
1980.
   COUNCIL — The governing body of the City of Reading.
   DEMOLITION or DEMOLISH — The razing or destruction, entirely or in part, of
a building, structure, site or object.
   DEMOLITION BY NEGLECT — Neglect in the maintenance and/or repair of a
building, structure, site or object resulting in its deterioration and/or
destruction.
   DESIGN — The architectural arrangement of exterior features as well as well
as mass, height, appearance and the texture, color, nature and composition of
materials.
   DISTRICT — A geographically definable area possessing a significant
concentration, linkage, or continuity of buildings, structures, sites, or
objects united by past events, plan, or physical development.
   FACADE — The exterior walls of any building or structure.
   GAS MAIN — The primary gas utility pipe typically located below a public
right-of-way. [Added 8-24-2015 by Ord. No. 45-2015]
   GAS METER — A specialized flow meter, used to measure the volume of fuel
gases such as natural gas and propane. [Added 8-24-2015 by Ord. No. 45-2015]
   GAS METER ASSEMBLY — A gas meter installation including, individually or
jointly, associated gas pressure regulator, valves, and piping. [Added 8-24-
2015 by Ord. No. 45-2015]
   GAS PRESSURE REGULATOR — A valve that regulates the flow of gas at a
specified pressure. [Added 8-24-2015 by Ord. No. 45-2015]
   GAS SERVICE — Gas piping between the gas main and the gas meter assembly.
[Added 8-24-2015 by Ord. No. 45-2015]
   HISTORIC DISTRICT — A district which is designated pursuant to this chapter
or prior historic district ordinances as amended.
   IN-KIND REPLACEMENT — Replacement of deteriorated features with new features
identical in design, texture, material, form, massing, detailing and
dimensions.
   MAJORITY VOTE — Votes by more than half of the members of the Reading Board
of Historical Architectural Review in attendance at a regular Board meeting.
   MAYOR — The chief executive of the City of Reading.
   NATION — The United States of America.
   OBJECT — A material thing of functional, aesthetic, cultural, historical or
scientific value that may be, by nature or design, movable yet related to a
specific setting or environment.
   OTHER MODERN DEVICE — Any other device, communication or other, utilized to
assist in viewer's ability to receive video programming signals from direct
broadcast satellites, broadband radio service, and television broadcast
stations (TVBS). [Amended 6-8-2009 by Ord. No. 16-2009]
   PERMIT — A certificate issued by the Building Inspector which approves the
construction, reconstruction, alteration, restoration, demolition or razing of
any building or structure, in whole or in part, within any historical district
and which is subject to the provisions of this chapter.
   PUBLIC STREET OR WAY — Any land dedicated to public use or passage
including, but not limited to, streets, alleys, parks, pedestrian rights-of-way
and other public rights-of- way, whether constructed, dedicated or proposed.
   READING HISTORICAL ARCHITECTURAL REVIEW BOARD — The agency established by
this chapter to review requests for authorization to construct, alter,
reconstruct, restore or demolish all or a part of any building or structure
within a historic district and to approve or deny such requests.
   RECONSTRUCTION — Any or all work needed to remake or to rebuild all or part
of any building or structure to a sound condition, but not necessarily of
original materials.
   RESTORATION — Any or all work involved in returning a building or structure,
or a part thereof, to its original condition or nearly original condition
through the use of original or nearly original materials. Condition shall refer
to design rather than to structural stability.
   SATELLITE DISH — A "dish" antenna that is one meter (39.37 inches) or less
in diameter and is designed to receive direct broadcast satellite service,
including direct-to-home satellite service, or to transmit fixed wireless
signals via satellite. [Amended 6-8-2009 by Ord. No. 16-2009]
   SIGN — Any device, structure or object for visual communication, including
its structure and component parts, that is used for the purpose of bringing the
subject thereof to the attention of people, but not including any cloth flag of
any public, quasi-public, civic, charitable or religious group.
   SITE — The location of a significant historic event, occupation or activity,
or a building or structure, whether standing, ruined, or vanished, where the
location itself maintains historical, cultural or archaeological value
regardless of the value of any existing structure.
   STRUCTURE — A work made up of interdependent and interrelated parts in a
definite pattern of organization constructed by man and affixed to real
property.
§ 295-103. Scope.
[Amended 6-25-2012 by Ord. No. 70-2012]
The chapter regulates and restricts the construction, reconstruction,
alteration, restoration, demolition or razing of any building, structure, site
or object within a designated historic or conservation district, in whole or in
part, and prescribes certain procedures relating to the issuance of permits for
such properties.
§ 295-104. District Map.1
The Reading Historic District Maps, together with all explanatory matter
thereon, are hereby adopted by reference and declared to be part of this
chapter. Such maps shall bear the seal of the City under the following words:
"This is to certify that this is an official historic district map of the City
of Reading." Such maps shall also contain the date of the adoption of this
chapter along with the dates and numbers of all ordinances amending it.
§ 295-105. Boundaries.
   A.   The historic districts.
      (1)   Callowhill Historic District. The Callowhill Historic District is
hereby created and described verbally as follows:
         (a)   All that certain district, tract, area or piece of land intended
to be known as the "Callowhill Historic District," as shown on a map bearing
the same title, consisting of parcels held in separate ownership located
abutting or near Fifth Street between Buttonwood Street and a line
approximately 40 feet south of Laurel Street and abutting or near Penn Street
between a line approximately 210 feet east of Sixth Street and a line
approximately 100 feet west of Fourth Street situated in the City of Reading,
County of Berks, and Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, being particularly bounded
and described as follows, to wit:
            [1]   Beginning at a point in the center line of Laurel Street (60
feet wide) at its intersection with the rear property line of No. 450 South
Fifth Street produced, being 183.39 feet west of the western building line of
South Fifth Street produced, and the southwest corner of the herein described
district: thence extending northwardly crossing a portion of Laurel Street and
along the western property line of No. 450 South Fifth Street to the northern
property line of No. 450 South Fifth Street: thence, extending eastwardly along
the northern property line of No. 450 South Fifth Street to the southwestern
property corner of No. 438 South Fifth Street; thence, extending northwardly by
various courses and distances along the western property lines and their
connections of Nos. 438, 436, 432, 430, 428, 426, 424, 422, 416 and 414 South
Fifth Street to the southern building line of Bingaman Street; thence,
producing and extending the western property line of 414 South Fifth Street and
crossing Bingaman Street to its northern building line; thence, extending
westwardly along the northern building line of Bingaman Street to the western
property line of No. 412 South Fifth Street; thence, extending northwardly by
various courses and distances along the western property lines and their
connections of Nos. 412, 410, 408, 406, 404, 402 and 400 South Fifth Street to
the southern building line of Pine Street; thence, producing and extending the
western property line of No. 400 South Fifth Street and crossing Pine Street to
its northern building line; thence, extending westwardly along the northern
building line of Pine Street to the western property line of No. 350 South
Fifth Street; thence, extending northwardly by various courses and distances
along the western property lines and their connections of Nos. 350, 346, 344,
342, 340, 338, 336, 334, 320-22, 318, 316, 314, 310, 308, 306, 304, 302 and 300
South Fifth Street to the southern building line of Spruce Street; thence,
producing and extending the western property line of No. 300 South Fifth Street
and crossing Spruce Street to its northern building line; thence, extending
westwardly along the northern building line of Spruce Street to the western
property line of No. 246 South Fifth Street; thence, extending northwardly by
various courses and distances along the western property lines and their
connections of Nos. 246, 244, 242, 240, 238, 236, 234, 230, 228, 226, 220-224,
218, 216, 214 and 200-210 South Fifth Street to the southern building line of
Chestnut Street; thence, extending westwardly along the southern building line
of Chestnut Street to the western property line of No. 150-52 South Fifth
Street produced and extended; thence, extending northwardly along such line as
extended, crossing Chestnut Street and along the western property lines and
their connections of Nos. 152, 150, 148, 146, 142, 138, 136, 132, 130, 126,
124, 118, 116, 110 and 100 South Fifth Street to the southern building line of
Franklin Street; thence, producing and extending the western property line of
100 South Fifth Street and crossing Franklin Street to its northern building
line; thence, extending westwardly along the northern building line of Franklin
Street to the eastern building line of Wood Street; thence, extending
northwardly along the same to the northern building line of Cherry Street;
thence, extending westwardly, crossing South Fourth Street and along the
northern building line of Cherry Street to the western property line of No. 348
Penn Street; thence, extending northwardly along the western property line of
No. 348 Penn Street, as extended, to the center line of Penn Street; thence,
extending eastwardly along such center line to the western property line of No.
359 Penn Street, as extended: thence, extending northwardly along the same line
to the northwestern corner of 359 Penn Street; thence, extending eastwardly
along the northern property line of 359 Penn Street and crossing North Fourth
Street to its eastern building line; thence, extending northwardly along the
same to the southern building line of Court Street; thence, extending
eastwardly along the same to the eastern building line of Madison Avenue,
produced and extended; thence, extending northwardly along the same, crossing
Washington Street and continuing northwardly by various courses and distances
along the western property lines and their connections of Nos. 100-110, 114-
116, 120, 124, 126-128, 130, 132, 136, 138, 140, 144, 146 and 150 North Fifth
Street to the southern building line of Walnut Street; thence, extending
eastwardly along the same to the western property line of No. 202 North Fifth
Street, produced and extended; thence, extending northwardly along the same
crossing Walnut Street and continuing northwardly by various courses and
distances along the western property lines and their connections of Nos. 202,
204, 206-216, 220, 224, 226-228, 230, 232, 234, 236, 238, 240, 242 and 244
North Fifth Street to the southern building line of Elm Street; thence,
extending eastwardly along the same to the western property line of No. 300
North Fifth Street produced and extended; thence, crossing Elm Street along the
same and extending northwardly by various courses and distances along the
western property lines and their connections of Nos. 300, 302, 304, 308, 310,
312, 318, 320, 322, 324, 326, 328, 330, 332, 334, 336, 338, 340, 342, 344, 346
and 348 North Fifth Street extended to the center line of Buttonwood Street;
thence, extending eastwardly along the same to the eastern property line of No.
357 North Fifth Street produced and extended; thence, extending southwardly by
various courses and distances along the eastern property lines and their
connections of Nos. 357, 355, 353, 351, 349, 331-335, 329, 327, 325, 323, 321,
319, 317, 313, 309, 307 and 301-305 North Fifth Street to the northern building
line of Elm Street; thence, extending westwardly along the same to the eastern
property line of No. 253 North Fifth Street produced and extended; thence,
extending southwardly along the same, crossing Elm Street and by various
courses and distances along the eastern property lines and their connections of
Nos. 253, 249, 247, 245, 239, 237, 233, 229, 227, 225 and 209-217 North Fifth
Street to the northern building line of Walnut Street; thence, extending
westwardly along the same to the eastern property line of No. 153-157 North
Fifth Street produced and extended; thence, extending southwardly along the
same, crossing Walnut Street and by various courses and distances along the
eastern property lines and their connections of Nos. 153-157, 147, 141, 139,
137, 135, 131-133, 127-129, 121-125, 117, 113 North Fifth Street and 501
Washington Street to the northern building line of Washington Street; thence,
continuing southwardly, crossing Washington Street and extending along the
western building line of Church Street to the northern building line of Court
Street; thence, extending westwardly along the same to the western property
line of No. 519 Penn Street produced and extended; thence, extending
southwardly along the same and crossing Court Street to the northwestern corner
of 519 Penn Street; thence, extending eastwardly by various courses and
distances along the northern property lines and their connections of Nos. 519,
523, 525, 527, 529, 531, 533-535, 537-543, 545-547, and 549-555 Penn Street to
the western building line of North Sixth Street; thence, extending southwardly
along the same to the northern property line of No. 601 Penn Street produced
and extended; thence, extending eastwardly along the same, crossing North Sixth
Street and by various, courses and distances along the northern property line
of 601 Penn Street to the eastern property line of such property; thence,
extending southwardly along the same to the northern building line of Penn
Street; thence, extending westwardly along the same to the eastern property
line of No. 600-620 Penn Street produced and extended; thence, extending
southwardly along the same, crossing Penn Street to the northern building line
of Cherry Street; thence, extending westwardly along the same and crossing
South Sixth Street to the western building line of Pearl Street produced and
extended; thence, extending southwardly along the same to the northern property
line of 521 Franklin Street; thence, extending westwardly along the same to the
western property line of No. 521 Franklin Street; thence, extending southwardly
along the same to the northern building line of Franklin Street; thence,
extending westwardly along the same to the eastern property line of No. 101
South Fifth Street produced and extended; thence, extending southwardly along
the same, crossing Franklin Street and by various courses and distances along
the eastern property lines and their connections of Nos. 101, 103, 105, 107,
111, 113, 115, 117, 119, 121-123, 125, 127, 133-135 and 137 South Fifth Street
to the southeast property corner of 137 South Fifth Street; thence, extending
westerly along the same to the eastern property line of 517 Chestnut Street;
thence, extending southerly along the same to the northern building line of
Chestnut Street; thence, extending westwardly along the same to the rear
property line of No. 201 South Fifth Street produced and extended; thence,
extending southwardly along the same, crossing Chestnut Street and along the
eastern property lines of Nos. 201, 205, 207, 209, 211, 213, 215, 219, 221 and
223 South Fifth Street to the northern property line of No. 225 South Fifth
Street; thence, extending eastwardly along the same to the western building
line of Pearl Street; thence extending southwardly along the same and by
various courses and distances along the eastern property lines and their
connections of Nos. 225, 229, 231-233, 235, 237, 239, 241, 243, 245 and 247
South Fifth Street to the northern building line of Spruce Street; thence,
extending westwardly along the same to the eastern property line of 301 South
Fifth Street produced and extended; thence, extending southwardly, crossing
Spruce Street and continuing by various courses and distances along the eastern
property lines and their connections of Nos. 301, 335, 337, 339, 341, 343, 345,
347, 349, 351, 353, 355, 401 and 403 South Fifth Street to the northern
building line of Bingaman Street; thence, extending southwestwardly along the
same to the northeastern property line of No. 409 South Fifth Street produced
and extended; thence, crossing Bingaman Street along the same and extending
southwardly by various courses and distances along the eastern property lines
and their connections of Nos. 409, 411, 413, 417, 423, 425, 429, 431, 433, 435,
437, 439, 443, 445, 447 and 449 South Fifth Street extended to the northern
building line of Laurel Street: thence, extending southwardly along the eastern
property line of 449 South Fifth Street extended, crossing Laurel Street and
continuing along the eastern property lines of Nos. 501 and 503 South Fifth
street to the southern property line of No. 503 South Fifth Street; thence,
extending westwardly along the same and by the extension and production of this
line crossing a portion of South Fifth Street to its center line; thence,
extending northwardly along the center line of North Fifth Street to the center
line of Laurel Street; thence, extending westwardly along the same to the place
of beginning.
      (2)   Prince Historic District. The Prince Historic District is hereby
created and described verbally as follows:
         (a)   All that certain district, tract, area or piece of land intended
to be known as the "Prince Historic District, Reading, Pennsylvania," as shown
on a map bearing the same title, consisting of parcels held in separate
ownership generally located between Pearl Street and South Seventh Street, from
Cherry Street southwardly to Canal Street, situate in the City of Reading,
County of Berks, and Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, being more particularly
bounded and described as follows, to wit:
            [1]   Beginning at a point in the center line of Franklin Street
(60 feet wide) and the center line of South Seventh Street (60 feet wide);
thence, extending southwardly along the center line of South Seventh Street,
also being the center line of the right-of-way of Conrail or any successor
railroad (formerly the Reading Company Railroad), to the intersection of South
Seventh Street and Chestnut Street; thence, extending southeasterly by a curve
along the center line of aforesaid railroad right-of-way to a point in the
center line of Bingaman Street (50 feet wide); thence, extending southwesterly
along the center line of Bingaman Street to the center line of South Seventh
Street (60 feet wide); thence, southwardly along the center line of South
Seventh Street to a point being the extended northern property line of No. 317
South Seventh Street; thence, eastwardly along the northern property line of
No. 317 South Seventh Street to the eastern property line of the aforesaid
property; thence, extending southerly by various courses and distances along
the eastern property lines and their connections of Nos. 317, 319, 321, 325,
327, 329, 331 South Seventh Street to a point in the center line of Neversink
Alley (15 feet wide); thence, thence southeasterly along the center line of
Neversink Alley approximately 170 feet to a point being the eastern side of
Gilson Alley (15 feet wide); thence, southerly along the eastern side of Gilson
Alley extended to a point in the center line of Laurel Street; thence,
westwardly along the center line of Laurel Street (60 feet wide) to a point in
the center line of South Seventh Street; thence, southwardly along the center
line of South Seventh Street (60 feet wide) to a point in the center line of
New Canal Street; thence, southwesterly along the center line of New Canal
Street (60 feet wide) to a point in the center line of South Sixth Street;
thence northwardly along the center line of South Sixth Street (60 feet wide)
to a point in the center line of Willow Street; thence, westerly along the
center line of Willow Street (60 feet wide), to a point in the center line of
South Fifth Street: thence, northwardly along the center line of South Fifth
Street (80 feet wide) to the northern property line of 505 South Fifth Street,
produced and extended: thence, eastwardly along the northern property line of
505 South Fifth Street to the western property line of No. 510 Laurel Street;
thence, northerly along the western property line of No. 510 Laurel Street,
crossing Laurel Street (60 feet wide) to the southwest property corner of No.
515 Laurel Street; thence, northerly by various courses and distances along the
western property lines and their connections of Nos. 515, 517 Laurel Street and
446, 444, 442-1/2, 442, 440-1/2, 440, 438, 436, 434, 432, 430, 428, 426, 424
Pearl Street to the southern property line of 508 Bingaman Street; thence,
westerly along the southern property line of 508 Bingaman Street to the western
property line of No. 508 Bingaman Street; thence, northwesterly along the
western property line of 508 Bingaman Street extended to the center line of
Bingaman Street (50 feet wide); thence, northeasterly along the center line of
Bingaman Street to a point being the extension of the western property line of
No. 515 Bingaman Street; thence, northerly along the extended western property
line of No. 515 Bingaman Street to the northwestern property corner of No. 515
Bingarnan Street, also being a point in the southern property line of 354 Pearl
Street; thence, westwardly along the southern property line of No. 354 Pearl
Street to the western property line of 354 Pearl Street; thence, northerly by
various courses and distances along the western property lines and their
connections of Nos. 354, 352, 350, 348, 346, 344, 342, 340, 338, 336 Pearl
Street, to the northwestern property corner of 336 Pearl Street; thence,
eastwardly along the northern property line of 336 Pearl Street to the western
building line of Pearl Street; thence, in a northerly direction along the
western building line of Pearl Street (20 feet wide) to the southern property
line of No. 520 Spruce Street; thence, westwardly along the southern property
line of No. 520 Spruce Street to the western property line of No. 520 Spruce
Street; thence, northerly along the western property line extended of No. 520
Spruce Street to the center line of Spruce Street; thence, easterly along the
center line of Spruce Street (60 feet wide) to the extended western building
line of Pearl Street; thence, northerly along the extended western building
line of Pearl Street (20 feet wide) to the southeastern property corner of No.
244 Pearl Street; thence, westerly along the southern property line of No. 244
Pearl Street to the southwestern property corner of No. 244 Pearl Street;
thence, northerly along the western property lines and their connections of
Nos. 244, 242, 240, 238 and 236 Pearl Street to the northwestern property
corner of No. 236 Pearl Street; thence, eastwardly along the northern property
line of No. 236 Pearl Street to the northeastern property corner of No. 236
Pearl Street, also being a point in the western building line of Pearl Street;
thence, northwardly along the western building line of Pearl Street (20 feet
wide) to the southeastern property corner of No. 222 Pearl Street; thence,
westwardly along the southern property line of No. 222 Pearl Street, also being
the northern side of a 10 foot wide alley to the center line of Seivard Street;
thence, northerly along the extended center line of Seivard Street (15 feet
wide) to the center line of Chestnut Street; thence, easterly along the center
line of Chestnut Street to a point in the western property line of 519 Chestnut
Street produced and extended; thence, northerly along the western property line
of No. 519 Chestnut Street to the northern property line of the aforesaid
property; thence, easterly to the western building line of Pearl Street:
thence, northwardly along the western building line of Pearl Street (20 feet
wide) to the southeastern property corner of No. 522 Franklin Street; thence,
westerly along the southern property lines and their connections of Nos. 522,
520, 518, 516, and 514 Franklin Street to the southwestern property corner of
514 Franklin Street; thence, northerly along the extended western property line
of No. 514 Franklin Street to the center line of Franklin Street; thence,
eastwardly along the center line of Franklin Street to the western property
line of No. 521 Franklin Street produced and extended; thence, northerly along
the western property line of No. 521 Franklin Street to the northwestern
property corner of No. 521 Franklin Street; thence, easterly along the northern
property lines of Nos. 521 and 523 Franklin Street to a point in the western
building line of Pearl Street; thence, northwardly along the western building
line of Pearl Street extended to a point in the center line of Cherry Street
(48 feet wide); thence, easterly along the center line of Cherry Street,
crossing South Sixth Street, to a point in the eastern property line of No. 45
South Sixth, produced and extended; thence, in a southerly direction along the
eastern property lines and their connections of Nos. 45, 47, 49 South Sixth
Street and 613 Franklin Street to a point in the center line of Franklin
Street; thence, in an easterly direction to a point in the center line of South
Seventh Street (60 feet wide), being the place of beginning.
      (3)   Centre Park Historic District. The Centre Park Historic District is
hereby created and described as follows:
         (a)   All that certain district, tract, area, or piece of land
intended to be known as the "Centre Park Historic District" as shown on a map
bearing the same title, consisting of parcels held in separate ownership
generally located between Centre Avenue and North Fifth Street, from the right-
of-way of Norfolk Southern Corporation (formerly the right-of-way of the
Lebanon Valley Railroad) northwardly to Robeson Street in the City of Reading,
County of Berks, and Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, being particularly bounded
and described as follows, to wit:
            [1]   Beginning at a point being the intersection of the center
line of the right-of- way of the former Lebanon Valley Railroad, now being
Norfolk Southern Corporation, and the center line of North Fourth Street (60
feet wide); thence, northwardly along the center line of North Fourth Street
(60 feet wide) to the southern property line of 352 Greenwich Street, produced
and extended, such line also being the north side of a five-foot wide alley;
thence, westwardly along such extended property line and continuing along the
southern property lines of 352, 350, 348, 346, 344, 342, 340, 338, 336, 334 and
332 Greenwich Street to the southwest property corner of 332 Greenwich Street;
thence, northwardly along the western property line of 332 Greenwich Street,
produced and extended, to a point on the center line of Greenwich Street (60
feet wide); thence, westwardly along the center line of Greenwich Street to the
intersection of the western property line, produced and extended of 325
Greenwich Street: thence, northwardly along the western property line of 325
Greenwich Street to the northwest property corner of that same property;
thence, eastwardly along the northern property lines of 325 and 327 Greenwich
Street to the southwest property corner of 620 Centre Avenue; thence,
northwardly along the western property lines of 620, 626 and 628 Centre Avenue
to the northwestern property corner of 628 Centre Avenue; thence,
northeastwardly along the northwest property line of 628 Centre Avenue to the
southwestern property corner of 630 Centre Avenue; thence, northwestwardly
along the southwest property lines and their connections of 630, 632 and 634
Centre Avenue to the northwestern property corner of 634 Centre Avenue, also
being a point in the southeastern property line of 642 Centre Avenue; thence,
southwestwardly along the southeastern property line of 642 Centre Avenue to
the southern property corner of that property; thence, northwestwardly along
the southwestern property line of 642 Centre Avenue to the southwest property
corner of 310 Oley Street; thence, northwardly along the western property line
of 310 Oley Street to the southeastern property corner of 308 Oley Street;
thence, westwardly along the southern property lines of 308, 306, 304, 302, and
300 Oley Street extended to the center line of North Third Street (60 feet
wide); thence, northwardly along the center line of North Third Street to its
intersection with the center line of Oley Street (60 feet wide); thence,
westwardly along the center line of Oley Street to its intersection with the
extended western property line of 710 North Third Street; thence, northwardly
by various courses and distances along the western property lines and their
connections of 710, 714, 724, 726, 728, 730, 734, 736, 738, 740, 742 and 744
North Third Street extended to the center line of Douglass Street (60 feet
wide); thence, eastwardly along the center line of Douglass Street to its
intersection with the extended western property line of 800 North Third Street;
thence, northwardly along the western property lines of 800, 802, 804, 806,
808, 810, 812, 814, 816, and 818 North Third Street to the northwest property
corner of 818 North Third Street, also being a point in the southern property
line of 832 Centre Avenue; thence, westwardly along the extended southern
property lines of 832 and 834 Centre A venue to a point in the center line of
Thorn Street; thence, northwardly along the extended center line of Thorn
Street, crossing Windsor Street (60 feet wide), to a point in the center line
of Windsor Street; thence, westwardly along the center line of Windsor Street
to its intersection with the extended western property line of 900 Centre
Avenue; thence, northwardly along the western property lines of 900 and 916
Centre Avenue to the northeast property corner of 211 Windsor Street; thence,
westwardly along the extended northern property line of 211 Windsor Street and
the southern property line of 920 Centre Avenue to the center line of North
Second Street; thence, northwardly along the center line of North Second Street
to its intersection with the center line of Spring Street: thence, eastwardly
along the center line of Spring Street to its intersection with the center line
of Centre Avenue; thence, northwestwardly along the center line of Centre
Avenue to its intersection with the extended center line of Robeson Street;
thence, northeast and eastwardly along the center line of Robeson Street,
crossing North Third Street, Rose Street, North Fourth Street, Madison Street,
all intervening alleyways and North Fifth Street to the extended eastern
property line of 1055 North Fifth Street; thence, southwardly along the eastern
property lines of Nos. 1055, 1053, 1051, 1049, 1047, 1045, 1043, 1041, 1039,
1037, 1035, 1033, 1031, 1029, 1027, 1025, 1023, 1021, 1019, 1017, 1015 and 1013
North Fifth Street, also being the western side of a 10 foot wide alley, to the
intersection with the extended southern property line of 1016 Church Street;
thence, eastwardly along the extended southern property line of 1016 Church
Street, crossing the aforementioned 10 foot wide alley, to the center line of
Church Street; thence, southwardly along the center line of Church Street to
its intersection with the center line of Spring Street; thence, westwardly
along the center line of Spring Street to its intersection with the extended
eastern property line of 951 North Fifth Street; thence, southwardly along the
extended eastern property lines of 951, 949, 947, 945, 943, 941, 939, 937, 935,
933, 931, 929, 927, 925, 923, 921, 919, 917, 915, 913, 911 and 909 North Fifth
Street, also being the western side of a 10 foot wide alley, to the northern
property line of 517 Windsor Street; thence, eastwardly along the extended
northern property lines of 517, 519, 521, 523, 525, 527 and 529 Windsor Street
to a point in the center line of Church Street; thence, southwardly along the
center line of Church Street to its intersection with the center line of
Windsor Street; thence, westwardly along the center line of Windsor Street to
its intersection with the extended eastern property line of 841 North Fifth
Street; thence, southwardly along the extended eastern property line of 841
North Fifth Street, crossing Windsor Street, and continuing along the eastern
property lines of 841 and 835 North Fifth Street to the northern property line
of 833 North Fifth Street; thence, eastwardly along same to the northeast
property corner of 833 North Fifth Street, being a point in the western side of
a 4 foot wide alley; thence, southwardly along the eastern property lines and
their connections of Nos. 833, 831, 829, 827, 825, 823, 821, 819, 817, 815,
813, 811, 809 and 807 North Fifth Street, also being the western side of
aforementioned alley, to the intersection of the extended northern property
line of 521 Douglass Street; thence, eastwardly along the extended northern
property lines of 521, 523, 525 and 527 Douglass Street, also being the
southern side of a 4 foot wide alley, to a point in the center line of Church
Street; thence, southwardly along the center line of Church Street, crossing
Douglass Street, to the extended southern property line of 526 Douglass Street;
thence, westwardly for a distance of 110 feet along the southern property lines
of 526, 524, 522 and 520 Douglass Street to a point in the southern property
line of 520 Douglass Street; thence, southwardly along a line at right angles
to the last described line, crossing a four-foot-wide alley and bisecting the
properties known as 717, 715, 713, 711, 709 and 705-707 North Fifth Street to
the southeast property corner of 705-707 North Fifth Street, also being a point
in the northern property line of 515 Oley Street; thence, eastwardly along the
extended northern property lines of 515, 517, 521 and 523 Oley Street to a
point in the center line of Church Street: thence, southwardly along the center
line of Church Street, crossing Oley Street, to its intersection with the
extended northern property line of 619 Church Street: thence, eastwardly along
the extended northern property line of 619 Church Street to the northeast
property corner of that same lot; thence, southwardly along the eastern
property lines of 619, 617, 615 and 613 Church Street and 529 Greenwich Street
to the northern building line of Greenwich Street; thence, southwardly,
crossing Greenwich Street, to the northeast property corner of 524 Greenwich
Street; thence, southwardly along the eastern property line of 524 Greenwich
Street to its southeast property corner; thence, southwestwardly along the
southern property lines of 524, 522, 520, 518, 516, 514 and 512 Greenwich
Street to a point in the eastern property line of 510 Greenwich Street: thence,
southwardly along the extended eastern property line of 510 Greenwich Street
for a distance of 152.83 feet to a point within the property known as 535 North
Fifth Street; thence, westwardly along a line at right angles to the last
described line crossing North Fifth Street, to a point in the center line of
North Fifth Street; thence, southwardly along the center line of North Fifth
Street to its intersection with the center line of the right-of-way of the
former Lebanon Valley Railroad, now being Norfolk Southern Corporation; thence,
westwardly along the said center line to its intersection with the center line
of North Fourth Street, being the place of beginning.
      (4)   Penn's Common Historic District. The Penn's Common Historic
District is hereby created and described verbally as follows:
         (a)   All that certain district, tract, area, or piece of land
intended to be known as the "Penn's Common Historic District" as shown on a map
bearing the same title, consisting of parcels held in separate ownership
located adjacent to Penn's Common (City Park), and generally located between
Mulberry Street and Thirteenth Street Extension, from a line approximately 80
feet south of Elm Street southeastwardly along North Eleventh Street, Perkiomen
Avenue to Good Street, and including the 1000 blocks of Walnut Street,
Washington Street, and Penn Street, situated in the City of Reading, County of
Berks, and Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, being particularly bounded and
described as follows, to wit:
            [1]   Beginning at a point being the intersection of the center
line of Thirteenth Street Extension (30 feet wide) and the center line of
Walnut Street (60 feet wide); thence extending southeastwardly along the center
line of Thirteenth Street Extension to its intersection with the northern
property line of 1401 Hill Road, produced and extended; thence, northeastwardly
along such extended property line and continuing along the northern property
lines of 1403, 1405, 1407, 1409, 1411, and 1413 Hill Road to the northeast
property corner of 1413 Hill Road; thence, southwardly to a point on the center
line of Hill Road (50 feet wide); thence, westwardly along the center line of
Hill Road to its intersection with the center line of Clymer Street (50 feet
wide); thence, southeastwardly along the center line of Clymer Street to its
intersection with the center line of Eckert Avenue (50 feet wide); thence
southwestwardly to the eastern property line of 1252 Eckert Avenue, produced
and extended, such line also being the western side of a five-foot-wide alley;
thence, southeastwardly along the eastern property lines of 1252 Eckert Avenue
and 1343 Good Street, produced and extended, to a point on the center line of
Good Street (50 feet wide); thence, southwestwardly along the center line of
Good Street to the intersection of the eastern property line, produced and
extended, of 1344 Good Street, such line also being the western side of a five-
foot-wide alley; thence, southeastwardly along the eastern property line of
1344 Good Street to the southeast property corner of 1344 Good Street; thence,
southwestwardly along the southern property lines of 1344, 1342, 1340, 1338,
and 1336 Good Street to the southwest property corner of 1336 Good Street,
produced and extended, to a point on the center line of a ten-foot-wide alley;
thence, northwestwardly along the center line of said alley to its intersection
with the extended southern property line of 1334 Good Street; thence,
southwestwardly along such extended property line and continuing along the
southern property lines of 1332 and 1330 Good Street to the southwest property
corner of 1330 Good Street; thence, northwestwardly along the western property
line of 1330 Good Street, produced and extended, to a point on the center line
of Good Street; thence, southwestwardly along the center line of Good Street to
its intersection with the center line of Mineral Spring Road (60 feet wide);
thence, northwestwardly along the center line of Mineral Spring Road to its
intersection with the center line of Chestnut Street (60 feet wide); thence,
westwardly along the center line of Chestnut Street to its intersection with
the center line of Weimer Street (20 feet wide); thence, northwestwardly and
westwardly along the center line of Weimer Street to its intersection with the
center line of South Twelfth Street (60 feet wide); thence, northwardly along
the center line of South Twelfth Street to its intersection with the center
line of Franklin Street (60 feet wide); thence, westwardly along the center
line of Franklin Street to the intersection of the western property line,
produced and extended, of 1170 Perkiomen Avenue; thence, northwardly along the
western property line of 1170 Perkiomen Avenue, produced and extended, to a
point on the center line of a ten-foot-wide alley; thence, westwardly along the
center line of the said alley to its intersection with the center line of
Little Wunder Street (15 feet wide); thence, southwardly along the center line
of Little Wunder Street to the intersection of the southern property line,
produced and extended, of 26 Little Wunder Street; thence, westwardly along
such extended property line and continuing along the southern property line of
26 Little Wunder Street, and 1116 Little Cherry Street to the northeast
property corner of 43 South Eleventh Street; thence, southwardly along the
eastern property lines of 43, 45, 47, 49, 51, and 53 South Eleventh Street to
the southeast property corner of 53 South Eleventh Street; thence, westwardly
along the southern property line of 53 South Eleventh Street, produced and
extended, crossing South Eleventh Street to the western building line of South
Eleventh Street; thence, northwardly along the western building line of South
Eleventh Street to the southeast property of 38 South Eleventh Street; thence,
westwardly along the southern property line of 38 South Eleventh Street to the
southwest property corner of 38 South Eleventh Street; thence, northwardly
along the western property line of 38 South Eleventh Street, produced and
extended, to a point on the center line of Shmeck's Court (10 feet wide);
thence, westwardly along the center line of Shmeck's Court to the intersection
of the western property line, produced and extended, of 36 South Eleventh
Street; thence, northwardly by various courses and distances along the western
property lines and their connections of 36, 34, 32, 30, 28, and 26 South
Eleventh Street, produced and extended, to a point on the center line of Cherry
Street (20 feet wide); thence, westwardly along the center line of Cherry
Street to its intersection with the western property line, produced and
extended, of 101.3 Cherry Street; thence, northwardly along such extended
property line to the northwest property corner of 1013 Cherry Street; thence,
eastwardly along the northern property lines of 1013 and 1015 Cherry Street to
the northeast property corner of 1015 Cherry Street; thence, northwardly along
the western property line of 1016 Penn Street to the southeast property corner
of 1012 Penn Street; thence, westwardly along the southern property lines of
1012 and 1010 Penn Street to the southwest corner of 1010 Penn Street; thence,
northwardly along the western property line of 1010 Penn Street to the
southeast property corner of 1008 Penn Street; thence, westwardly along the
southern property lines of 1008 and 1006 Penn Street to the southwest property
corner of 1006 Penn Street; thence, northwardly along the western property line
of 1006 Penn Street, produced and extended, to a point on the center line of
Penn Street (80 feet wide); thence, westwardly along the center line of Penn
Street to the intersection of the western property line, produced and extended,
of 1001 Penn Street; thence, northwardly along such extended property line to
the northwest property corner of 1001 Penn Street; thence, eastwardly by
various courses and distances along the northern property lines and their
connections of 1001 and 1005 Penn Street to the northeast property corner of
1005 Penn Street; thence, northwardly along the western property lines of 1007
Penn Street and 1004 Court Street, produced and extended, to a point on the
center line of Court Street (20 feet wide); thence, eastwardly along the center
line of Court Street to the intersection of the western property line, produced
and extended, of 18 Mulberry Street; thence, northwardly along such extended
property line and continuing along the western property lines of 18, 20, and 22
Mulberry Street to the northwest property corner of 22 Mulberry Street; thence,
eastwardly along the northern property line of 22 Mulberry Street to the
northeast property corner of 22 Mulberry Street; thence, northwardly along the
western building line of Mulberry Street to its intersection with the southern
property line of 34 Mulberry Street; thence, westwardly along the southern
property line of 34 Mulberry Street to the southwest property corner of 34
Mulberry Street; thence, northwardly by various courses and distances along the
western property lines and their connections of 34, 36, 38, 40 and 42, Mulberry
Street to a point on the southern property line of 44 Mulberry Street; thence,
westwardly along the southern property line of 44 Mulberry Street to the
southeast corner of 47 North Tenth Street (not located in the Penn's Common
Historic District); thence, northwardly along the eastern property line of 47
North Tenth Street to a point on the southern property line of 1010 Washington
Street; thence, westwardly along the southern property line of 1010 Washington
Street to the southwest property corner of 1010 Washington Street; thence,
northwardly along the western property line of 1010 Washington Street, produced
and extended, crossing Washington Street to the southwest property corner of
1013 Washington Street; thence, northwardly along the western property line of
1013 Washington Street and continuing northwardly by various courses and
distances along the western property lines and their connections of 110, 112,
and 114, Mulberry Street to the northwest property corner of 114 Mulberry
Street; thence, eastwardly along the northern property line of 114 Mulberry
Street to the northeast property corner of 114 Mulberry Street; thence,
northwardly along the western building line of Mulberry Street to its
intersection with the southern property line of 130 Mulberry Street; thence,
westwardly along the southern property line of 130 Mulberry Street to the
southwest property corner of 126 Mulberry Street; thence, northwardly by
various courses and distances along the western property lines and their
connections of 130, 132, 134, 136, 138, 140, 140 1/2, 142, and 144 Mulberry
Street to the northwest property corner of 144 Mulberry Street; thence,
northwardly along the western property line of 1010 Walnut Street, produced and
extended, to a point on the center line of Walnut Street; thence, westwardly
along the center line of Walnut Street to the intersection of the western
property line, produced and extended, of 1009 Walnut Street; thence,
northwardly along such extended property line to the northwest property corner
of 1009 Walnut Street; thence eastwardly by various courses and distances along
the northern property lines and their connections of 1009, 1011, 1013, 1015,
1017, 1019, 1021, 1021 1/2, 1023, and 1025 Walnut Street, produced and
extended, crossing Mulberry Street and continuing along the northern property
line, produced and extended, of 1027 Walnut Street; thence, eastwardly along
such extended property line by various courses and distances along the northern
property lines of 1027, 1029, 1031, 1033, 1037, and 1039 Walnut Street produced
and extended; thence, eastwardly along such extended property line, crossing
Dumn's Court (10 feet wide) to the southwest corner of 212 North Eleventh
Street; thence, northwardly by various courses and distances along the western
property lines and their connections of 212, 214, 216, 218, 220, 222, 224, 226,
228, 230, 234, 236, 238, 240, 242, 244, 246, and 248 North Eleventh Street to
the northwest property corner of 248 North Eleventh Street; thence, eastwardly
along the northern property line of 248 North Eleventh Street, produced and
extended, to a point on the center line of North Eleventh Street (60 feet
wide); thence, northwardly along the center line of North Eleventh Street to
the intersection of the extended northern property line of 243 North Eleventh
Street; thence, eastwardly along such extended property line to the northeast
property corner of 243 North Eleventh Street; thence, southwardly by various
courses and distances along the eastern property lines and their connections of
243, 241, 239, 233, 231, 229, 227A, 227, 225A, 225, 223, 221, 219, and 217 1/
2 North Eleventh Street to the southeast property corner of 217 1/2 North
Eleventh Street, also being a point on the northern property line of 1111
Walnut Street; thence, eastwardly along the northern property lines of 1111
Walnut Street and 214 Locust Street to the northeast property corner of 214
Locust Street, produced and extended, to a point on the center line of Locust
Street (20 feet wide); thence, southwardly along the center line of Locust
Street to its intersection with the center line of Walnut Street; thence
eastwardly along the center line of Walnut Street to its intersection with the
center line of Thirteenth Street Extension, being the place of beginning.
   B.   The Conservation District. [Added 6-25-2012 by Ord. No. 70-2012]
      (1)   Heights Conservation District. The Heights Conservation District is
hereby created and described verbally as follows:
         (a)   All that certain district, tract, area, or piece of land
intended to be known as the "Heights Conservation District" as shown on a map
bearing the same title, consisting of parcels held in separate ownership
generally located between Thirteenth Street and Oak Lane, from Rockland Street
southwardly to Hampden Park, situated in the City of Reading, County of Berks,
and Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, being particularly bounded and described as
follows, to wit:
            [1]   Beginning at a point in the center line of Hampden Boulevard
(50 feet wide) at its intersection with the northern property line of 2020
Rockland Street, produced and extended; thence, southwestwardly along the
center line of Hampden Boulevard to its intersection with the center line of
Richmond Street (30 feet wide); thence, southeastwardly along the center line
of Richmond Street to its intersection with the City of Reading boundary line;
thence, southwestwardly along the City of Reading boundary line to its
intersection with the center line of Oak Lane (35 feet wide); thence,
southwestwardly along the center line of Oak Lane to the northern property line
produced and extended, of 1303 Oak Lane; thence, southeastwardly along the
northern property line of 1303 Oak Lane to its intersection with the City of
Reading boundary line; thence, southwestwardly along the City of Reading
boundary line to its intersection with the southern property line of 1303 Oak
Lane; thence, northwestwardly along the southern property line of 1303 Oak
Lane, produced and extended, to a point on the center line of Oak Lane; thence,
southwestwardly along the center line of Oak Lane to its intersection with the
southern property line of 1151 Oak Lane, produced and extended; thence,
southeastwardly along the southern property line of 1151 Oak Lane to the
southeast property corner of 1151 Oak Lane; thence, southwestwardly by the
approximate bearings and distances of the area of Hampden Park as follows:
southwestwardly 531 feet to the intersection of the City of Reading boundary
line; thence, southwestwardly 951 feet; thence, westwardly 260 feet; thence,
northwardly 678 feet; thence, westwardly 150 feet; thence, southwestwardly 560
feet, produced and extended to a point on the center line of North Thirteenth
Street (50 feet wide), more precisely described in deed book 2108, deed page
1416; thence, northwardly along the center line of North Thirteenth Street to
its intersection with Hampden Boulevard; thence, northeastwardly along the
center line of Hampden Boulevard to its intersection with the center line of
Robeson Street (35 feet wide); thence, westwardly along the center line of
Robeson Street to its intersection with the western property line of 1100 North
Thirteenth Street, produced and extended, such line also being the eastern side
of a fifteen-foot wide alley; thence, northwardly along the same by various
courses and distances along the western property lines and their connections of
Nos. 1100, 1102, 1104, 1106, 1108, 1110, 1112, 1114, 1116, 1118, 1120, 1122,
1124, 1126, 1128, 1130, 1132, 1134, 1136, 1138, 1140, 1142, and 1164 North
Thirteenth Street, produced and extended, to a point on the center line of
Marion Street (35 feet wide); thence, westwardly along the center line of
Marion Street to its intersection with the center line of North Twelfth Street
(35 feet wide); thence, northwardly along the center line of North Twelfth
Street to its intersection with center line of Perry Street (35 feet wide);
thence, eastwardly along the center line of Perry Street to its intersection
with the western property line of 1300 North Thirteenth Street, produced and
extended, such line also being the eastern side of a ten-foot wide alley;
thence, northwardly along the same by various courses and distances along the
western property lines and their connections of Nos. 1300, 1302, 1304, 1306,
1308, 1310, 1312, 1314, 1316, 1318, 1320, 1322, 1324, 1326, 1328, and 1330
North Thirteenth Street produced and extended; thence, extending northwardly
along the same, crossing Pike Street (35 feet wide) and by various courses and
distances along the western property lines and their connections of Nos. 1400,
1408, 1410, 1412, 1414, 1416, 1418, 1420, and 1430 North Thirteenth Street
produced and extended, such line also being the eastern side of a fifteen-foot
wide alley; thence, extending northwardly along the same, crossing Amity Street
(35 feet wide) and by various courses and distances along the western property
lines and their connections of 1500, 1502, 1506, 1508, 1510, 1512, and 1518
North Thirteenth Street, such line also being the eastern side of a fifteen-
foot wide alley, produced and extended to a point on the center line of Union
Street (35 feet wide); thence, westwardly along the center line of Union Street
to its intersection with the center line of North Twelfth Street; thence,
northwardly along the center line of North Twelfth Street to its intersection
with the center line of Exeter Street (35 feet wide); thence, eastwardly along
the center line of Exeter Street to its intersection with the center line of
North Thirteenth Street; thence, southwardly along the center line of North
Thirteenth Street to its intersection with the center line of Union Street;
thence, eastwardly along the center line of Union Street to its intersection
with the center line of Palm Street (35 feet wide); thence, northwardly along
the center line of Palm Street to its intersection with the center line of Bern
Street (35 feet wide); thence, northwestwardly along the center line of Bern
Street to its intersection with the center line of College Avenue (50 feet
wide); thence, northeastwardly along the center line of College Avenue to its
intersection with the center line of North Fourteenth Street (35 feet wide);
thence, northwardly along the center line of North Fourteenth Street to its
intersection with the center line of Rockland Street (50 feet wide); thence,
eastwardly along the center line of Rockland Street to its intersection with
the center line of Palm Street; thence, northwardly along the center line of
Palm Street to the northern property line of 1425 Rockland Street, produced and
extended; thence, eastwardly along the northern property lines and their
connections of 1425 and 1435 Rockland Street, produced and extended, crossing
North Fifteenth Street (35 feet wide); thence, eastwardly along the northern
property lines and their connections of 1501 and 1515 Rockland Street, produced
and extended, crossing Olive Street (35 feet wide); thence, eastwardly along
the northern property lines and their connections of 1525, 1535, 1605, and 1615
Rockland Street, produced and extended, crossing Elder Street (35 feet wide);
thence, eastwardly along the northern property lines and their connections of
1625, 2001, and 2020 Rockland Street, produced and extended, to a point on the
center line of Hampden Boulevard, being the place of beginning.
   C.   Changes in boundaries. If the rear or side lot line of a district
property which defines the boundary of said district is reconfigured through
subdivision or annexation, the district boundary will be modified to reflect
such change.
   D.   Uncertainty in boundaries. Should a dispute arise as to the accuracy of
the Reading Historical District Map, the Official Map, on file in the office of
the City Clerk, shall be the final authority. Where uncertainty exists as to
the boundaries of historical districts, the following rules shall apply:
      (1)   Where district lines are indicated as approximately following the
center line or street line of streets or the center line or alley line of
alleys, such lines shall be construed to extend to the center lines of such
streets or alleys.
      (2)   Where historical district lines are so indicated that they are
approximately parallel to the street lines of streets, the alley lines of
alleys or the limits of rights-of-way, such lines shall be construed as being
parallel thereto and at such distance therefrom as indicted on the map. If no
distance is given, such dimension shall be determined by the use of the scale
shown on such map.
      (3)   Where historical district lines are indicated as approximately
following lot lines, such lot lines shall be construed to be the boundaries.
1.   Editor's Note: The Reading Historic District Maps are available from the
City offices.
§ 295-106. Enforcement and administration.
[Amended 6-8-2009 by Ord. No. 16-2009; 8-10-2009 by Ord. No. 43-2009; 10-25-
2010 by Ord. No. 77-2010]
   A.   Preservation Officer.
      (1)   Appointment. This chapter shall be administered and enforcement
actions undertaken by an agent of the City, who shall be known as the
"Preservation Officer." The Director of the City of Reading Community
Development Department may, with approval of the Mayor and Council, designate a
City employee or employees as his/her authorized assistant or assistants who
shall exercise all the powers of the Preservation Officer at such times as the
Preservation Officer indicates and during the absence of the Preservation
Officer.
      (2)   Duties. The Preservation Officer shall:
         (a)   Administer the Preservation Ordinance in accordance with its
literal terms.
         (b)   Identify and register violations of this chapter, together with
the reasons therefor.
         (c)   Receive and examine all applications required under the terms of
this chapter.
         (d)   Issue or refuse certificates of appropriateness within 30 days
of the receipt of the complete application, except as specifically provided in
this chapter.
         (e)   Receive complaints of violations of this chapter.
         (f)   Issue an enforcement notice to any person violating any
provision of this chapter and institute civil enforcement proceedings as a
means of enforcing this chapter, as hereinafter set forth.
         (g)   Keep records of applications and permits issued, of all
certificates of appropriateness granted by the Reading Board of Historical
Architectural Review or City Council, of complaints received, of inspections
made, of reports rendered, and of notice or orders issued; such records shall
be and are the property of the City, and shall be available for the use of the
Reading Board of Historical Architectural Review, City Council, other City
officials and staff and City residents.
         (h)   Make required inspections and perform all other duties as called
for in this chapter.
      (3)   Conflicts. The Preservation Officer shall not hold any elective
office within the City.
      (4)   Qualifications. The minimum professional qualifications to be met
by the Preservation Officer are a graduate degree in history, architectural
history or a closely related field; or a bachelor's degree in history,
architectural history or a closely related field plus two years of full-time
professional experience in the field.
      (5)   Limitations of authority. The Preservation Officer shall not have
the power to permit any work affecting the general design, arrangement,
texture, material, and color which can be seen from a public street or way
which does not conform to this chapter.
   B.   Building Inspector.
      (1)   Duties. The Building Inspector shall be responsible for the
issuance of permits for any work that is required according to the presently
enacted building code. No such permit shall be issued by the Building Inspector
until the Board or Council has authorized the issuance of a certificate of
appropriateness.
      (2)   Conduct of office. Upon receipt of an application for a permit for
work to be done in any historic district, the Building Inspector shall act in
accordance with the procedures presently being followed in that office except
as those procedures are modified by the following requirements:
         (a)   He or she shall forward within three working days to the
Preservation Officer a copy of the application for a permit, together with
construction plans and specifications filed by the applicant pursuant to §
295-107.
         (b)   He or she shall maintain in that office a record of all such
applications. The record shall include details of the handling and disposition
of the same and shall be in addition to, and appropriately cross-referenced
with, other building inspection records.
         (c)   If an application for a certificate of appropriateness is
approved by the Historical Architectural Review Board or City Council, a
building permit shall be issued if all other requirements for such permit are
satisfied.
         (d)   The Building Inspector or his designated representative shall
have the power to institute any proceedings at law or in equity necessary for
the enforcement of this chapter in the same manner as in enforcement of the
building code. 2
   C.   Finances and fees. Council shall appropriate monies to finance the
preparation, administration and enforcement of this chapter, to finance the
work of the Reading Board of Historical Architectural Review and to support or
oppose, upon appeal to the courts, decisions of the Reading Board of Historical
Architectural Review. For the same purposes, Council may accept gifts and
grants of money and services from private sources and from the county, the
state and the federal government which are not prejudicial to the fair and
impartial enforcement and administration hereof.
   D.   General administrative procedures.
      (1)   All persons or entities desiring to undertake an exterior
alteration or modification, requiring a building permit under the presently
enacted building code, to any building, structure, sign, or premises or install
any gas meter assembly, satellite dish, antenna, or other modern device
utilized to receive video programming signals as set forth in Subsection E
below within any designated historic district, shall apply to the Preservation
Officer for a certificate of appropriateness prior to obtaining the required
building permits as set forth in §
295-107. No application shall be accepted or deemed complete until such time as
all forms, materials and plans are filed and any and all fees are fully paid.
[Amended 8-24-2015 by Ord. No. 45-2015]
      (2)   The Preservation Officer shall either issue a certificate of
appropriateness as set forth in §§
295-108 and 295-109 or schedule the certificate of appropriateness application
for review at the next applicable meeting of the Reading Board of Historical
Architectural Review.
      (3)   Until a certificate of appropriateness is issued no construction
shall be undertaken, and any construction which has occurred prior to the
issuance of the permit shall, if requested by the Board, be removed.
      (4)   If a certificate of appropriateness is issued, the action proposed
may be immediately undertaken, provided that the applicant has also been issued
other permits required under the presently enacted building code.
   E.   Placement of satellite dishes in historic districts.
      (1)   Installation.
         (a)   No satellite dishes, antenna, or other similar modern device
shall be installed or placed in front yards, front of buildings or along their
facades that can be seen from a public right-of-way within historic districts.
All satellite dishes, antenna, or other similar modern devices shall be located
to the rear of the main dwelling unit. Antenna and satellite dishes shall be
installed in the rear or on the roof of the main dwelling unit. A roof-mounted
satellite dish or antenna shall not be visible from the public right-of-way.
When being secured to a brick wall, anchoring for satellite dishes shall only
occur within the mortar joints and not within the brick themselves.
         (b)   Satellite dishes that are placed in accordance with this chapter
may be approved at staff level when submitted with a diagram of their proposed
placement on the structure or building. Placement of satellite dishes on any
other area of a structure or building shall be sent to the Reading Board of
Historical Architectural Review for review.
      (2)   Exceptions. Satellite dishes, antenna or other modern devices, as
defined herein, may be installed in front of buildings in the historic district
only if no other means of reception can be provided. In such cases where the
proposed location of a satellite dish is visible from a public right-of-way,
the owner or tenant of the property shall seek the issuance of a certificate of
appropriateness as required in §
295-107 of this chapter. Such satellite dishes, antenna or other modern devices
shall be installed to be unobtrusive and shall be screened from view through
the use of landscaping, fencing and/or architectural building features. The
Building Inspector and Historic Preservation Specialist shall approve the
installation to ensure there is no disruption to the historic nature and
aesthetic value of the district.
      (3)   Removal. Any satellite dishes installed in the front of buildings
before the enactment of this chapter shall be removed to meet the requirements
of the ordinance or must be reviewed by the Reading Board of Historical
Architectural Review to obtain a certificate of appropriateness as required per
§
295-107 of this chapter within one year of the effective date of this chapter.
Satellite dishes shall be removed when the owner or tenant who installed the
device no longer inhabits the property.
      (4)   Violations and penalty. Placement of any satellite dish that does
not conform to the guidelines of this section will constitute a violation and
may be subject to penalty and enforcement per §§
295-122 and 295-123.
F.   Placement of gas meters in historic districts. [Added 8-24-2015 by Ord.
No. 45-20153]
      (1)   Installation.
         (a)   No gas meters shall be installed or placed in front yards, front
of buildings or along their facades that can be seen from a public right-of-way
within any historic district designated by City ordinance or listed in the
National Register of Historic Places. Such gas meters shall be located inside
the building, at an exterior location that is not visible from a public right-
of-way, or shall be installed within an exterior, below-grade vault that is
covered by a flush, corrosion-resistant access hatch.
         (b)   Exposed gas pressure regulator installations shall be
inconspicuously located outside the main dwelling unit.
         (c)   All exposed components of a gas meter assembly installation
shall be fabricated of corrosion-resistant materials and painted along with
associated visible valves and piping to match the color of the adjacent facade
of the building.
         (d)   Gas meter assembly installations shall be resistant to
tampering, vandalism, and protected from damage by moving vehicles.
         (e)   Gas meter assembly installations shall not encroach upon
required sidewalk widths, so designated by City ordinance.
         (f)   Gas meter assembly installations shall maintain uniformity in
overall size, elevation, and configuration with new or existing gas meter
assembly installations located at each immediately adjacent property.
         (g)   Existing sidewalks and streets disturbed by installations or
alterations of the gas main, gas service, or a gas meter assembly shall be
repaved to applicable published City of Reading standards.
         (h)   Gas meters that are placed in accordance with this chapter may
be approved by the Preservation Officer when submitted with a diagram of their
proposed placement on the structure or building and relevant photographs of the
building. Placement of gas meters on any other area of a structure or building
shall be reviewed by the Historical Architectural Review Board.
      (2)   Exceptions. Gas meters, as defined herein, may be installed in
front yards, front of buildings, or along their facades that can be seen from a
public right-of-way within historic districts only if no other means of gas
service can be provided. In such cases where the proposed location of a gas
meter is visible from a public right-of- way, the public utility shall seek the
issuance of a certificate of appropriateness as required in §
295-107 of this chapter. Such gas meters shall be unobtrusive and shall be
screened from view through the use of landscaping, fencing and/or architectural
building features. The Building Inspector and Historic Preservation Specialist
shall approve the installation to ensure there is no disruption to the historic
nature and aesthetic value of the district.
      (3)   Removal. Any existing gas meter assembly installed in front yards,
front of buildings or along their facades that can be seen from a public right-
of-way within historic districts before the enactment of this subsection must
be reviewed by the Historical Architectural Review Board to obtain a
certificate of appropriateness as required per §
295-107 of this chapter within one year of the effective date of this chapter.
The Historical Architectural Review Board may require removal and/or
alterations to existing gas meter assemblies and adjacent construction to meet
the requirements of this subsection.
      (4)   Violations and penalty. Placement of any gas meter that does not
conform to the guidelines of this subsection will constitute a violation and
may be subject to penalty and enforcement per §§
295-122 and 295-123.
   G.   Enforcement notice.
      (1)   Following an inspection of a building or structure located in a
designated historic district, if it appears to the Preservation Officer,
Property Maintenance Inspector, Property Maintenance Supervisor or Zoning
Enforcement Officer that a violation of any provision of this chapter has
occurred, enforcement proceedings shall be initiated by sending a notice of
violation as provided in this section. Copies of the notice of violation shall
be filed in the Zoning Office, Property Maintenance Division and Historic
Preservation Office.
      (2)   Enforcement notice shall be sent to the owner of record of the
parcel on which the violation has occurred, to any known occupant (if different
from the owner), or to any person who has filed a written request to receive
enforcement notices regarding the property.
      (3)   An enforcement notice shall state at a minimum the following:
         (a)   The name of the owner of record and any other person against
whom the Preservation Officer, Property Maintenance Inspector, Property
Maintenance Supervisor or Zoning Enforcement Officer intends to take action.
         (b)   Location of the property in violation.
         (c)   The specific violation, with a description of the requirements
which have not been met, citing in each instance the applicable provisions of
this chapter.
         (d)   The date before which the steps for compliance must be commenced
and the date before which the steps must be completed.
         (e)   That the recipient of the notice has a right to appeal to the
Reading Board of Historical Architectural Review within 14 days of the receipt
of the notice by completing a COA application and submitting it to the
Preservation Officer for review by the Board at the next regularly scheduled
meeting.
         (f)   Any person who authorizes or continues any work on any
structure, building, sign or premises after having been served with an
enforcement notice, except such work as is directed by the City to be
performed, shall be in violation of this chapter and subject to remedies set
forth in §
295-122 hereof.
         (g)   Any person who has been served with an enforcement notice or
discontinues or abandons work shall not leave any structure, building, sign or
premises in such condition as to be hazardous to the public health, safety and
welfare.
      (4)   Stop-work orders.
         (a)   Upon notice from the Preservation Officer, Property Maintenance
Inspector, Property Maintenance Supervisor or Zoning Enforcement Officer that
the work on any building, structure, or premises is conducted contrary to the
provisions of this chapter, such work shall be stopped immediately. The stop-
work order shall be posted by the Building Inspector, Property Maintenance
Inspector, Property Maintenance Supervisor or Zoning Enforcement Officer on the
property involved and shall state the conditions under which work may be
resumed.
         (b)   Any person who authorizes or continues any work on any building,
structure, or premises after the posting of a stop-work order thereon shall be
in violation of this chapter and subject to the penalties as set forth in §
295-123.
         (c)   Following the posting of a stop-work order, any person who
discontinues or abandons work shall not leave any building, structure, or
premises in such condition as to be hazardous to the public health, safety and
welfare. In the event that any building, structure, or premises is abandoned or
left in a condition which, in the opinion of the Building Inspector,
constitutes a hazard to the public health, safety and welfare, the Preservation
Officer may declare the same to be a nuisance. Such hazard shall, thereafter,
be abated as permitted by statute or ordinance.
2.   Editor's Note: See
Ch. 180, Construction Codes.
3.   Editor's Note: Pursuant to this ordinance, former Subsection F,
Enforcement notice, was redesignated as Subsection G.
§ 295-107. Required permits and certificates.
   A.   Building permit. No person shall erect, construct, reconstruct, alter,
restore, demolish, raze or change in appearance in any manner any building,
structure, object or site, in whole or in part, in any designated historic
district, without first obtaining the required permits which have been issued
on the strength of a certificate of appropriateness.
   B.   Certificate of appropriateness. [Amended 6-25-2012 by Ord. No. 70-2012]
      (1)   Historic districts. No permit shall be issued or cause to be
issued, for the construction, reconstruction, alteration, restoration,
demolition or razing of any building, structure, or premises, in whole or in
part, within a designated historic district until a certificate of
appropriateness has been issued. Such certificate shall not be limited to work
requiring a building permit according to the presently enacted building code,
but shall include all work affecting general design, arrangement, texture,
material and color of a structure which can be seen from a public street or
way. This includes, but is not limited to, the following: painting;
sandblasting; chemical cleaning; stucco or other applied textures; replacement
or major repair of windows, cornices, trim or other nonstructural elements;
signs; and other work affecting any building, structure or premises.
      (2)   Conservation districts.
         (a)   No permit shall be issued or cause to be issued, for new
construction and additions to buildings or structures, including a porch or
porch enclosure, that impacts the streetscape within a designated conservation
district until a certificate of appropriateness has been issued, unless
specifically listed as exempt below.
         (b)   Demolition activity impacting the streetscape, including
demolition of any character defining porch, balcony, deck, cornice, dormer or
roof, shall require the issuance of a certificate of appropriateness, unless
specifically listed as exempt below.
         (c)   The following activities shall not require a certificate of
appropriateness:
            [1]   Demolition or construction of any building or structure not
visible from a public right-of-way.
            [2]   Maintenance, repair, or alteration of a building or structure
or part thereof.
            [3]   Installation of appurtenances and accessory elements of a
decorative or ancillary nature, regardless of visibility from a public street,
including but not limited to the following:
               [a]   Storm windows and doors, awnings and shutters.
               [b]   Signs, banners and flags.
               [c]   Downspouts and gutters.
               [d]   Flower boxes, light fixtures and mailboxes.
               [e]   Heating or cooling units, including solar heating
fixtures.
               [f]   Fences and gates. [Added 1-22-2024 by Ord. No. 6-2024]
               [g]   Walls not exceeding four feet in height. [Added 1-22-2024
by Ord. No. 6-2024]
               [h]   Arbors and trellises. [Added 1-22-2024 by Ord. No. 6-2024]
               [i]   Detached manufactured carports. [Added 1-22-2024 by Ord.
No. 6-2024]
               [j]   Detached manufactured sheds. [Added 1-22-2024 by Ord. No.
6- 2024]
               [k]   Antennas and satellite dishes.
               [l]   Other ancillary or decorative elements.
               [m]   Gas meters that are not visible from a public right-of-
way. [Added 8-24-2015 by Ord. No. 45-2015]
            [4]   Demolition of any structure deemed by the Building Official
to be in imminent danger of failure or collapse and where the Building Official
orders the demolition in order to protect public health, safety and welfare.
   C.   Applications.
      (1)   Form. All applications for a certificate of appropriateness shall
be in writing on a form provided by the Preservation Officer and shall be
submitted to the Preservation Officer at least 10 working days before the
regularly scheduled meeting. Incomplete applications shall not be accepted and
shall be returned to the applicant for completion.
      (2)   Applicants. All requests for certificates of appropriateness shall
be made in writing by the legal or equitable owner of the subject property or
his/her authorized agents or appointee.
      (3)   Submission requirements.
         (a)   The submission requirements may vary according to the proposed
scope of work.
         (b)   At a minimum, an applicant must present a completed application
for a certificate of appropriateness form for any proposed construction,
reconstruction, alteration, restoration, demolition or razing of a designated
historic building, structure or premises; or to any building, structure or
premises within a designated historic district visible including, but not
limited to, all work affecting the general design, arrangement, texture,
material and color which can be seen from a public street or way.
         (c)   Appropriately and accurately scaled drawings of all front, side
and rear elevations where the proposed work will occur may be required.
Additional information such as site plans, and building sections and plans may
be required for further clarity. All drawings must be annotated or be
accompanied by applicable specifications that describe the proposed undertaking
in detail. Photo- drawings with notes and/or specifications may be acceptable
at the discretion of the Preservation Officer.
         (d)   Detailed drawings of all features to be constructed,
reconstructed, altered, restored, demolished, painted, razed or changed in
appearance in any manner may be required at a scale to be determined.
         (e)   Product information regarding proposed construction materials.
         (f)   Charts providing color samples for the painting of exterior
surfaces.
         (g)   Representative photographs of all buildings, structures, or
premises and the specific areas where the proposed work will occur shall be
submitted with the certificate of appropriateness application form. The
photographs shall be dated and labeled and shall remain the property of the
City.
         (h)   Applications for treatment such as demolition or new
construction shall include any additional requirements as specified in any
Board policies adopted pursuant to this chapter.
§ 295-108. Review process and procedure for a certificate of appropriateness.
   A.   Applicants shall consult with the Preservation Officer early in the
planning process for guidance in the preparation of a complete and acceptable
application for a certificate of appropriateness.
   B.   The Preservation Officer, the Reading Board of Historical Architectural
Review, and City Council shall be guided by the United States Secretary of the
Interior's Standards for Rehabilitation and Guidelines for Rehabilitating
Historic Buildings, by
Chapter 180, Construction Codes, and by any policies and/or guidelines
hereafter adopted by the Board or the City of Reading. The City shall have
copies of these documents available for public viewing. [Amended 8-26-2013 by
Ord. No. 35-2013]
   C.   The Preservation Officer shall review the application, ascertain its
completeness and determine the necessity of submission to the Reading Board of
Historical Architectural Review. An incomplete application and submission shall
not be accepted by the Preservation Officer and shall be returned to the
applicant with a written request for additional information.
§ 295-109. Approval and issuance of a certificate of appropriateness by
Preservation Officer.
The Board may authorize the Preservation Officer to approve certain proposed
building improvements. A list of treatments authorized by the Board for staff
approval will be maintained by the Preservation Officer. All other applications
will be referred to the Board.
§ 295-110. Issuance of a certificate of appropriateness for applications
referred to Board.
   A.   The Preservation Officer shall forward to the Board for review all
applications for certificates of appropriateness not approved pursuant to §
295-109.
   B.   The Board shall hold regularly scheduled monthly meetings for the
purpose of reviewing applications. Any meeting held on a day not regularly
scheduled shall be considered a special meeting. A special meeting may be held
at the call of the Board chairperson or upon the written request of any two
Board members. All Board members shall be notified at least 24 hours prior to
such meeting.
      (1)   All meetings must be publicly announced at least 24 hours in
advance and be open to the public.
      (2)   The meeting agenda must be available to the public for review prior
to the meeting.
      (3)   Records of all decisions and actions of the Board including the
reasons for making the decisions must be kept on file and available for public
inspection.
      (4)   All decisions of the Board shall be made in a public forum.
   C.   Notice to the applicant shall be provided in written form as follows:
      (1)   The applicant shall be given written notice of the time and date of
the meeting not less than 10 days prior to said meeting.
      (2)   The Board shall notify the applicant of its decision within 30 days
of its review of the application at the meeting.
         (a)   If the Board decides not to grant a certificate of
appropriateness to the applicant, it shall notify the applicant in writing.
         (b)   Notice shall indicate the reason for disapproval and what
changes in the plans and specifications would meet the conditions for
protecting the distinctive historic character of the district.
         (c)   Should the Board fail to notify the applicant of its decision
within 30 days of its review of the application, it shall be assumed, as a
matter of law, that the application is approved, unless the applicant waives
the time limit in writing.
   D.   The criteria to be used by the Board in making its decisions concerning
the issuance of certificates of appropriateness may be developed in detail by
the Board. At a minimum, such criteria shall include the following:
      (1)   Broad historical values representing the cultural, political,
economic or social history of the City.
      (2)   The relationship of the structure to historic personages or events.
      (3)   Specimen architectural types representative of a certain period,
style or method of construction.
      (4)   The effect of the proposed change upon the general historical and
architectural nature of the district.
      (5)   The historical and/or architectural appropriateness of exterior
architectural features which can be seen from a public street or way.
      (6)   The general design, arrangement, texture, material and color of the
building or structure and the relation of such factors to similar features of
building and structures in the district.
   E.   Certificate of appropriateness applications for the following property
modifications must be reviewed by the HARB and approved by City Council:
      (1)   Demolition.
      (2)   Installation or construction of animal shelters, greenhouses,
garages, carports and storage sheds exceeding 20 square feet.
      (3)   Construction of building additions which exceed 5% of ground floor
area or have an area of more than 100 square feet.
      (4)   Any change in building height or roof line.
   F.   The Board shall make or cause to be made a written report to Council
summarizing monthly meetings, activities and decisions. The report shall
indicate the reasons for any denials of certificate of appropriateness and
what, if any, changes in the plans and specifications would be deemed
appropriate.
§ 295-111. Reading Board of Historical Architectural Review.
The Board of Historical Architectural Review is hereby created:
   A.   Membership and terms.
      (1)   The Board shall be composed of nine members, appointed by City
Council; one of whom shall be a registered architect, one a licensed real
estate broker, one a person with knowledge of the building trades, one who is
either a resident of or owner of property within the Callowhill Historic
District, one who is either a resident of or owner of property within the
Prince Historic District, one who is either a resident of or owner of property
in the Centre Park Historic District, one who is either a resident of or owner
of property within the Penn's Common Historic District, one who is either a
resident of or owner of property within the Heights Conservation District, and
one who has knowledge of or interest in the preservation of historic buildings
and districts. [Amended 6-25-2012 by Ord. No. 70-2012; 6-22-2015 by Ord. No.
29-2015]
      (2)   The terms of members shall be fixed so that no more than four terms
shall expire during the same calendar year. Upon the expiration of the term of
any member, a successor shall be appointed to serve for a term of three years.
      (3)   The term of any member of the Board who was appointed in his or her
capacity as a registered architect, licensed real estate broker, a person with
knowledge of the building trades, or a resident of or owner of property in the
historical district shall automatically be considered vacant if in the case of
the former three, the person ceases to be so engaged, or in the case of the
latter, ceases to be either a resident of and/or owner of property in the
historical district. An appointment to fill a vacancy shall be only for the
unexpired portion of the term.
   B.   Organization of the Board.
      (1)   The Board shall comply with the bylaws adopted by the Board
December 16, 1986, by Res. 27-86.
      (2)   The Board shall establish offices and elect officers from its own
membership. Nominations for various offices may be made by any member of the
Reading Board of Historical Architectural Review. Elections shall be held
annually. The chairperson shall fill by appointment any office prematurely
vacated.
      (3)   Any action taken at any meeting shall require the affirmative vote
of the majority of Board members present. Each Board member shall be entitled
to one vote on any given issue. [Amended 6-22-2015 by Ord. No. 29-2015]
      (4)   An executive committee consisting of the elected officers
(chairperson, vice chairperson, secretary) may be established to review
applications for adequate content. The executive committee should convene a
minimum of four working days before a regularly scheduled meeting.
      (5)   The number of standing or temporary committees shall be determined
by the Board. The chairperson and members of such committees shall be appointed
by the chairperson of the Board. Membership on said committees shall terminate
automatically upon the expiration of the term of the appointing chairperson.
      (6)   The Board may form committees and develop policies regarding
maintenance, rehabilitation, construction and demolition.
   C.   Obligation of members.
      (1)   Board members must attend a minimum of seven meetings per year. If
a member is unable to attend three consecutive meetings, the Board as a whole
may recommend to City Council that the said member be removed and replaced by a
newly appointed member. [Amended 8-26-2013 by Ord. No. 35-2013]
      (2)   Board members are required to attend at least eight hours of
informational or educational training per year as determined by the
Pennsylvania Historical and Museum Commission.
   D.   Expenditure for service. City Council may appropriate funds for legal,
secretarial, clerk, consultant and other technical assistance required to
achieve the aims of this chapter. Board members shall serve without
compensation, except that the City may reimburse Board members for expenses
incurred in the performance of their duties.
   E.   Conflict of interest. No member of the Board shall be permitted to take
part in the discussion or vote on the issuance of a certificate of
appropriateness for any property in which such member has any interest, direct
or indirect. Such member shall temporarily absent himself or herself from the
table during any such discussion or vote.
   F.   Removal from office. Any member may be removed for misconduct or
neglect of duty or for other just cause by a majority vote of Council taken
after the member has received 15 days' advance notice of the intent to take
such vote. Failure of a member to attend three consecutive regular meetings of
the Board will constitute grounds for immediate removal from the Board by City
Council. Failure of a member to attend at least 50% of the regular meetings of
the Board in a calendar year will constitute grounds for immediate removal from
the Board by City Council. The Chairperson of the Board shall inform the City
Clerk in writing when a member has failed to comply with this attendance
policy. Following such notification, City Council may vote to remove the member
and seek applicants to fill the vacant position. [Amended 8-23-2010 by Ord. No.
57-2010]
§ 295-112. Functions of Board of Historical Architectural Review.
   A.   Recommend to City Council the delineation of boundaries of and
designation as historic those districts that the Board determines are
significant to the City.
   B.   Maintain or cause to be maintained the City's Comprehensive Historic
Sites Survey and Inventory of Historic Buildings.
C.    Review and grant or deny all applications, not approved by the
Preservation Officer, for certificates of appropriateness to alter or demolish
buildings, structures, sites or objects located within designated historic
districts.
   D.   Make recommendations to the Mayor and City Council concerning the use
and availability of grants, gifts and appropriations to promote the
preservation of buildings, structures, sites, objects or districts of historic
importance to the City.
   E.   Make recommendations to the Mayor and City Council that the City
purchase any facade easement, building, structure, site or object of historic
significance where private preservation is not feasible.
   F.   Increase public awareness of the value of architectural, cultural and
historic preservation.
   G.   Adopt rules of procedure, policies and regulations and establish such
committees as the Board deems necessary for the conduct of its business.
   H.   Keep or cause to be kept records of all proceedings.
   I.   Delegate to the Preservation Officer such responsibility and authority
as it deems appropriate to carry out the routine activities of the Board,
including review of applications.
   J.   Publish and conduct a regular schedule of monthly meetings to carry out
Board functions.
§ 295-113. Proper maintenance and demolition by neglect.
   A.   All work performed pursuant to the issuance of a certificate of
appropriateness and building permit shall conform to the requirements of such
certificate and permit.
      (1)   The Preservation Officer shall inspect any work performed pursuant
to such certificate and permit to ensure compliance.
      (2)   In the event that work is not being performed in accordance with
the certificate and permit, the Preservation Officer shall direct the Building
Inspector to issue a stop- work order and all work shall cease until the work
is brought into conformity.
   B.   The exterior of every historic building, structure, and object located
within a historic district shall be kept in good repair.
   C.   Neglect of the exterior of any historic building, structure, or object
located within a historic district which may cause the exterior to deteriorate,
decay, become damaged or fall into a state of disrepair shall constitute
demolition by neglect.
      (1)   The Preservation Officer shall order the owner to repair, make
watertight, preserve and/or protect such a building, structure or object within
30 days following the receipt of a written order.
      (2)   The written order shall specify the work to be undertaken and the
date for compliance.
      (3)   Failure to comply shall constitute a violation of this chapter
pursuant to §
295-123 hereof.
§ 295-114. Hazardous structures.
In the event that the Building Inspector, the Fire Marshal or a court shall
order or direct, in the interest of the public health, safety and welfare, the
construction, reconstruction, alteration or demolition of a building,
structure, object or site in a historic district, the terms of this chapter may
be waived to the extent that the applicant may proceed with the ordered action
for the purpose of remedying conditions determined to be imminently dangerous
to life, health or property.
§ 295-115. Emergency issuance of a certificate of appropriateness.
There may exist certain situations where building repair is immediately
required. In such emergencies a Building Inspector must determine that there
will be significant damage to the structure if an emergency situation is not
corrected in a timely manner. Subsequent to determination of an emergency
situation by the Building Inspector, an emergency issuance of a certificate of
appropriateness can be authorized by a majority of the Executive Committee of
the Board.
§ 295-116. Financial hardship.
Financial considerations may be taken into account in the review of an
application for a certificate of appropriateness for certain repairs or
alterations. The applicant must submit the following information:
   A.   An estimate of the costs for the proposed work as well as an estimate
of any additional cost that may be incurred to comply with the Secretary of the
Interior's Standards for Rehabilitation and Guidelines for Rehabilitating
Historic Buildings.
   B.   Evidence that there are no other cost-effective methods of appropriate
repair or alteration.
   C.   Any other financial information as may be requested by the Board.
§ 295-117. Conflict with other provisions.
Should any provision set forth in this chapter be found to conflict with any
law of the United States or of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, such federal
and/or state laws shall govern and this chapter shall be construed accordingly.
Such conflict shall not affect the validity of the chapter as a whole.
§ 295-118. Interpretation.
All standards set forth in this chapter are to be interpreted as minimum
standards required. Nothing herein contained shall be construed to prohibit or
prevent the use of higher standards
§ 295-119. Appeals.
   A.   Any party aggrieved by any decision of the Reading Board of Historical
Architectural Review made pursuant to this chapter may file an appeal with the
Council of the City of Reading within 30 days after notice of the decision has
been made.
      (1)   Upon receipt of notice to appeal, City Council shall consider at a
regular or special meeting the question of issuing to the applicant making the
appeal, a certificate of appropriateness for the work covered by the
application.
      (2)   The applicant shall be advised of the time and date of the regular
or special meeting at which the appeal shall be considered.
      (3)   The applicant shall be advised of his/her right to attend the
meeting and be heard as to his/her reason(s) for filing both the original
application for the proposed scope of work and for the appeal.
      (4)   If Council approves the application on appeal, a certificate of
appropriateness shall be issued for the work specified in the application.
Until the appeal has been satisfactorily made to Council, no work shall
commence, nor shall a certificate of appropriateness be granted.
      (5)   If Council disapproves, Council shall indicate the reason(s) for
disapproval and indicate what changes to the plans and specifications, if any,
would be deemed appropriate.
      (6)   Council shall send written notice of its decision to the applicant
within 30 days of the meeting at which the appeal was heard.
      (7)   Should Council fail to so notify the applicant, it shall be
assumed, as a matter of law, that the application is approved, unless the
applicant waives the time limit in writing.
   B.   Any party aggrieved by any decision of Council made pursuant to the
provisions of this chapter may file an appeal with the Court of Common Pleas of
Berks County within 30 days after notice of the decision has been made. Failure
of such party to file the appeal within such 30 days shall preclude an appeal
from such decision.
§ 295-120. Relief from City employee and appointee liability.
Any person charged with the enforcement of this chapter, while acting for the
City, shall not thereby render himself or herself personally liable, and he or
she is relieved hereby from all personal liability for any damage that may
accrue to persons or property as a result of any act required or permitted in
the discharge of his or her duties. Any suit instituted against any officer,
employee or appointee because of an act performed by him or her in the lawful
discharge of his or her duties shall be defended by the legal representative of
the City. In no case shall any such officer, employee or appointee be liable
for costs in any action, suit or proceeding that may be instituted in pursuance
of the provisions of this chapter when he or she performs his or her duties in
good faith. For the purposes of this chapter, any person who has been assigned
duties by the Mayor or Council pursuant to this chapter shall be considered an
employee of the City and shall be entitled to the provisions of this section.
§ 295-121. Amendments.
Council may, after public notice and hearing, amend, change or supplement the
regulations herein established. Thus, Council may create additional historic
districts, change the boundaries of historic districts, or amend the
regulations pertaining thereto, provided such amendments are made by ordinance
pursuant to the City Charter.
§ 295-122. Notice and prosecution.
[Amended 10-25-2010 by Ord. No. 77-2010]
   A.   Notice. The Preservation Officer, Property Maintenance Inspector,
Property Maintenance Supervisor or Zoning Enforcement Officer shall serve a
notice of violation on the person in violation of this chapter or of a plan
approved under the provisions of this chapter or in violation of a permit or
certificate of appropriateness issued under the provisions of this chapter.
Such notice shall direct the restraint, correction or abatement of such
violation.
   B.   Prosecution. If the violation is not abated within the time specified
in the notice of violation, the Preservation Officer, Property Maintenance
Inspector, Property Maintenance Supervisor or Zoning Enforcement Officer shall
institute the appropriate proceeding at law or in equity to restrain, correct
or abate such violation.
§ 295-123. Violations and penalties.
Whoever violates the provisions of this chapter or fails to comply with any of
the requirements thereof or conducts activities in violation of a permit issued
under the provisions of this chapter or who, without having applied for and
received an approved permit, conducts activities for which a permit is required
under the terms of this chapter shall be guilty of a summary offense and fined
not more than $300 for each offense with costs. Each day that a violation
continues shall be deemed a separate offense.
Chapter 302
HOUSE NUMBERING
§
302-101.   Director of Public Works to number or renumber.
§
302-102.   Director of Public Works to prepare map with house numbers.
[HISTORY: Adopted by the City Council of the City of Reading 6-28-1894 by Ord.
No. 31-1894; amended in its entirety 5-29-2001 by Ord. No. 14-2001 (
Ch. 4, Part 2, of the 2001 Code of Ordinances). Subsequent amendments noted
where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Construction codes — See
Ch. 180.
Subdivision and land development — See
Ch. 515.
STATE LAW REFERENCES
Numbering of buildings — See 53 P.S. § 37403(19).
§ 302-101. Director of Public Works to number or renumber.
The Director of Public Works is hereby authorized and empowered to number and
renumber, or cause to be numbered and renumbered and equalized the houses
within the City of Reading, whenever the same may be necessary.
§ 302-102. Director of Public Works to prepare map with house numbers.
The Director of Public Works is hereby directed whenever occasion requires, in
order to number or equalize the numbering of houses, to prepare a map of the
same, designating the numbers of the respective houses. Such map showing the
changes and numbering as aforesaid shall be filed in the office of the Director
of Public Works for reference.
Chapter 308
HOUSING
Part 1
Housing Registration
A   Registration and Inspection
§
308-101.   Definitions.
§
308-102.   Housing registration required.
§
308-103.   Application for housing registration.
§
308-104.   Annual renewal of housing registration.
§
308-105.   Denial of application for housing registration.
§
308-106.   Revocation of housing registration.
§
308-107.   Change of address.
§
308-108.   Inspection.
§
308-109.   (Reserved)
§
308-110.   Responsible local agent.
§
308-111.   Structural changes.
§
308-112.   Failure to apply for housing registration.
§
308-113.   Owner and occupant duties.
§
308-114.   Owners jointly and severally responsible.
§
308-115.   Fees for housing registration, surcharges and administrative fees.
§
308-116.   (Reserved)
§
308-117.   Official notices.
§
308-118.   Placarding and condemnation.
§
308-119.   Review and appeals.
B   Disruptive Conduct
§
308-130.   Definitions.
§
308-131.   Investigation and report; suspension and/or revocation of housing
permit.
§
308-132.   Code and License Appeals Board.
§
308-133.   Appeal to court of proper jurisdiction.
§
308-134.   Share information.
§
308-135.   Compliance with other City of Reading ordinances.
Part 2
Waiver of Fees
§
308-201.   Waiver of construction fees for nonprofit agencies.
Part 3
Abandoned Property Registration
§
308-301.   Definitions.
§
308-302.   Establishment of registry.
§
308-303.   Registration of abandoned real property.
§
308-304.   Maintenance requirements.
§
308-305.   Inspections for violations.
Addendum to Rental Agreement
[HISTORY: Adopted by the City Council of the City of Reading as indicated in
part histories. Amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Construction codes — See
Ch. 180.
Health code — See
Ch. 288, Part 1.
Solid waste — See
Ch. 496.
Taxation — See
Ch. 549.
Zoning — See
Ch. 600.
STATE LAW REFERENCES
Real Estate Licensing and Registration Act — See 63 P.S. § 455.101 et seq.
Part 1
Housing Registration
[Adopted 7-23-2007 By Ord. No. 28-2007 (Ch. 11, Part 1, of the 2001 Code of
Ordinances); Amended In Its Entirety 3-25-2013 By Ord. No. 17-2013; and 5-8-
2017 by Ord. No. 41-2017]
A   Registration and Inspection
[Amended 11-23-2015 by Ord. No. 78-2015]
§ 308-101. Definitions.
The following words and phrases when used in this chapter shall have the
meanings given to them in this section unless the context clearly indicates
otherwise. Additional definitions for purpose and use of the property are found
within the City of Reading Zoning Ordinance. 1
   BUSINESS PRIVILEGE LICENSE — A license issued by the Berks Earned Income Tax
Bureau per City of Reading Codified Ordinance
Chapter 549, Taxation, Special, Part 4, Business Privilege Tax, authorizing one
to perform business including, for purposes of this subpart, renting.
   CODE AND LICENSE APPEALS BOARD - Board authorized to hear, among other
things, appeals of and render decisions in matters concerning housing.
   CODES — Any state or local code or ordinance adopted, enacted or in effect
in and for the City of Reading.
   CODES OFFICIAL — A City of Reading employee or authorized agent sworn to
enforce the City of Reading Codes and Codified Ordinances. This term is used
interchangeably with Property Maintenance Inspector (PMI).
   DWELLING UNIT - A single unit providing complete, independent living
facilities for one or more persons, including permanent provisions for living,
sleeping, eating, cooking and sanitation.
   OWNER — The record titleholder per Berks County Assessment Office.
   PROPERTY MAINTENANCE DIVISION — A division of the City of Reading Community
Development Department charged with enforcing the Code of the City of Reading
governing issues including, but not limited to, housing, property maintenance,
health and blight.
   REGISTRATION - Filing of a housing application to register a parcel as
required by this chapter.
   RESPONSIBLE LOCAL AGENT - A Berks County resident/company designated by the
owner as the agent responsible for managing a non-owner occupied dwelling in
compliance with the City of Reading Codified Ordinances when the dwelling is
owned by a person or entity who resides more than 25 miles outside of the City
of Reading.
   ZONING — City of Reading Zoning Ordinance (
Chapter 600).
   ZONING PERMIT — A permit issued by the City of Reading Zoning Division per
the City of Reading Zoning Ordinance (
Chapter 600).
1.   Editor's Note: See
Ch. 600, Zoning.
§ 308-102. Housing registration required.
Owners of residential and mixed-use parcels are required to apply for and renew
a housing registration issued by the City of Reading Property Maintenance
Division per the procedure established by this code and policies created
hereunder.
Owners of single-family owner-occupied properties are excluded from this
requirement but are required to confirm owner occupancy.
§ 308-103. Application for housing registration.
   A.   Applications for housing registration shall be made in writing or by
electronic application on forms prepared and provided by the City of Reading
Property Maintenance Division and shall be accompanied by payment of the
applicable fee(s) as per the City of Reading Fee Schedule,
Chapter 212. Such forms shall require, but shall not be limited to, the
following information and shall be accepted and sworn to by the owner:
      (1)   The name, business address, date of birth, telephone numbers
(business and mobile), and driver's license, state-issued identification or
governmental identification number(s) of all of the owner(s) and the
responsible local agent of any residential and mixed-use parcel. A federal EIN
(employee identification number) must be provided if the owner is a
corporation, limited-liability company, or partnership.
      (2)   The address of the premises for which the housing registration is
required.
      (3)   A zoning permit application as applicable.
      (4)   Participation in a recognized trash/disposal program and the City's
recycling program will be verified.
      (5)   The business privilege license number as provided by the City.
   B.   Registration of any parcel required to have a housing registration is
required within 30 days of the change of ownership or change of use.
   C.   Special provisions for properties with a valid housing permit issued
prior to December 31, 2007, but lacking valid zoning permits for multiple-
dwelling or rooming house use.
      (1)   Any property previously registered with the City of Reading
Property Maintenance Division and holding a valid housing permit issued by the
Reading Property Maintenance Division prior to December 31, 2007, and has
remained current shall be required to apply to the Zoning Administrator for a
zoning permit prior to submitting an application for a housing registration.
The Zoning Administrator shall make an initial determination as to whether the
subject property is located within a zoning district where multifamily rental
use is legally permitted as an allowed use or a use previously approved as a
conditional use pursuant to Subsection D of § 27-1203 of the Zoning Ordinance,
as amended. 2
         (a)   If the Zoning Administrator determines that the subject property
is located within a zoning district where multifamily rental use is legally
permitted in accordance with the foregoing provisions in Subsection A, it will
be granted a zoning permit as a legally permitted use under the applicable
zoning, subject to Subsection B hereunder, and it will be required to comply
with all of the provisions of this subpart and any other applicable chapters as
verified upon inspection by the Property Maintenance Division.
         (b)   If the subject property had a valid housing permit as of
December 31, 2007, but is determined to be located within a zoning district
where multifamily rental use is not legally permitted in accordance with the
foregoing provisions in Subsection A, it will be granted a zoning permit as a
prior nonconforming use by the Zoning Administrator within the meaning of
Subsection B of § 27-607 of the Zoning Ordinance 3  and remain eligible for a
housing registration provided it conforms to the remaining requirements of the
City of Reading codes and Code of the City of Reading.
      (2)   The Zoning Administrator shall make a secondary determination as to
whether the number of dwellings present exceeds the number of units previously
recorded for the premises in City records. A housing registration will be
denied until the property is modified to comply with the number of units
previously recorded.
      (3)   A zoning permit issued by the Zoning Administrator in accordance
with Subsections A and B hereinabove shall satisfy the requirements of §
308-105, and the issuance of a housing registration shall be subject to
compliance with the remaining provisions of Subsection A.
2.   Editor's Note: See §
600-1203.
§ 308-104. Annual renewal of housing registration.
[Amended 12-18-2017 by Ord. No. 115-2017]
   A.   Each housing registration shall be renewed by the registrant on or
before the first of April in each and every calendar year regardless of when
the original registration was filed in the previous year. If the first of April
falls upon a Saturday, Sunday or holiday, the deadline shall be the close of
business on the next business day. If said housing registration fee is paid on
or before April first a discount will be allowed as per the City of Reading Fee
Schedule,
Chapter 212.
   B.   If payment is made after the due date of April first a late fee will be
applied as per City of Reading Fee Schedule,
Chapter 212. Renewal of a housing registration shall be made in writing or by
electronic application upon forms provided by the Property Maintenance
Division. Submission of annual renewal forms shall be accompanied by payment of
the specified renewal fee as per the City of Reading Fee Schedule,
Chapter 212.
   C.   Submission of annual renewal forms after the April first deadline shall
be subject to a surcharge as provided in the City of Reading Fee Schedule,
Chapter 212. All delinquent accounts may be given to collections as per this
subpart. Failure to submit an annual renewal form as required herein before
July 1 in each and every year may result in the immediate revocation of the
housing registration and be subject to §
308-112, Failure to apply for housing registration.
   D.   In the event of revocation of the housing registration, the property
owner must file an application for reinstatement upon a form prescribed by the
Property Maintenance Division and the filing of said application shall be
accompanied by payment of all outstanding property maintenance fees and
surcharges.
   E.   Notwithstanding the filing of an application for reinstatement, nothing
herein shall prevent the City of Reading from undertaking legal action to
enforce any other provision of the Code of the City of Reading, including
action to enjoin any continued occupancy of the property by tenants residing
therein and/or action to abate any nuisance, dangerous condition or other
threat to the health and safety of the tenants residing therein or the general
public.
3.   Editor's Note: See §
600-607.
§ 308-105. Denial of application for housing registration.
   A.   The City may deny a housing registration or renewal to any applicant of
said dwelling or building if it is notin compliance with any state or local
code or ordinance adopted, enacted or in effect in and for the City of Reading,
is in pending litigation for violations of the aforesaid code or has been
declared uninhabitable and/or condemned by the appropriate authority with
jurisdiction.
   B.   The City may deny an application for a housing registration if the
applicant (or in the case of a corporate or similar entity, its owners or
affiliates) has a demonstrable history on three or more occasions of failing to
address cited code violations, including lack of utilities, that present
immediate threats to human health and safety within the compliance period
specified by the Property Maintenance Division, currently has unresolved codes
violations, delinquent property maintenance fees or has any tax delinquencies.
   C.   The City of Reading Property Maintenance Division is hereby authorized
to placard and condemn a property for which a housing registration has not been
filed with the Property Maintenance Division as required by this Part. Such
action requires vacation of the property as determined by the Property
Maintenance Division in the exercise of its discretion.
§ 308-106. Revocation of housing registration.
   A.   The City of Reading Property Maintenance Division shall have the
authority to revoke or suspend the housing registration of any dwelling or
building that it determines within the reasonable exercise of its discretion to
be uninhabitable by humans, and in noncompliance with any state or local code
or ordinance adopted, enacted or in effect in and for the City of Reading or
has failed an inspection. A housing registration may also be revoked if it is
determined that the registration was filed upon material misrepresentations,
errors or omissions set forth in the application.
   B.   The City may revoke a housing registration if the applicant (or in the
case of a corporate or similar entity, its owners or affiliates) has a record
of chronic codes violations and currently has unresolved codes violations,
delinquent property maintenance fees or has any tax delinquency.
   C.   A notice of a revocation of a housing registration shall set forth the
reason for the revocation and shall be provided in writing to the last known
owner of record.
§ 308-107. Change of address.
Any owner of a residential and mixed-use parcel governed by this subpart who
relocates or changes mailing address shall file written notice of the same with
the City of Reading Property Maintenance Division within 10 days of such
relocation or change in mailing address. Failure to provide such notice will
not excuse an owner from penalties due to a violation under this subpart.
§ 308-108. Inspection.
   A.   All properties that are subjected to registration will be placed into a
routine inspection cycle to determine if the parcel is compliant with the
applicable codes and codified ordinances. It is the responsibility of the owner
to make tenant(s) aware of the date and time of the inspection and obtain
tenant consent.
   B.   An inspection of all applicable parcels will be on a revolving basis
not less than every two years nor more than every five years from the start
date of the previous routine inspection.
   C.   An inspection will be conducted as per the Property Maintenance
Division's Standard Operating Procedure and a report with any violations or a
letter of compliance will be given to the owner as per official notices, §
308-117. The report will list all, if any, violations with a reasonable time
identified to remedy the violation.
   D.   An initial inspection, reinspection and/or extension inspection(s) may
be necessary to achieve compliance.
   E.   Inspection fees and penalties are listed in the City of Reading Fee
Schedule,
Chapter 212.
   F.   Complaint inspections. Nothing in this Part shall preclude the Property
Maintenance Division from performing an inspection upon receipt of a complaint
of a violation or a violation identified by a Code Official of the City of
Reading codes and Code of the City of Reading existing at the parcel. Said
inspections shall be in accord with the applicable Codes and ordinances and
regulations and policies established by the City of Reading Property
Maintenance Division. An inspection will be conducted as per the Property
Maintenance Division's Standard Operating Procedure and a report with any
violations or a letter of compliance will be given to the owner as per official
notices, §
308-117. The report will list all, if any, violations with a reasonable time
identified to remedy the violation.
   G.   Search warrant. If any owner, responsible local agent, occupant or
other person in charge of a structure subject to the provisions of this Part
refuses, impedes, inhibits, interferes with, restricts or obstructs entry and
free access to every part of the structure or premises where inspection
authorized by this subpart is sought, the administrative authority, Property
Maintenance Division, shall promptly apply for an administrative search or
inspection warrant to a court of competent jurisdiction and shall supply all
necessary affidavits and testimony to indicate that there is a reasonable or
probable cause to conduct an inspection. The Property Maintenance Division is
further authorized to apply for an injunction to a court of competent
jurisdiction and seek injunctive relief as necessary.
   H.   Failure to appear for inspection. If the owner or responsible local
agent cannot be available at the proposed time, said owner or responsible local
agent shall provide no less than twenty-four-hour written notice to the
Property Maintenance Division. Upon failure to give such written notice or upon
failure to gain entry, an administrative fee as provided in the City of Reading
Fee Schedule,
Chapter 212, will be assessed against the owner failing to supply written
notice or appear. If the property owner or responsible local agent fails to
appear for a third scheduled inspection or any combination of scheduled
inspections, cancellations or failure to gain entry, the Property Maintenance
Division shall assess an administrative fee as provided in the City of Reading
Fee Schedule,
Chapter 212, and may placard the subject property and/or promptly seek an
administrative search or inspection warrant from a court of competent
jurisdiction by supplying all necessary affidavits and testimony in support
thereof.
§ 308-109. (Reserved)
§ 308-110. Responsible local agent. 
[Added 5-8-2017 by Ord. No. 41-2017] 
   A.   Designation. Any owner who rents, leases or lets a property in the City
of Reading and who resides more than 25 miles from the City of Reading shall
designate and appoint an adult individual or company to serve as the
responsible local agent for such property. The responsible local agent shall
provide the code official with access to the property for inspection purposes
necessary to ensure such compliance. A responsible local agent is required to
reside within or maintain a principle office in Berks County, Pennsylvania.
   B.   Proof of a written power of attorney authorizing the responsible local
agent to manager said properties and interact with the Property Maintenance
Division staff is required to be filed with the City of reading Property
Maintenance Division.
   C.   The responsible local agent requirement shall be effective ninety days
after the effective date of this section.
§ 308-111. Structural changes.
Any change in the structural condition or integrity of a property shall be
reported in writing to the Property Maintenance Division within seven days of
such change. Prior to any change in the structural condition or integrity of a
property, the owner shall obtain any necessary permits from the Building and
Trades Office.
§ 308-112. Failure to apply for housing registration.
   A.   Prohibition. It shall be unlawful for the owner of any property to fail
to apply for housing registration as required in §
308-102, Housing registration required.
   B.   Surcharge.
      (1)   In the event an authorized City official determines an owner failed
to register a property, a noncompliance surcharge as provided in the City of
Reading Fee Schedule,
Chapter 212, Fees, shall be imposed to the application fee and written notice
of noncompliance shall be delivered personally, mailed to the owner by first
class/certified mail or email at the last known address, as well as by posting
written notice in the form of a placard on the front entrance of the subject
property. If the notice is returned showing that the letter was not delivered,
a copy thereof shall be posted in a conspicuous place in or about the structure
affected by such notice. Service upon any executive officer of a corporation
shall be a sufficient, but not the exclusive, method of service upon the
corporation. Service upon any partner of a partnership shall be a sufficient
but not the exclusive method of service upon the partnership.
      (2)   Said notice of noncompliance shall advise the owner of the
noncompliance surcharge and the requirement to register the property within 15
days from the date of the date of mailing and posting. Failure to submit a
complete application or file a written request for review or appeal within the
prescribed time shall result in the assessment of a continuing noncompliance
surcharge as per the City of Reading Fee Schedule,
Chapter 212, until such time as a complete application for a housing
registration is received by the Property Maintenance Division. The City of
Reading may pursue an in personam action (legal proceeding against the person)
for the collection of any outstanding surcharges owed.
§ 308-113. Owner and occupant duties.
   A.   Owner's duties.
      (1)   It shall be the duty of every owner to keep and maintain all
residential and mixed- use parcels in compliance with all applicable codes and
provisions of all applicable state laws and regulations and local ordinances,
and to keep such property in good and safe condition and to be aware of, and to
act to eliminate disruptive conduct in, such parcels.
      (2)   It shall be the responsibility of every owner to employ policies
and manage the residential and mixed-use parcels under his/her control in
compliance with the provisions of this chapter, the City codes and Code of the
City of Reading and applicable state laws.
   B.   Tenant/occupant duties.
      (1)   The occupant(s) shall comply with all obligations imposed unto by
this Part and by the Code of the City of Reading, as well as all state laws and
regulations.
      (2)   The occupant(s) shall conduct themselves and require other persons
including, but not limited to, guests on the premises and within their control
with their consent, to conduct themselves in a manner that will not disturb the
peaceful enjoyment of the premises by others and that will not disturb the
peaceful enjoyment of adjacent or nearby properties by people occupying the
same.
      (3)   The occupant(s) shall not engage in, nor tolerate, nor permit
others on the premises to cause damage to the property or engage in disruptive
conduct, or other violations of this part, City codes or applicable state laws.
      (4)   Police officers or public officers shall investigate alleged
incidents of disruptive conduct. They shall complete a disruptive conduct
report upon a finding that the reported incident constitutes disruptive conduct
as defined herein. The information filed in said report shall include, if
possible, the identity of the alleged perpetrators of the disruptive conduct
and all other obtainable information, including the factual basis for the
disruptive conduct described on the prescribed report.
§ 308-114. Owners jointly and severally responsible.
If any regulated dwelling is owned by more than one person, in any form of
joint tenancy, as a partnership, corporation or found to have an equitable
interest, each person shall be jointly and severally responsible for the duties
imposed under the terms of this subpart and shall be severally subject to
prosecution for the violation of this part.
§ 308-115. Fees for housing registration, surcharges and administrative fees.
   A.   Fee Schedule. Fees required for an application for, and annual renewal
of, a housing registration, as well as inspection-related and other applicable
fees shall be established by City Council and included on the City's Fee
Schedule.
   B.   Waiver of fees. The registration fees established in Subsection A above
shall be waived if the owner, spouse or family member of the owner occupy a
single-family property.
   C.   Prosecution of violation. Notwithstanding the above, nothing will
prevent the Property Maintenance Division from commencing a summary offense
criminal action via the issuance of a nontraffic citation for sections of
Chapter 308 in accord with the Pennsylvania Rules of Criminal Procedure in the
court of appropriate jurisdiction and the violations shall be deemed a strict
liability offense.
   D.   Collections. All delinquent fees under this Part shall be turned over
to a collections agency and are subject to collection costs.
§ 308-116. (Reserved)
§ 308-117. Official notices.
All official notices shall be delivered by first class mail to the address of
record of the owner. The address of record of the owner shall be that provided
to the Property Maintenance Division and in the absence of the same the address
provided by the County of Berks. Any owner change of address must comply with §
308-107. There shall be a rebuttable presumption that any notice required to be
given under this Part shall have been received by owner if the notice was given
in the manner provided. A claim of lack of knowledge by the owner of any
violation hereunder or City of Reading codes shall not be a defense to license
nonrenewal, suspension or revocation proceedings as long as all notices
prerequisite to institution of such action were given and deemed received in
accord with the applicable provisions of this Part.
§ 308-118. Placarding and condemnation.
The City of Reading Property Maintenance Division is hereby authorized to
placard and condemn thereby requiring the immediate vacation, or within the
discretion of the Property Maintenance Division, vacation within a specific and
reasonable amount of time for vacation of a property that is being rented and
for which a housing registration has not been filed or for which an inspection
has not been completed by the Property Maintenance Division as required by §
308-108 of this Chapter.
§ 308-119. Review and appeals.
   A.   Review and appeals.
      (1)   A property owner/responsible local agent may make a written request
to the Director of the Department of Community Development within 15 calendar
days for review of any fees or surcharges (including the calculation thereof)
imposed upon a finding of noncompliance. The Director of Community Development,
or his designee, shall conduct said review and issue a written determination.
      (2)   If a property owner/responsible local agent feels aggrieved by a
review finding, the property owner/responsible local agent must make a written
request within 15 days of the date of the determination to the Director of
Community Development for a de novo appeal to challenge or dispute a finding of
noncompliance and/or the calculation of any fees or surcharges imposed as a
result thereof. The request shall be accompanied by a deposit as per the City
of Reading Fee Schedule,
Chapter 212, as security for the payment of costs in the event findings and
calculations by the Property Maintenance Division are affirmed. The appeal
shall be conducted by the Code and License Appeals Board as per the applicable
ordinance. The unexcused failure of the owner/responsible local agent to appear
for said appeal will result in the denial and dismissal of the challenge or
dispute. The cost of the appeal shall be borne by the City in the event the
findings and calculations by City personnel are not fully affirmed.
   B.   Subsequent appeals. Any subsequent appeal filed under this Chapter
shall be filed to the Berks County Court of Common Pleas pursuant to 2
Pa.C.S.A. §§ 751 and 752.
B   Disruptive Conduct
§ 308-130. Definitions.
As used in this subpart, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
   CODE AND LICENSE APPEALS BOARD — Board authorized to hear, among other
things, appeals of and render decisions in matters concerning disruptive
conduct reports. [Added 11-23-2015 by Ord. No. 78-2015]
   DISRUPTIVE CONDUCT — Any form of conduct, action, incident or behavior
perpetrated, caused or permitted by any occupant or visitor of a housing unit
that is so loud, untimely (as to hour of the day), offensive, riotous, or that
otherwise disturbs other persons of reasonable sensibility in their peaceful
enjoyment of their premises, or causes damage to said premises such that a
report is made to a police officer and/or a public officer complaining of such
conduct, action, incident, or behavior, with the exception of domestic abuse or
domestic violence, as per Pa. Title 23 Domestic Relations, Chapter 61, and as
defined herein. Exemptions may also include circumstances relating to familial
status or disabilities. It is not necessary that such conduct, action, incident
or behavior constitutes a criminal offense, nor that criminal charges be filed
against any person in order for said person to have perpetrated, caused or
permitted the commission of disruptive conduct, as defined herein. Provided,
however, that no disruptive conduct shall be deemed to have occurred unless a
public officer or a police officer shall investigate and make a determination
that such did occur, and keep written records, including a disruptive conduct
report, of such occurrences. The occupant and the owner, operator, responsible
agent or manager shall be notified of any such occurrences, in writing.
[Amended 4-14-2014 by Ord. No. 24-2014]
   DISRUPTIVE CONDUCT REPORT — A written report of disruptive conduct on a form
to be prescribed therefor to be completed by a police officer or a public
officer, as the case may be, who actually investigates an alleged incident of
disruptive conduct and which shall be maintained by the Department of Police
and Property Maintenance Division.
   DOMESTIC ABUSE or DOMESTIC VIOLENCE — A pattern of abusive or harmful
behavior within the confines of an intimate relationship. Domestic abuse
generally occurs between people who do or do not share a home, such as a
husband and wife, boyfriend and girlfriend, parent and child, estranged
spouses, etc. Some examples of domestic abuse include but are not limited to
the following: [Added 4-14-2014 by Ord. No. 24-2014]
   A.   Physical abuse (hitting, pushing, kicking, restraining, throwing
objects or otherwise touching another with unwanted physical aggression).
   B.   Verbal abuse (using derogatory or emotionally hurtful language with the
intent to invoke fear or lower self-esteem).
   C.   Sexual abuse.
   D.   Emotional abuse.
   E.   Intimidation.
   F.   Threatening.
   G.   Stalking.
   TWELVE-MONTH PERIOD — For purposes of this subpart, twelve-month period
shall be calculated by counting 12 months back from the most recent disruptive
conduct report.
§ 308-131. Investigation and report; suspension and/or revocation of housing
permit.
[Amended 4-14-2014 by Ord. No. 24-2014] 4
Police officers or public officers shall investigate alleged incidents of
disruptive conduct. They shall complete a disruptive conduct form upon finding
that the reported incident constitutes disruptive conduct as defined herein.
The information filed in said form shall include the identity of the alleged
perpetrators of the disruptive conduct and all other obtainable information,
including the factual basis for the disruptive conduct described on the
prescribed form. A copy of the disruptive conduct form will be provided to the
occupant. If the finding is considered valid by the Reading Police Department,
a copy of the disruptive conduct report shall be mailed to the occupant and
mailed to the owner within 15 working days of the date the form is issued to
the occupant.
   A.   Eviction. After two disruptive conduct incidents in any twelve-month
period by an occupant documented by disruptive conduct reports, the owner shall
have 10 working days from the date of the written notice to begin eviction
proceedings against the occupant(s) or pursue an appeal. This subsection is not
intended to limit or inhibit the owner's right to initiate eviction action.
   B.   Suspension or revocation of housing permit. Failure of an owner or
local authorized agent to take action required in Subsection A above will
result in the commencement of the process to suspend the housing permit for the
property where the disruptive conduct incident occurred in accordance with/per
the process established herein, notwithstanding any other requirements
therefor.
   C.   Reinstatement of housing permit. The housing unit involved shall not
have its housing permit reinstated until the applicable reinstatement fee is
paid and the disruptive occupants have been evicted, unless the appeal filed by
the property owner or occupant has concluded and was approved. Notwithstanding
this subsection, if there are violations assessed against the owner per the
provisions of this part which require suspension or revocation, a housing
permit shall not be reinstated until compliance with the requirements therefor
have occurred.
   D.   Report against all occupants. The content of the disruptive conduct
report shall count against all occupants of the housing unit. The content of
the disruptive conduct report shall not count against all occupants of the
rental unit if the complaint is initiated by one of the housing unit occupants.
More than one disruptive conduct report filed against the occupants of a
housing unit in a twenty-four-hour period shall count as a single disruptive
conduct report for the purpose of the preceding subsection.
   E.   Maintenance of list of disruptive conduct report tenants and occupants
and evicted occupants. The Property Maintenance Division shall maintain a list
of the names of all occupants and tenants against whom a disruptive conduct
report is issued as a result of this Part. The Property Maintenance Division
shall also maintain a list of all occupants and tenants evicted as a result of
this Part. The names shall remain on the list for a period of five years.
4.   Editor's Note: Ordinance No. 78-2015, adopted 11-23-2015, renumbered
former Subsections D through F of this section as Subsections C through E,
respectively.
§ 308-132. Code and License Appeals Board.
[Amended 4-14-2014 by Ord. No. 24-2014; 11-23-2015 by Ord. No. 78-2015; and 7-
24-2017 by Ord. No. 66-2017]
   A.   Appeals. The occupant and/or owner may appeal the contents of said
disruptive conduct report. Additionally, any person aggrieved by the
suspension, nonrenewal, denial or revocation of a housing registration may
appeal. All appeals must be filed, in writing, with the Director of the
Department of Community Development, with the appropriate filing fee, as per
the City of Reading Fee Schedule,
Chapter 212, within 15 business days from the date appearing on the disruptive
conduct report or notice of suspension, nonrenewal, denial or revocation of a
housing permit mailed to the occupant or property owner. The appeal fee shall
be refunded if the appeal is approved by the Code and License Appeals Board.
   B.   Enforcement upon resolution of appeal of Code and License Appeals
Board. Upon a successful appeal to the Code and License Appeals Board, that
disruptive conduct report will be withdrawn and discounted within that twelve-
month period. However, once all appeals to the Code and License Appeals Board
have been exhausted and a second disruptive conduct report has been confirmed,
the public officer shall reinspect the premises in question 15 business days
from the date of decision to ensure either that the unit is vacant, or that the
owner has commenced the eviction process. Failure to comply will result in
revocation of the unit's housing registration.
§ 308-133. Appeal to court of proper jurisdiction.
[Amended 4-14-2014 by Ord. No. 24-2014; 11-23-2015 by Ord. No. 78-2015]
Once a DCR is issued, any person aggrieved by any decision of the Code and
License Appeals Board may immediately appeal to the Court of Common Pleas of
Berks County, or a court of proper jurisdiction. Such appeal shall be made by a
duly verified petition in accordance with the Pennsylvania Rules of Civil
Procedure and shall set forth the factual and legal basis upon which the
decision of the Board is alleged to be incorrect or illegal, in whole or in
part. A timely petition filed with the Court shall be served upon all parties
before the Code and License Appeals Board, including the Board and City of
Reading, at the time of its filing and shall stay enforcement of the Board's
decision. A successful appeal to the Court shall rescind all prior disruptive
conduct reports issued within a twelve-month period.
§ 308-134. Share information.
The City of Reading Property Maintenance Division is authorized to share any
and all information obtained under this code with the other departments and
divisions of the City of Reading.
§ 308-135. Compliance with other City of Reading ordinances.
[Amended 11-23-2015 by Ord. No. 78-2015]
Every owner of every dwelling, in addition to the provisions set forth herein,
shall comply with any state or local code or ordinance adopted, enacted or in
effect in and for the City of Reading.
Part 2
Waiver of Fees
[Adopted 8-22-2008 by Ord. No. 43-2008 (
Ch. 11, Part 2, of the 2001 Code of Ordinances)]
§ 308-201. Waiver of construction fees for nonprofit agencies.
   A.   Certain nonprofit agencies are unique in the City because they:
      (1)   Provide owner-occupied housing.
      (2)   Create taxable projects.
      (3)   Offer 0% mortgage to the homeowner of a project.
      (4)   Have an all-volunteer labor pool.
      (5)   Create homeownership opportunities for low-income families who
perform sweat equity on the rehabilitation or construction of their homes.
   B.   The fees payable to the City for the rehabilitation or construction of
single-family residences in Reading, by organizations meeting the above
criteria be waived and that said waiver shall not pertain to City, county or
school taxes which may become due and payable on these properties during or
subsequent to the construction period.
   C.   Request for waiving the fees shall be submitted to and approved by the
City prior to commencing the project(s).
Part 3
Abandoned Property Registration
[Adopted 10-14-2013 by Ord. No. 48-2013 5 ; amended in its entirety 11-23-2015
by Ord. No. 78-2015; and 5-8-2017 by Ord. No. 41-2017]
5.   Editor's Note: This Ordinance Provided An Effective Date Of 1-1-2014.
§ 308-301. Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this Part, shall have the
meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly
indicates a different meaning.
   ABANDONED REAL PROPERTY — Any real property located in the City, whether
vacant or occupied, that is in default on a mortgage, has had a lis pendens
filed against it by the mortgagee holding a mortgage on the property, is
subject to an ongoing foreclosure action by the mortgagee, is subject to an
application for a tax deed or pending tax assessors lien sale, or has been
transferred to the mortgagee under a deed in lieu of foreclosure. The
designation of a property as "abandoned" shall remain in place until such time
as the property is sold or transferred to a new owner, the foreclosure action
has been dismissed and any default on the mortgage has been cured.
   APPLICABLE CODES — To include, but not be limited to, the City's Codified
Ordinances ("City Code") and the Pennsylvania Building Code.
   ENFORCEMENT OFFICER — Any law enforcement officer, building official, zoning
inspector, code enforcement officer, fire inspector or building inspector, or
other person authorized by the City to enforce the applicable code(s).
   MORTGAGEE — The lender in a mortgage.
   VACANT — Any building or structure that is not legally occupied.
§ 308-302. Establishment of registry.
Pursuant to the provisions of this Part, the City or designee shall establish a
registry cataloging each abandoned property within the City, containing the
information required within.
§ 308-303. Registration of abandoned real property.
   A.   Any mortgagee who holds a mortgage on real property located within the
City of Reading shall perform an inspection of the property to determine
vacancy or occupancy, upon default by the mortgagor. The mortgagee shall,
within 10 days of the inspection, register the property with the City's
Property Maintenance Division on forms or website access provided by the City,
and indicate whether the property is vacant or occupied. A separate
registration is required for each property, whether it is found to be vacant or
occupied.
   B.   If the property is occupied but remains in default, it shall be
inspected by the mortgagee or his designee monthly until: 1) the mortgagor or
other party remedies the default; or 2) it is found to be vacant or shows
evidence of vacancy at which time it is deemed abandoned, and the mortgagee
shall, within 10 days of that inspection, update the property registration to a
vacancy status on forms or website address provided by the City.
   C.   Registration pursuant to this section shall contain the name of the
mortgagee and the server, the direct mailing address of the mortgagee and the
server, a direct contact name and telephone number for both parties, facsimile
number and e-mail address for both parties, the folio or tax number, and the
name and twenty-four-hour contact phone number of the property management
company responsible for the security and maintenance of the property.
   D.   A nonrefundable annual registration fee shall be assessed as per the
City of Reading Fee Schedule and shall accompany the registration form or
website registration.
   E.   All registration fees must be paid directly from the mortgagee,
servicer, trustee or owner. Third-party registration fees are not allowed
without the consent of the City and/or its authorized designee.
   F.   This section shall also apply to properties that have been the subject
of a foreclosure sale where the title was transferred to the beneficiary of a
mortgage involved in the foreclosure and any properties transferred under a
deed in lieu of foreclosure/sale.
   G.   Properties subject to this Part shall remain under the annual
registration requirements of this section and the inspection requirements of
this Part.
   H.   Any person or legal entity that has registered a property under this
section must report any change of information contained in the registration
within 10 days of the change.
   I.   Failure of the mortgagee and/or owner to properly register or to modify
the registration form from time to time to reflect a change of circumstances as
required by this Part is a violation of this Part and shall be subject to
enforcement.
   J.   Pursuant to any administrative or judicial finding and determination
that any property is in violation of this Part, the City may take the necessary
action to ensure compliance as per this Part.
§ 308-304. Maintenance requirements.
All abandoned real properties are subject to the requirements contained within
the City's Property Maintenance Ordinance.
§ 308-305. Inspections for violations.
Adherence to this Part does not relieve any person, legal entity or agent from
any other obligations set forth in any applicable code(s), which may apply to
the property.
Addendum to Rental Agreement
[Amended 8-22-2008 by Ord. No. 43-2008, 9-22-2008 by Ord. No. 55-2008]
This Addendum to Rental Agreement is made this ______ day of ______________,
20___, and is incorporated into and shall be deemed and amend and supplement
the Rental Agreement made by the undersigned Tenant and Landlord, their heirs,
successors and assigns, dated. The Rental Agreement and this Addendum pertain
to the premises described in said agreement and located at
_______________________________________.
This Addendum is required by the Certification of Rental Units Ordinance of the
City of Reading.
   ADDITIONAL COVENANTS AND OBLIGATIONS
In addition to the covenants and obligations set forth in the aforementioned
Rental Agreement, Tenant and Landlord hereby covenant and agree as follows:
A. Landlord’s Covenants and Obligations:
1. Landlord shall keep and maintain the leased premises in compliance with all
applicable codes and ordinances of the City of Reading and all applicable state
laws and shall keep the leased premises in good and safe condition.
2. The local responsible agent for the leased premises shall be as follows:
______________________________________________________
Name
______________________________________________________
Address
______________________________________________________
Telephone Number
3. The Landlord shall be responsible for regularly performing all routine
maintenance, including lawn mowing and ice and snow removal, and for making any
and all necessary repairs in and around the leased premises, except for any
specific tasks which the parties hereby agree shall be delegated to the Tenant
and which are identified as follows:
___________________________________________________________________________________________
___________________________________________________________________________________________
___________________________________________________________________________________________
4. The Landlord shall promptly respond to reasonable complaints and inquiries
from the Tenant.
5. The Landlord shall comply with all applicable provisions of the Landlord/
Tenant Act of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
B. Tenant’s Covenants and Obligations:
1. Tenant shall comply with all applicable codes and ordinances of the City of
Reading and all applicable state laws.
2. Tenant agrees that the maximum number of persons permitted within the
regulated rental unit at any time and the maximum number of persons permitted
within the common areas of the leased premises at any time shall be in
accordance with the habitability requirements and occupancy limits provided for
in the International Building Code as adopted by the City of Reading,
International Existing Building Code as adopted by the City of Reading,
International Fire Code as adopted by the City of Reading, International
Residential Code as adopted by the City of Reading, City of Reading Property
Maintenance Code, and City of Reading Zoning Ordinance.
3. Tenant shall dispose of all rubbish, garbage and other waste from the leased
premises in a clean and safe manner and shall separate and place for collection
all recyclable materials in compliance with the City of Reading’s Solid Waste
and Recycling Ordinances.
4. Tenant shall not engage in any conduct on the leased premises which is
declared illegal under the Pennsylvania Crimes Code or Liquor Code, or the
Controlled Substance, Drug, Device and Cosmetic Act, nor shall Tenant permit
others on the premises to engage in such conduct.
5. Tenant shall use and occupy the leased premises so as not to disturb the
peaceful enjoyment of adjacent or nearby premises by others.
6. Tenant shall not cause, nor permit, nor tolerate to be caused damage to the
leased premises, except for ordinary wear and tear.
7. Tenant shall not engage in, nor tolerate nor permit others on the leased
premises to engage in “disruptive conduct,” which is defined as “any form of
conduct, action, incident or behavior perpetrated, caused or permitted by any
occupant or visitor of a rental unit that is so loud, untimely (as to hour of
the day), offensive, riotous or that otherwise disturbs other persons of
reasonable sensibility in their peaceful enjoyment of their premises or causes
damage to said premises, such that a report is made to a Police Officer and/or
a Public Officer complaining of such conduct, action, incident, or behavior. It
is not necessary that such conduct, action, incident or behavior constitute a
criminal offense, nor that criminal charges be filed against any person in
order for said person to have perpetrated, caused or permitted the commission
of disruptive conduct as defined herein. Provided, however, that no disruptive
conduct shall be deemed to have occurred unless a Public Officer or a Police
Officer shall investigate and make a determination that such did occur, and
keep written records, including a disruptive conduct report of such occurrence.
The tenant and the owner, operator, responsible agent or manager shall be
notified of any such occurrences in writing.”
8. Tenant acknowledges and agrees that this tenancy is subject to the
provisions of the Code of the City of Reading including, but not limited to,
the Housing Ordinance/Code, the Health Code, the Property Maintenance Code and
the Solid Waste and Recycling Ordinances, and that the issuance by a Public
Officer or Police Officer of the City of Reading of two disruptive conduct
reports in any twelve-month period relating to the leased premises shall
constitute a breach of the rental agreement of which this addendum is a part.
Upon such breach, Landlord shall have the right and option to pursue any and
all of the following remedies:
a. Termination of the rental agreement without prior notice; and
b. Bring an action to recover possession of the leased premises without
abatement of rents paid, including reasonable attorney’s fees and costs; and
c. Bring an action to recover the whole balance of the rent and charges due for
the unexpired lease term, including reasonable attorney’s fees and costs; and
d. Bring an action for damages caused by Tenant’s breach, including reasonable
attorney’s fees and costs.
   IN WITNESS WHEREOF, the parties have hereunto set their hands and seals the
day and year first above written.
___________________________________________________________________________________________
WITNESS         TENANT
___________________________________________________________________________________________
WITNESS         TENANT
___________________________________________________________________________________________
WITNESS         TENANT
Chapter 317
INVASIVE PLANTS AND NOXIOUS WEEDS
Part 1
General Provisions
§
317-101.   Purpose.
§
317-102.   Definitions.
§
317-103.   Invasive plant/noxious weed list.
§
317-104.   Prohibited acts.
§
317-105.   Enforcement.
§
317-106.   Violations and penalties.
[HISTORY: Adopted by the City Council of the City of Reading as indicated in
part histories. Amendments noted where applicable.]
Part 1
General Provisions
[Adopted 1-10-2022 By Ord. No. 6-2022]
§ 317-101. Purpose.
This Chapter is intended to regulate and provide guidance to landowners to
responsibly control invasive plants and noxious weeds to allow the re-
establishment of native plants and to implement the City's obligations under
the Controlled Plant aud Noxious Weed Act, 3 PA CS Section 1501 et seq.
§ 317-102. Definitions.
As used in this Part, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
ACT - The Controlled Plant and Noxious Weed Act 3 PA CS Sections 1501 et seq.
CONTROL - The management of the population of an invasive plant/noxious weed to
an acceptable level, including eradication.
CONTROL ORDER - A written order issued by the PA Dept of Agriculture or the
City of Reading to a person detailing required treatment measures to control
noxious weeds or controlled plants.
CONTROLLED PLANT - A plant species or subspecies that is regulated to prevent
uncontained growth and to negate undesirable characteristics.
INVASIVE PLANT/NOXIOUS WEED - Plants that are not native to an area that can
spread quickly, cause economic or environmental harm, or harm to human health
or are determined to be injurious to crops, livestock, agricultural land or
other property, including forest land and bodies or water which are listed as
noxious or invasive by the PA Department of Agriculture or PA Department of
Conservation and Natural Resources.
PROPAGATE - To increase, multiply or spread a plant or crop through planting,
cultivation or any means of reproduction.
TREATMENT MEASURE - A method of eradicating, managing, regulating or
controlling invasive plants/noxious weeds utilizing biological, chemical, or
mechanical means or a combination thereof.
WIDELY ESTABLISHED - Established throughout multiple counties or municipalities
of the Commonwealth of PA.
§ 317-103. Invasive Plant/Noxious Weed List.
The duly promulgated lists of controlled plants in Pennsylvania, including the
PA Department of Agriculture's Noxious, Invasive and Poisonous Plan Program
Class lists and the PA Department of Conservation and Natural Resource's list
of Invasive Plants of Pennsylvania shall be incorporated herein.
§ 317-104. Prohibited Acts.
   A.   It shall be a violation of this Chapter to willfully distribute,
cultivate or propagate any invasive plant/noxious weed or any controlled plant.
   B.   It shall be unlawful for a person to willfully conceal an invasive
plant/noxious weed or controlled plant from inspection or make a false
declaration.
   C.   Pursuant to the implementation responsibilities assigned to
municipalities in the Controlled Plants and Noxious Weeds Act, this Chapter
prohibits a person from failing to control an invasive plant/noxious weed or
any controlled plant in accordance with a Control Order issued by the
Department of Agriculture. The City will undertake enforcement as required
under the Act, and as established in this Chapter.
§ 317-105. Enforcement.
This Chapter shall be enforced by the City Arborist.
§ 317-106. Violations and Penalties.
   A.   Notice of violation. The Arborist or his/her designee shall serve a
notice of violation of the person in violation of this Chapter or a Control
Order issued by the PA Department of Agriculture or the City. Such notice shall
direct the abatement of such violation.
   B.   Appeal process. Property owners may appeal the Notice of Violation or
Control Order in accordance with the procedures set forth in
Chapter 555 Trees, Section
555-114 Violations & Penalties, letter B relating to Shade Trees.
   C.   Prosecution of violation. If the violation is not abated within the
time specified in the notice of violation, the Officer may request the City
Solicitor to institute the appropriate proceeding at law or in equity to
restrain, correct or abate such violation.
   D.   Penalties.
      (1)   Penalties. Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any
provision of this Chapter shall be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than
$600 plus costs. Each day that a violation continues shall be deemed a separate
offense.
      (2)   Disposition of penalties or assessments. All penalties or
assessments imposed under this Part shall be paid to the City Treasurer, to be
placed to the credit of the Shade Tree Commission, subject to be drawn upon by
the Commission for the purposes authorized in this Chapter.
Chapter 325
LAW ENFORCEMENT
Part 1
Crossing Police Lines
§
325-101.   Crossing police lines.
§
325-102.   Violations and penalties.
Part 2
False Reports to Police
§
325-201.   False reports to police.
§
325-202.   Violations and penalties.
[HISTORY: Adopted by the City Council of the City of Reading as indicated in
part histories. Amendments noted where applicable.]
STATE LAW REFERENCES
False Alarms — see 18 Pa.C.S.A. § 4905.
Part 1
Crossing Police Lines
[Adopted 9-23-1964 by Ord. No. 29-1964; amended in its entirety 5-29-2001 by
Ord. No. 14-2001 (Ch. 6, Part 6B, Of The 2001 Code Of Ordinances)]
§ 325-101. Crossing police lines.
No person shall cross a police line without the express permission of the
Police Department. A "police line" means the boundary of an area which has been
temporarily isolated or set apart by ropes, barricades or other methods, by the
police in pursuance of official duties and which boundary or line is plainly
marked by a sign bearing the inscription "POLICE LINE-DO NOT CROSS."
§ 325-102. Violations and penalties.
Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any provision of this Part
shall be, upon conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than
$1,000 plus costs and, in default of payment of said fine and costs, to a term
of imprisonment not to exceed 30 days.
Part 2
False Reports to Police
[Adopted 9-23-1964 By Ord. No. 30-1964; amended in its entirety 5-29-2001 By
Ord. No. 14-2001 (Ch. 6, Part 6A, Of The 2001 Code Of Ordinances)]
§ 325-201. False reports to police.
No person shall knowingly make, or cause to be made, any false report or
misleading call or request for any of the services of the Police Department.
§ 325-202. Violations and penalties.
Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any provision of this Part
shall be, upon conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than
$1,000 plus costs and, in default of payment of said fine and costs, to a term
of imprisonment not to exceed 30 days.
Chapter 328
LEAD POISONING PREVENTION
§
328-101.   Definitions.
§
328-102.   Prohibited use and distribution of sources of lead hazards.
§
328-103.   Determination of lead hazard.
§
328-104.   Inspection and access.
§
328-105.   Testing procedures and standards.
§
328-106.   Risk assessment/lead inspection.
§
328-107.   Notification and abatement.
§
328-108.   Abatement of lead hazard.
§
328-109.   Exemptions.
§
328-110.   Protection of occupants.
§
328-111.   Liability of City of Reading, Pennsylvania.
§
328-112.   Required certifications.
§
328-113.   Severability.
§
328-114.   Violations and penalties.
[HISTORY: Adopted by the City Council of the City of Reading 10-23-2000 by Ord.
No. 21-2000 (Ch. 10, Part 3, of the 2001 Code of Ordinances). Amendments noted
where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Construction codes — See
Ch. 180.
STATE LAW REFERENCES
Hazardous substances list — See 35 P.S. § 7303.
Lead - See Title 10 of the Residential Lead-Based Paint Hazard Reduction Act.
§ 328-101. Definitions.
[Amended 12-4-2023 by Ord. No. 104-2023]
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have
the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly
indicates a different meaning.
ABATE or ABATEMENT - The reduction of the presence of lead on surfaces and
other sources that result in the possibility of lead toxicity or poisoning.
CITY OF READING - The City of Reading, Pennsylvania, Office of Community
Development and its designee in the City of Reading Lead Hazard Control
Program, or any successor bureau, department or agency or any otherwise
authorized representative or agent of the City of Reading, Pennsylvania Office
of the Managing Director.
CLEARANCE EXAMINATION - A visual examination and collection of environmental
samples by an inspector or risk assessor and analysis by an accredited
laboratory upon completion of an abatement project, interim control
intervention, or maintenance job that disturbs lead-based paint (or paint
suspected of being lead-based).
DWELLING - A building or structure, or a unit therein composed of a room or
group of rooms within a building or structure, occupied or designed or intended
to be occupied as a place for human habitation or use, or any part thereof,
including any accessory building, structure, yard or fence belonging thereto or
usually enjoined therewith and any institutional or nonresidential structure or
a room or group of rooms within an institutional or nonresidential structure,
such as day-care centers, child-care facilities, school, church or recreational
facilities, including any building, structure, yard or fence belonging thereto
or usually enjoined therewith, including all movable or removable objects
contained therein such as but not limited to, toys, furniture, utensils and
appliances.
ELEVATED BLOOD LEAD LEVEL - The level of lead in the blood of a child under six
years of age confirmed by venous sample to be equal to or greater than the lead
level defined as elevated by the United States Centers for Disease Control.
ENCAPSULATION - Any covering or coating that acts as a barrier between lead-
based paint and the environment, the durability of which relies on adhesion and
the integrity of the existing bonds between multiple layers of paint and
between the paint and the substrate.
ENCLOSURE - Use of rigid durable construction materials that are mechanically
fastened to the substrate to act as a barrier between the lead-based paint and
the environment.
EXTRACTABLE OR LEACHABLE LEAD - Quantity of lead in food containers, cooking,
eating or drinking utensils or tableware.
LEAD-BASED PAINT OR COATINGS - Any paint, varnish, glaze or other applied
liquid surface coating including putty or plaster which contains a quantity of
lead in excess of 1.0 milligrams per square centimeter of surface.
LEAD SOURCE HEAL TH HAZARD - An item or condition where exposure to that item
or condition could have the potential to a create case of lead poisoning,
including but not limited to exposure to lead-based paint, lead-contaminated
soil, water and ceramics.
OCCUPANT - Any person living, sleeping, cooking, eating in or having actual
possession and/or control of a dwelling. This term includes, but is not limited
to, tenants and/or commercial leaseholders.
OWNER - Any person, firm, corporation, guardian, conservator, receiver,
trustee, executor or other judicial officer and his/her/its agent or designee
who, alone or jointly with others, owns, holds or controls the whole or any
part of the freehold or leasehold title to any property containing a dwelling,
with or without occupying it. The term shall include, in addition to the holder
of legal title, any vendee in possession thereof, and anyone who rents and/or
leases the dwelling to another. In the case of an object such as a toy, item of
furniture, utensils, appliance or other household item which is the property of
an occupant, the occupant shall be considered the item’s owner.
RECOGNIZED METHOD OF ANALYSIS - Any method of lead detection and analysis
recognized by the Department of Housing and Urban Development which results in
measurement of lead in milligrams in a square centimeter of a particular area
including, without limitation, a radioisotope X-ray fluorescent analyzer for
in-place determination of lead content.
REMOVAL - Stripping of paint from contaminated surfaces by approved method, or
replacement and disposal of contaminated items.
RISK ASSESSMENT - An official inspection conducted on a property by a suitably
trained inspector approved by the City of Reading, Pennsylvania, for the
purpose of locating and identifying lead poison hazards that could affect human
health.
SOURCES - All interior surfaces of a dwelling and those exterior surfaces of a
dwelling which are readily accessible to children under six years of age,
including, but not limited to, stairs, decks, porches, railings, windows, doors
and siding. Any yard or other area in the vicinity of a dwelling including,
without limitation, any soil, yard or other area which may be subject to
contamination from flaking or peeling of lead-based coatings or from any other
source of lead is also considered an exposed surface.
SURFACE - The outermost layer or superficial area (excluding paint, plaster or
putty) of the interior or exterior of a dwelling including, but not limited to,
the outermost layer or superficial area of walls, ceilings, floors, stairs,
windows, windowsills, window frames, window sashes, doors, door frames,
baseboards and woodwork and the outermost layer or superficial area of objects
such as toys, furniture, utensils, appliances or other household items.
§ 328-102. Prohibited use and distribution of sources of lead hazards.
   A.   No person shall apply lead paint to toys, furniture, kitchen utensils
or the interior surfaces of any dwelling, dwelling unit, rooming house, rooming
unit or facility where children live or enter. Such interior surfaces include,
but are not limited to, windowsills, window frames, doors, door frames, walls,
ceilings, stair rails and spindles or other appurtenances.
   B.   No person shall sell, transfer or deliver toys or furniture to which
lead paint has been applied.
   C.   Use and distribution of cooking and drinking vessels or eating utensils
containing extractable or leachable lead in excess of seven micrograms per
millimeter is prohibited.
   D.   Labeling of substances having lead content.
      (1)   No person shall store, sell or transfer for retail purposes any
lead-based paint unless the container used in retail trade bears a warning
statement which shall be an integral part of the label, shall be placed in a
conspicuous place on the immediate container of such paint and shall be printed
in letters which are legible and in conspicuous contrast with other printing
appearing on the container. The statement shall be in substantial conformance
with state and federal laws and regulations and recommended standards of the
Federal Hazardous Substances Labeling Act, and shall further conform in wording
and type style and size as follows, or shall be an approved equivalent:
 
                                                           Type Size and Style
WARNING                                                    (10 pt. caps)
CONTAINS LEAD. HARMFUL IF EATEN.                           (10 pt. caps)
DO NOT APPLY ON TOYS, FURNITURE, WINDOW SILLS OR OTHER
INTERIOR SURFACES OF ANY DWELLING OR FACILITY WHICH MAY BE
OCCUPIED OR USED BY CHILDREN. KEEP AWAY FROM HEAT AND OPEN (10 pt. caps)
FLAME. AVOID PROLONGED CONTACT WITH SKIN AND BREATHING OF
VAPOR OR SPRAY MIST. CLOSE CONTAINER AFTER EACH USE.
USE WITH ADEQUATE VENTILATION.                             (12 pt. type)
KEEP OUT OF THE REACH OF CHILDREN.                         (12 pt. type)
 
      (2)   This warning statement shall also be required on accompanying
literature, including directions for use. Where tinting or coloring added to
paint at the point of sale produces a final paint product with more than 0.01%
lead content, the labeling requirements of this section shall apply.
      (3)   Labels on containers of lead paint manufactured prior to the
effective date of this chapter shall be made to conform with the above labeling
requirements by the application of a separate warning label which shall be
affixed directly upon the existing label. However, after one year from the
effective date of these regulations, the warning shall be an integral part of
the label on the container.
§ 328-103. Determination of lead hazard.
[Amended 12-4-2023 by Ord. No. 104-2023]
A.   Any lead source shall be considered a health hazard to children under six
years of age, pregnant women or to other persons who have elevated levels of
blood lead.
B.   Any source of lead including, without limitation, a lead-based coating,
shall be considered a health hazard to a child under six years of age with
levels of blood lead equal to or greater than 3.5 micrograms per deciliter of
whole blood, if:
   (1)   It exists in or about a dwelling in which a child under six years of
age with said elevated levels of blood lead, resides or regularly visits;
   (2)   It is determined to be on any flaking, peeling, nonintact deteriorated
surface or on any exposed surface or in any soil or dust found in or about the
dwelling or in any rugs, carpet or other surface coverings in or about the
dwelling; and
   (3)   It contains a quantity of lead in excess of 1.0 milligrams per square
centimeter of surface when measured by a recognized method of analysis.
C.   Children's products and furniture shall not possess a lead concentration
greater than 0.009 percent (90 parts per one million) in the paint or similar
surface coatings.
§ 328-104. Inspection and access.
[Amended 12-28-2009 by Ord. No. 76-2009; Amended 12-4-2023 by Ord. No. 104-
2023]
A.   The City of Reading, Pennsylvania is authorized to inspect a dwelling,
upon reasonable notice given to the owner and/or occupant of the dwelling, and
upon display of proper identification, to determine compliance with this
chapter.
B.   After reasonable notice, every occupant of a dwelling shall grant to the
owner thereof or his agent or employee or any person with whom the City of
Reading, Pennsylvania, has contracted, free access to it at all reasonable
times for the purpose of effecting compliance with this chapter and with any
notice or order issued under this chapter.
C.   Except as provided in Section 328-104C.(1), all lead inspections conducted
by the City of Reading shall be at the owner's expense including the initial
inspection and the clearance inspection.
   (1)   Lead inspections conducted by the City of Reading pursuant to a state
and/or federal lead hazard control grant, administered by the City of Reading,
shall be at the expense of the City of Reading as outlined by the terms of the
relevant grant.
D.   Inspection. If the owner or representative of the owner cannot be
available at the scheduled time, said owner or representative shall provide no
less than twenty-four-hour written notice to the City of Reading. Upon failure
to give such written notice or upon failure by the City of Reading to gain
entry, an administrative fee as set forth in Subsection E shall be assessed
against the owner.
E.   Schedule of fees. Fees for the following shall be as set by ordinance; see
Chapter 212, Fees.1
   (1)   Initial inspection.
   (2)   First inspection extension.
   (3)   Each subsequent inspection extension.
   (4)   Administrative fee for no show.
F.   Collections. All bills or accounts governed by this chapter which are not
paid by May 1 of each year or within 60 days of billing shall be turned over to
a collection agency.
G.   Clearance examination. Any lead abatement activity conducted and
documented by a lead-based paint risk assessor following lead-based paint
hazard reduction activities to determine that the lead hazard reduction
activities are complete are to adhere to all relevant Federal Environmental
Protection Agency protocols, standards, and guidelines prior to the issuance of
a certificate of habitability or certificate of occupancy.
1.   Editor's Note: Amended during codification (see
Ch. 1, General Provisions, Part 2).
§ 328-105. Testing procedures and standards.
[Amended 12-4-2023 by Ord. No. 104-2023]
A.   Testing and environmental investigation may be performed by any public or
private agency, entity or firm approved by the City of Reading or by a
designated City of Reading employee, and certified by the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania.
B.   The physical determination of the lead content of surface material in a
dwelling, or of the lead content of any exposed surface shall be made by
nondestructive measurements using a recognized method of analysis. All
instruments used for in-place determination of lead content shall be operated
by a certified operator with proof of the same being submitted to the City of
Reading.
§ 328-106. Risk assessment/lead inspection.
[Amended 12-4-2023 by Ord. No. 104-2023]
A.   A risk assessment for lead source health hazards shall be conducted on any
property that meets one of the following conditions:
   (1)   A child under six years of age with levels of blood lead equal to or
greater than 3.5 micrograms per deciliter of whole blood, is determined to be
occupying the dwelling.
   (2)   A child under six years of age with levels of blood lead, equal to or
greater than 3.5 micrograms per deciliter of whole blood, is determined to
regularly visit the dwelling.
   (3)   Any dwelling that receives federal funding for the purpose of
rehabilitation, renovation or conversion of dwelling units occupied now or
which could be occupied in the future by any child under six years of age and
marketed according to the Federal Department of Urban and Housing Development
guidelines.
   (4)   Any dwelling of a participant in the grant funded City of Reading Lead
Hazard Control Program.
B.   Risk assessments shall take the following items into consideration to
determine the extent of the hazard:
   (1)   Consideration of the age and type of construction of the building as
compared to other buildings in the area.
   (2)   Physical and sanitary condition of all painted surfaces.
   (3)   Water piping.
   (4)   Soil on the property.
   (5)   Field testing of painted surfaces by any approved method of the
Federal Department of Housing and Urban Development, Federal Environmental
Protection Agency and the Pennsylvania Department of Labor and Industry.
C.   The risk assessor after inspection shall issue a written and signed
document stating the locations of the lead and the conditions of the leaded
surfaces. A risk assessment is based only on conditions observed and recorded
at the time of this inspection.
§ 328-107. Notification and abatement.
[Amended 12-4-2023 by Ord. No. 104-2023]
A.   Testing for health hazard. The City of Reading can perform or cause the
performance of an environmental investigation of a dwelling to determine
whether there exists a lead source health hazard under §
328-106 upon receipt of:
   (1)   Notification by a certified medical professional that a child under
six years of age living in a specified dwelling has an elevated blood lead
level; or
   (2)   Credible information and/or documentation indicating that there exists
or may exist in a dwelling in which a child umder the age of six resides or
regularly visits, a lead-based coating or other source of lead which may cause
or contribute to the child's elevated blood lead level.
B.   Notice of violation. Following an environmental investigation, if it is
determined that there exists a health hazard under §
328-106, the City of Reading shall issue a violation notice ordering the owner,
to abate the lead source health hazard by removal, encapsulation or enclosure
or to perform interim controls such as repainting enclosure or other acceptable
method of the hazard abatement in a reasonable time as specified by a certified
Pennsylvania risk assessor. The owner to whom the violation notice has been
directed shall bear the cost of abatement and shall follow state and federal
guidelines prescribing abatement activities. Before lead work has been
completed and before the dwelling is reoccupied, the dwelling shall be cleared
for occupation by a certified risk assessor or inspector. The owner to whom the
violation notice has been directed shall submit proof, satisfactory to the City
of Reading, of abatement promptly upon completion.
   (1)   Nothing in §
328-107B. shall prevent the owner of a dwelling from first applying to and if
qualified and approved participating in the City of Reading Lead Hazard Control
Program, should it be in effect, to abate the lead source health hazard through
this Program. Should the owner not be qualified and approved to participating
in this Program, the owner continues to bear the responsibility to abate the
lead source health hazard and for the cost of abatement.
C.   Placarding of property. If the owner to whom the violation notice has been
directed fails to abate the hazard in a reasonable time as specified by the
City of Reading, the dwelling may be placarded with a sign that indicates:
"This property is unfit for human habitation due to lead poisoning hazards and
cannot be reoccupied until all the hazards are abated." It shall be illegal for
anyone but the City of Reading to remove or obstruct the visibility of said
placard. The City of Reading shall remove said placard upon application by the
owner, and payment of a $150 administration fee, following determination that
the lead source health hazard has been abated.
§ 328-108. Abatement of lead hazard.
[Amended 12-4-2023 by Ord. No. 104-2023]
All abatement performed pursuant to this section shall follow the most recently
issued requirements set forth in the "Guidelines for the Evaluation and Control
of Lead-Based Paint Hazards in Housing" issued by the U.S. Department of
Housing and Urban Development, June 1995, based on Title 10 of the Residential
Lead-Based Paint Hazard Reduction Act of 1992, and shall follow the following
procedures:
A.   Completion of Lead Abatement Notification Form. Within five days following
receipt of a notice of violation, the owner shall submit to the Pennsylvania
Department of Labor and Industry a Lead Abatement Notification Form, LIBI 600
L. This form shall be returned to the Pennsylvania Department of labor and
Industry within five days of receipt of a violation notice that a lead source
health hazard exists in the property, and prior to the start of abatement. The
form shall consist of written plans and a schedule for the elimination of the
lead source health hazard. Said plans and schedule shall specify in detail the
means, methods, materials and dates by which correction will be achieved.
B.   Approval/disapproval of abatement plan. Upon receipt of the plans and
schedule described in paragraph A. of this section, from the Pennsylvania
Department of Labor and Industry the City of Reading shall approve or
disapprove such plans and schedule. Notice of any disapproval shall be
accompanied by specific reasons therefor. Upon receipt of a disapproval notice,
the owner shall within four days resubmit the plans and schedule with such
revisions as are necessary to remove the objections. Upon disapproval of a
second plan by the City of Reading said owner shall be issued a written notice
indicating schedule and method of abatement which will be required to bring the
dwelling, or pertinent areas, into compliance. Said owner shall complete
abatement of the lead source health hazard within ten days after receiving
notification from the City of Reading that the plans and schedule have been
approved, or ten after receiving notification indicating an acceptable schedule
and method of abatement, unless the City of Reading extends the time for
compliance.
C.   Approved methods of abatement.
   (1)   Removal. Lead-based paint shall be completely removed from any surface
that can be chewed or eaten by children. Any cracked, chipped, blistered, or
peeling lead-based paint shall be completely removed to the base surface under
such safety conditions as may be approved by the City of Reading.
   (2)   Encapsulation. The capping over of such surfaces which contain lead at
unacceptable levels with permanently affixed coverings, the surface of which is
lead-free and which said permanently affixed covering is incapable of being
readily chewed through, torn from the surface, pierced or otherwise removed in
such manner as to expose the hazardous surface (for example, hardboard,
plywood, drywall, plaster).
   (3)   Enclosure. Repainting of such surfaces that contain lead at
unacceptable levels with a non-lead-based paint with a manufacturer's warranty
of twenty-year rating. This method shall not be deemed to be satisfactory for
compliance with this chapter where evidence has been obtained of children under
six years of age chewing the surface.
D.   Disapproved methods of abatement.
   (1)   The methods used for the removal of lead-based paint shall not present
a hazard to health from fumes, dust or vapors by inhalation or absorption
through the skin and mucous membranes and shall be in accordance with all
applicable laws, ordinances, regulations, safety standards and practices of the
City of Reading, as well as state and federal agencies.
   (2)   Dry sanding, heat guns capable of producing temperatures in excess of
1,100° F., the use of an open flame torch and chemical strippers containing
methylene chloride are prohibited as part of any abatement techniques.
§ 328-109. Exemptions.
[Amended 12-4-2023 by Ord. No. 104-2023]
The City of Reading may, on a case-by-case basis, approve an alternative
procedure for abatement of a lead paint violation, provided that the owner
submits a written description of an alternative procedure to the City of
Reading and demonstrates that compliance with City of Reading’s procedures is
not practical or feasible in the individual case and that the proposed
alternative procedure provides the equivalent control and removal.
§ 328-110. Protection of occupants.
[Amended 12-4-2023 by Ord. No. 104-2023]
A.   No owner, landlord, agent or person found to be in violation of this
chapter may evict, or cause to be evicted from any dwelling, occupants,
including occupants whose children under six years of age have levels of blood
lead equal to or greater than 3.5 micrograms per deciliter of whole blood for
the purpose of avoiding lead abatement which may be ordered or has been ordered
under this chapter or by a court of law.
B.   In the event the dwelling in which a lead source health hazard is found is
vacated by the occupant who occupied the same at the time of the issuance of a
corrective notice/violation notice under this chapter, such dwelling, shall not
be let or occupied by any other person until the lead source health hazard is
abated and the dwelling is brought into legal compliance under this chapter.
§ 328-111. Liability of City of Reading, Pennsylvania.
[Amended 12-4-2023 by Ord. No. 104-2023]
An issuance of an incorrect statement by the City of Reading, Pennsylvania, to
an owner and/or occupant that a violation notice has been abated, removed or
encapsulated does not subject the City of Reading, Pennsylvania, to any claims
for liability if the issuance of the statement was made in good faith.
§ 328-112. Required certifications.
[Added 12-4-2023 by Ord. No. 104-2023]
Any lead abatement related work, including but not limited to, testing,
abatement, rehabilitation, interim controls, and clearance are to be completed
by persons certified according to the most recently promulgated state and
federal standards. All associated fees and training done for the purpose of
maintaining relevant certifications are at the cost of the individual
contractors, and it is the contractors' responsibility to maintain all
necessary up to date certifications to perform required lead related abatement
work.
§ 328-113. Severability.
[Added 12-4-2023 by Ord. No. 104-2023]
In the event any part or provision of this chapter shall be held to be illegal
or void by a court of competent jurisdiction, this shall not have the effect of
making void or illegal any of the other parts or provisions thereof Any invalid
part of this chapter shall be segregated from the remainder of the article by
the court holding such part invalid, and the remainder of the article shall
remain in full force and effect.
§ 328-114. Violations and penalties.
[Amended 12-4-2023 by Ord. No. 104-2023]
A.   In addition to any other sanction or remedial procedure, any owner who
violates any provision of this chapter, upon conviction thereof, shall be fined
not less than $100 and not more than $1,000 plus restitution for costs, or be
confined in jail not exceeding 30 days, or both. Each day's continuance of a
violation shall constitute a separate offense.
B.   The imposition of a penalty herein prescribed shall not preclude the City
of Reading, Pennsylvania, from instituting appropriate action by injunction or
any other legal remedy to prevent or correct any violation of this chapter
including, but not limited to, the right to make corrections, utilizing
qualified personnel, or to have corrections made under agreement with a
professional contractor for any dwelling not in compliance with this chapter
whose owner cannot be located or who does not comply with any notice or order
to make corrections. The City of Reading, Pennsylvania, shall bill the owner
and place a lien against the property for any expense incurred and unpaid. The
City of Reading, Pennsylvania, retains the right to enforce these remedies
irrespective of any other code enforcement.
Chapter 332
LIBRARY
§
332-101.   Property accepted.
§
332-102.   Conditions of trust; Board of Trustees.
[HISTORY: Adopted by the City Council of the City of Reading 2-23-1899 by Ord.
No. 53-1899 (Ch. 12, Part 1, of the 2001 Code of Ordinances). Amendments noted
where applicable.]
STATE LAW REFERENCES
Appropriations — See 24 P.S. § 4401.
Payment for operation and maintenance — See 53 P.S. § 38603.
§ 332-101. Property accepted.
The City of Reading hereby accepts the donation of the real estate and the
buildings thereon erected, situated on the southwest corner of Fifth Street and
Franklin Street, in the City of Reading, and the books, manuscripts and other
personal property therein contained, tendered to the City of Reading by the
Reading Library, a corporation existing under the Laws of Pennsylvania, to be
conveyed and transferred to the City of Reading on the passage of this chapter.
The Mayor of the City is hereby authorized to receive the same in the name of
the City of Reading, and to cause the deed therefor to be duly recorded.
§ 332-102. Conditions of trust; Board of Trustees.
The donation is received by the City of Reading upon the following trusts and
conditions:
   A.   To establish a free public library for the use and benefit of the
citizens and residents of the City of Reading, to be reasonably maintained at
the public expense under the authority of an Act of Assembly, entitled: "An act
empowering any city in this commonwealth to take and hold donations of money,
books, real and personal property, for the purpose of a free library in said
city, and to make appropriations to maintain the same" and of any other laws of
the State of Pennsylvania which are now or may be hereinafter enacted.
   B.   The library shall be managed and controlled by a Board of 16 trustees,
to be constituted as follows: The Mayor of the City shall be ex officio, and
the 15 others shall be appointed as follows: Ten thereof shall be elected by
Council and five thereof shall be elected by the Board of Directors of the
Reading Library, the donor as aforesaid. At the meeting for organization of the
Board of Trustees, the terms of the members shall be determined by lot. Three
shall serve for one year, two to be appointed by the City and one by the Board
of Directors of the Reading Library, three for two years, two to be appointed
by the City and one by the Board of Directors of the Reading Library, three for
three years, two to be appointed by the City and one by the Board of Directors
of the Reading Library, three for four years, two to be appointed by the City
and one by the Board of Directors of the Reading Library, and three for five
years, two to be appointed by the City and one by the Board of Directors of the
Reading Library, and at the expiration of the term of each, a successor shall
be elected or appointed as hereinbefore provided, for a full term of five
years, the terms to date from the first Monday of January of the year in which
they may be named, respectively. Vacancies occurring from any cause shall be
filled, for the unexpired term, as follows: Where the vacancy is the selection
of Council, Council shall fill the unexpired term; where the vacancy is the
selection of the Board of Directors of the Reading Library, the Board of
Directors of the Reading Library shall fill the unexpired term. The Board of
Trustees shall annually, on the first Monday of January, report to Council of
the City of Reading, the condition, expenditures and necessities of the library
and property, real and personal, connected therewith.
Chapter 339
LICENSES AND PERMITS
Part 1
Licensed Occupations
§
339-101.   Short title.
§
339-102.   Definitions.
§
339-103.   License tax levy and fee.
§
339-104.   Exemptions; other taxes; free licenses.
§
339-105.   License issuance.
§
339-106.   License to be publicly displayed.
§
339-107.   License expiration and term; full fee required.
§
339-108.   License transfer and fee.
§
339-109.   Finance Director powers and duties.
§
339-110.   Appeals.
§
339-111.   Violations and penalties.
Part 2
Business Privilege License
§
339-201.   Short title.
§
339-202.   Definitions.
§
339-203.   License required.
§
339-204.   Application.
§
339-205.   Fee.
§
339-206.   Posting license.
§
339-207.   License refusal.
§
339-208.   Required reporting of business cessation.
§
339-209.   License revocation.
§
339-210.   Cease operations order.
§
339-211.   Code and License Appeals Board administrative hearing/ appeal.
§
339-212.   Injunctive relief.
§
339-213.   Violations and penalties.
§
339-214.   Collections.
§
339-215.   Nonexclusive remedies.
§
339-216.   Regulations.
Part 3
Immigration Assistance Services
§
339-301.   Definitions.
§
339-302.   Exemptions.
§
339-303.   Provider requirements.
§
339-304.   Legal duties of provider.
§
339-305.   Written agreements.
§
339-306.   Prohibited acts.
§
339-307.   Violations and penalties; enforcement.
§
339-308.   Private right of action.
[HISTORY: Adopted by the City Council of the City of Reading as indicated in
part histories. Amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fees — See
Ch. 212.
Pawnbrokers — See
Ch. 403.
STATE LAW REFERENCES
Power to license generally — See 53 P.S. § 37601.
Vehicles for hire — See 53 P.S. § 37602.
Power to license junk dealers and junkyards — See 53 P.S. § 37403(63).
Part 1
Licensed Occupations
[Adopted 12-1-1954 By Ord. 50-1954 (Ch. 13, Part 2, of the 2001 Code of
Ordinances)]
§ 339-101. Short title.
This Part shall be known as the "License Tax Ordinance."
§ 339-102. Definitions.
As used in this Part, certain terms are defined as follows:
   AMUSEMENT DEVICE — Any coin-operated machine, instrument or device, that is
played, operated or used for pastime, amusement or gaming, and includes, inter
alia, pinball games, shuffle alleys, baseball games, basketball games, bowling
games and shooting games.
   BUSINESS — Includes all occupations specifically mentioned in this Part. If
any person as herein defined conducts any of such businesses at more than one
location or from more than one vehicle, the business conducted at each
location, or from each vehicle, shall be considered, for the purpose of
assessment of license taxes, a separate and independent business. Buildings or
other places of business, separated by a public street, shall be considered
separate locations.
   CITY — The corporate entity known as the City of Reading or the geographical
entity designated as the City of Reading, whichever the context of the
particular use herein of such word shall imply.
   COIN-OPERATED RIDING DEVICE — Any coin-operated riding device operated by
the insertion, use or payment of a coin, regardless of the particular name or
designation by which such device may be known. [Amended 3-22-1961 by Ord. No.
4-1961]
   GAMING TABLE — Includes bowling alleys, billiard tables, pool tables,
bagatelle tables and other gaming tables.
   JUKEBOX — Any music cabinet automatically operated by the deposit of a coin
or token so that music may be rendered therefrom.
   PERSON — Any individual, firm, partnership, corporation or association, and
any servant, agent, assistant, employee or representative thereof. Each
individual in a crew shall be considered a taxable person.
   PLACE OF AMUSEMENT — Includes theaters, bowling alleys, billiard parlors,
shows, circuses, menageries and all kinds of public exhibitions, for pay,
except those for religious, educational or charitable purposes.
   VEHICLE — A conveyance in or on which persons or property may be carried,
and shall include, inter alia, human-propelled, horse-drawn and motor-propelled
conveyances, including motor vehicles, motor buses, taxicabs, omnibuses and
street railway cars.
§ 339-103. License tax levy and fee.
[Amended 3-22-1961 by Ord. No. 4-1961; 12-22-1976 by Ord. No. 48-1976; 12-31-
1980 by Ord. No. 60-1980; 10-17-1990 by Ord. No. 145-1990]
In addition to all other taxes levied and collected by the City, license taxes
in the amounts as set by ordinance and provided in
Chapter 212, Fees, are hereby levied for general revenue purposes upon every
person conducting or engaging in any of the hereinafter mentioned businesses or
occupations and upon every hereinafter mentioned vehicle, gaming table, place
of amusement, jukebox and amusement device as follows:
   A.   Persons soliciting orders for goods, wares or merchandise by sample, or
otherwise, or for the rendition of services to or from others not merchants or
dealers, each, per year. 1
   B.   Pawnbrokers, each, per year.
   C.   Market-house companies and owners of each market-house, per year.
   D.   Express companies or agencies, telegraph, telephone, steam-heating,
gas, natural gas, electric light or power companies or agencies or individuals
furnishing communication, light, heat or power, each, per year.
   E.   Motor vehicle liveries, and owners of motor vehicles for hire, each,
per year.
   F.   Street railways.
      (1)   Street railway cars, omnibuses and motor buses except taxicabs,
whether operating solely within the City or to points without the City, which
at any time transport passengers for pay or hire from one point to another
within the City limits, each vehicle, per year.
      (2)   Street railway cars, omnibuses and motor buses, except taxicabs,
transporting passengers for pay or hire from the City only to points within the
radius of 10 miles of the City's boundaries, each vehicle, per year.
   G.   Taxicabs, each, per year: not to exceed an amount per year from any one
person, firm or corporation so operating.
   H.   Bowling alleys, billiard tables, pool tables, bagatelle tables and
other gaming tables not prohibited by law, except pinball games and coin-
operated amusement devices, each alley or table, per year.
   I.   Theaters having stage productions of any type, and shows, circuses or
menageries under canvas, each, per year.
   J.   Moving picture theaters, where no stage productions are held, each, per
year.
   K.   All other public exhibitions for pay or hire, except amateur athletic
contests, each, per day of exhibition.
   L.   Amusement devices not prohibited by law except shuffle boards, each,
per year.
   M.   Shuffle boards, each, per year.
   N.   Jukeboxes, each, per year.
   O.   Coin-operated riding devices within the City, each coin-operated riding
device, per year.
   P.   Public dump or junkyard, each, per year.
   Q.   Waste rag or paper handling establishment, each, per year.
1.   Editor's Note: Original Subsection A, regarding fees to be paid by street
vendors, hawkers, peddlers, which immediately preceded this subsection, was
repealed during codification (see
Ch. 1, General Provisions, Part 2).
§ 339-104. Exemptions; other taxes; free licenses.
[Amended 10-19-1966 by Ord. No. 51-1966; 12-22-1976 by Ord. No. 48-1976; 12-31-
1980 by Ord. No. 60-1980; 8-24-1983 by Ord. No. 34-1983; 5-29-2001 by Ord. No.
14-2001]
   A.   The following persons shall be exempted from the license taxes provided
in §
339-103 but shall obtain the permits and pay the inspection fees, if any,
required by any other ordinance and the license taxes, if any, levied in this
section for the following, the amount of such fees to be as provided in
Chapter 212, Fees: 2
      (1)   Those persons commonly known as "pitchmen" and those hawkers
traveling with or operating during a circus, convention or public celebration.
      (2)   Newspaper vendors operating from regular sidewalk stands, the
location of which shall be approved by the Mayor.
   B.   The following persons shall not be required to pay a license tax or to
obtain any license under this Part:
      (1)   Farmers who sell or offer for sale their own produce only.
      (2)   Manufacturers or producers who sell or offer for sale their own
produce or products.
   C.   The following persons shall not be required to pay a license to hawk,
peddle and vend goods, wares and merchandise on the streets and to solicit
trade from door to door, but shall obtain, before starting in business, a
license which shall be issued free of charge by the Finance Director:
      (1)   Blind, physically incapacitated or disabled persons, who submit to
the Finance Director a resolution of Council, authorizing the issuance of a
free license to them by name.
      (2)   Persons selling goods, wares and merchandise donated by the owners,
the proceeds whereof are to be applied to any charitable or philanthropic
purpose.
      (3)   Persons who are enrolled as a full-time student in any school,
public or private, college or university.
      (4)   Persons selling or offering for sale Christmas trees or wreaths
from sidewalk stands, the location of which shall be approved by the abutting
property owner or owners, shall not be required to pay a license tax, but shall
obtain, before starting in business, a license which will be issued free of
charge by the Finance Director.
      (5)   The exemption contained in the foregoing subsection of this section
apply only to license taxes levied and licenses required by this Part, and
shall not be interpreted to affect in any way inspection fees imposed or
permits required by other ordinances.
2.   Editor's Note: Amended during codification (see
Ch. 1, General Provisions, Part 2).
§ 339-105. License issuance.
[Amended 8-24-1983 by Ord. No. 34-1983; 5-29-2001 by Ord. No. 14-2001]
All license taxes shall be payable to the Finance Director, who shall issue
licenses as receipts therefor. In the case of street vendors, hawkers and
peddlers who use a vehicle, and in the case of gaming tables, amusement devices
and jukeboxes, a metal plate or paper sticker to be affixed thereto shall be
issued in addition to the regular license.
§ 339-106. License to be publicly displayed.
License taxes shall be payable in advance and no person shall conduct any of
the businesses or trades or follow any of the occupations or callings, or
operate any of the vehicles, or set up or operate any of the gaming tables,
amusement devices, jukeboxes, or places of amusement upon which a license tax
is herein levied, until the tax for the current period shall have been paid,
and a license thereby obtained and publicly posted in a conspicuous place in
the licensee's place of business or in the cases of street railway cars, motor
buses and omnibuses, in such vehicle, and in the cases of gaming tables,
amusement devices, jukeboxes and street vendors, hawkers or peddlers using a
vehicle, the metal plate or paper sticker issued with license affixed to such
table device, jukebox or vehicle.
§ 339-107. License expiration and term; full fee required.
All annual licenses granted hereunder shall expire as of 12:00 midnight on
December 31 of each year. Annual license taxes shall not be prorated, and
regardless of when a license is issued, the full annual rate shall be paid.
§ 339-108. License transfer and fee.
[Amended 12-22-1976 by Ord. No. 48-1976; 12-31-1980 by Ord. No. 60-1980; 8-24-
1983 by Ord. No. 34-1983; 5-29-2001 by Ord. No. 14-20013]
A transfer of an unexpired license issued pursuant to the terms of this Part
shall be made by the Finance Director and a certificate of transfer issued
therefor upon payment to the Finance Director of an additional tax or transfer
fee of an amount as set by ordinance; see Chapter 212, Fees.
3.   Editor's Note: Amended during codification (see
Ch. 1, General Provisions, Part 2).
§ 339-109. Finance Director powers and duties.
[Amended 8-24-1983 by Ord. No. 34-1983; 5-29-2001 by Ord. No. 14-2001]
   A.   It shall be the duty of the Finance Director to:
      (1)   Classify, prepare the tax bills for and notify all persons liable
for payment of a license tax under this Part.
      (2)   Keep a list of all licenses issued under this Part.
      (3)   Submit to Council or on before January 15 of each year, a list of
all persons assessed for license taxes for the current year. The list shall be
arranged by classes, showing the comparison with the assessments for the
previous year.
      (4)   See to the proper enforcement of the provisions of this Part.
       B.   The Finance Director is empowered to institute civil actions, in
the name of the City, for the collection of license taxes, and to institute
prosecutions for violations of this Part.
§ 339-110. Appeals.
[Amended 8-24-1983 by Ord. No. 34-1983; 5-29-2001 by Ord. No. 14-2001]
Any person aggrieved by the assessment of a license tax or by any decision of
the Finance Director may appeal therefrom, to Council within 10 days after
notice thereof, and shall be given a public hearing thereon. The Finance
Director shall attend all hearings whenever such appeals shall be heard. The
decision of Council upon all such appeals shall be final.
§ 339-111. Violations and penalties.
[Amended 5-29-2001 by Ord. No. 14-2001]
Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any provision of this Part
shall be, upon conviction thereof, sentenced to a fine of not more than $600
plus costs and, in default of payment of said fine and costs, to a term of
imprisonment not to exceed 30 days. Each day that a violation continues shall
constitute a separate offense.
Part 2
Business Privilege License
[Adopted 5-10-2010 by Ord. No. 17-2010 (Ch. 13, Part 4, of the 2001 Code of
Ordinances)]
§ 339-201. Short title.
This Part shall be known as the "Business Privilege License Ordinance."
§ 339-202. Definitions.
As used in this Part, certain terms are defined as follows except where the
context clearly indicates a different meaning:
   BUSINESS — Any activity carried on or exercised for gain or profit in the
City, including, but not limited to, the sale of merchandise or other tangible
personality or the performance of services and the rental of personality and/or
realty.
   CALENDAR YEAR — The period January 1 to December 31, inclusive.
   CITY — The City of Reading.
   LICENSE YEAR — The period from January 1 to December 31, inclusive.
   PERSON — Any individual, partnership, limited partnership, association, firm
or corporation. Whenever used in any clause prescribing or imposing a penalty,
the term "person" as applied to associations shall mean the partners or members
thereof, and as applied to corporations, the officers thereof.
   REVOCATION — To annul or cancel an act, particularly a statement, document,
or promise, as if it no longer exists.
§ 339-203. License required.
Any person desiring to conduct, transact, or engage in any business, trade,
profession or other activity within the City shall obtain a business privilege
license annually.
§ 339-204. Application.
Applicants for license under this Part shall file an initial annual application
for a business privilege license with the Finance Director on a form provided
by him/her. To be considered completed, a license fee shall accompany the
application, which shall be renewed on an annual basis.
§ 339-205. Fee.
The license fee, which shall be collected by the Tax Administration of the
City, shall be set by ordinance as provided by law and set forth in the City of
Reading Fee Schedule. 4
4.   Editor's Note: See
Ch. 212, Fees.
§ 339-206. Posting license.
The license issued shall be conspicuously posted in the place of business for
which the license is issued, and shall remain posted for the license year or
fraction of year for which such license was issued or until the indicated
activity or business changes ownership or goes out of business. In cases where
more than one place of business is conducted, a separate license shall be
issued annually for each place of business.
§ 339-207. License refusal.
   A.   The issuance of a business privilege license may be predicated upon the
applicant first receiving the approval of the Zoning Administrator and/or
Health Officer, or other City official, as applicable, for the operation of
his/her business.
   B.   Any person who is in default in payment of any tax due to the City
shall be refused a license until tax is paid in full or a payment plan is
executed with the appropriate City office.
§ 339-208. Required reporting of business cessation.
Upon cessation of business activity within the City, the person who had been
conducting said business activity shall report said cessation to Tax
Administration in writing within 10 days.
§ 339-209. License revocation.
   A.   Basis for revocation. Any business privilege license issued by the City
pursuant to the provisions of this Part may be revoked for good cause by the
issuing authority upon a finding that the following conditions exist:
      (1)   The existence of chronic unsanitary conditions, noise, disturbances
or other conditions at, in or attributable to the premises of a licensee which
causes or tends to create a public nuisance, which may injuriously affect the
public health, safety, or welfare of others, or which unnecessarily affects the
adequate allocation of public safety resources.
      (2)   Repeatedly or purposefully permitting or causing the commission of
any act in the operation of the business which is prohibited by any ordinance,
rule or law of the City, state or federal government.
      (3)   Fraudulent practices and misrepresentation in the operation of the
business.
      (4)   Concealment or misrepresentation in procuring the business
privilege license.
      (5)   The business for which the license obtained has been is unlawful or
is prohibited by any code, ordinance, rule or law of the City, state or federal
government.
      (6)   The license was issued by mistake or is in violation of any of the
provisions of this Part.
      (7)   The premises used to conduct said business has been condemned,
declared a fire hazard or declared unsafe for business occupancy pursuant to
applicable building, trades, property maintenance or fire codes.
   B.   Procedures and hearing process to revoke business privilege license.
      (1)   Requests for revocation of business privilege license may be
submitted in the form of a written complaint by City staff to the Managing
Director.
      (2)   Upon a determination by the Managing Director pursuant to the
policies and regulations established in accordance herewith that the complaint
is founded, the Managing Director shall schedule a hearing before the Code and
License Appeals Board within 20 days.
      (3)   Notice of hearing shall be served by certified mail, return receipt
requested, and first class mail to the person holding the business privilege
license at the address shown on the business privilege license application. A
copy of the notice of the hearing shall also be posted in a conspicuous place
on the property. [Amended 12-8-2014 by Ord. No. 97-2014]
      (4)   The notice shall inform the licensee of the allegations which
constitute the basis for the hearing, and shall provide that the licensee will
be given the opportunity to appear and be heard at the hearing.
      (5)   The hearing shall be conducted in accordance with procedures
established by the Code and License Appeals Board as authorized herein.
      (6)   At the conclusion of the hearing following all evidence, the Code
and License Appeals Board shall make a determination as to whether basis exists
to revoke the business privilege license within 10 days of the hearing.
      (7)   In the event the Code and License Appeals Board determines that the
business privilege license shall be revoked, the revocation will be effective
immediately shall be delivered to the applicant in accordance with the
requirements of the notice of the hearing as set forth herein. The Board shall
instruct the Finance Director to notify the licensee of the revocation of the
business privilege license and to direct the licensee to immediately cease all
business activity at the business location.
      (8)   Any person conducting business activity in violation of revocation
of a business privilege license shall be punishable by those penalties set
forth herein.
      (9)   No business having a business privilege license revoked pursuant to
this Part shall be eligible for another license to operate a similar business
at that or any location in the City of Reading until approval is received by
the Business Privilege Code and License Appeals Board.
§ 339-210. Cease operations order.
   A.   Whenever business is being conducted in or on any premises without a
required business privilege license or if a licensed business has violated one
or more provisions of the Code of the City which relate to the conduct of the
business, the Finance Department or any City official authorized to issue
citations may issue a cease operations order directing that business activity
to cease immediately until the required business privilege license is obtained.
   B.   The cease operations order shall describe the business that is being
conducted without the required business privilege license and shall state that
such business activity and any other business activity that requires a business
privilege license must cease until the required license is obtained.
   C.   The cease operations order shall be posted at every entrance to the
premises in conspicuous place clearly visible to the public and shall remain
posted until removed by the Finance Department following compliance with its
terms.
   D.   The Finance Department shall promptly notify the Department of Police
of the issuance of every cease operations order. The Police Department may upon
the request of the Finance Department render assistance in the enforcement of
any cease operations order and shall have the right to enter the premises for
such purpose.
   E.   Prohibited conduct. No person with knowledge of a cease operations
order shall:
      (1)   Continue to conduct any business for which a business privilege
license is required in or on any premises for which a cease operations order
has been issued.
      (2)   Remove, damage or deface any cease operations order.
      (3)   Resist or interfere with any inspection or other official in the
performance of their duties or the enforcement of any provision of this
section.
   F.   Fees.
      (1)   Business privilege license in response to cease operations order.
If a cease operations order is issued and a business privilege license
obtained, the fee for said business privilege license may be subject to an
additional penalty fee equal to the cost of the normal business privilege
license fee.
      (2)   Removal of cease operations order. Upon compliance with a cease
operations order by obtaining of a business privilege license and any other
terms set forth thereon, prior to removal of a cease operations order a fee in
the amount established by the Fee Ordinance of the City of Reading. 5
5.   Editor's Note: See
Ch. 212, Fees.
§ 339-211. Code and License Appeals Board administrative hearing/appeal.
   A.   Organization.
      (1)   Membership. The Code and License Appeals Board shall be a body of
five members consisting of: the Finance Director or his/her designee who shall
serve as Chairperson; a Councilperson from the District the business is located
in or the designee of the President of Council if the District Councilor is
unavailable, a member of the business community; a resident at large; and
member of a recognized City of Reading community group.
      (2)   Alternates. There shall be three alternate members, one each from
the following groups: a member of the business community, a resident at large
and a member of a community group recognized by the City of Reading.
      (3)   Appointment. All members of the Board shall be appointed by the
Mayor with the approval of the Council of the City of Reading.
      (4)   Term. A member or alternate member shall serve a term of three
years from the time of appointment or reappointment or until his/her successor
shall take office. Members and alternates of the initial board shall be
appointed to staggered terms of one, two and three years.
      (5)   Powers of designees and alternates. Designees and alternate members
may be requested to attend meetings in absence of a regular member and shall
have all the powers of a regular member at such meetings.
      (6)   Quorum and majority vote. Three members shall constitute a quorum
of the Board. A majority vote of the members of the quorum of the Board shall
prevail. A tie vote shall be deemed as a denial of the appeal.
   B.   Powers. The Board shall have the following powers:
      (1)   Promulgate rules and regulations. To adopt and administer the rules
of procedure regarding its organization, officers (except the Chairperson),
times and places of meetings, conduct of meetings and other legal procedures
relating to the hearing and determination of appeals and other matters within
the Board's jurisdiction.
      (2)   Hear and decide matters. To hear and decide matters regarding the
revocation of a business privilege license where it is alleged that one of the
criteria set forth herein has been violated. The Board is also authorized to
hear appeals of refusals of business privilege license or cease operations
order.
      (3)   Timeliness. In exercising the above-mentioned powers, the Board
shall act with reasonable promptness and seek to prevent unwarranted delays
prejudicial to the party involved and to the public interest; provided,
however, that the Board shall hold a hearing on any founded complaint within 20
days and shall file its decision within 10 days after the appeal hearing.
      (4)   Authority. The Board is empowered to find no cause for the
revocation of a business privilege license or cause to revoke a business
privilege license. The Board shall be bound by this Part and shall not ignore
the clear provisions and intent of this Part.
   C.   Fees. If the Board determines that a business privilege license is to
be revoked, the licensee shall be responsible for all fees, costs and expenses
related to the hearing before the Code and License Appeals Board. In appeals
from refusals of business privilege license or cease operations order, the
applicant shall pay a fee to appeal in an amount established by Fee Ordinance
of the City of Reading.6
   D.   Appeals refusals of business privilege license or cease operations
order. Applicants who are refused a business privilege license or receive a
cease operations order may appeal said determination to the Code and License
Appeals Board within 10 days of receipt of notification of refusal of a
business privilege license or cease operations order. Notice of such decisions
shall be in accordance with the requirements set forth herein. A hearing and
decision by the Board of said appeal shall be per timeliness requirements
herein.
   E.   Appeals to the court of common pleas. Appeals of any decision of the
Code and License Appeals Board shall be in accordance with the Local Agency
Law, 2 Pa.C.S.A. § 751 et seq., of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania. Such an
appeal shall not serve as a stay in the case of revocation of a business
privilege license. The licensee must petition the court for a stay to continue
operation of the business during any appeal.
6.   Editor's Note: See
Ch. 212, Fees.
§ 339-212. Injunctive relief.
In case of violation of this Part or a section thereof, the City, through its
Finance Director or a designee duly appointed by the Mayor, may cause to be
instituted an appropriate proceeding at law or in equity to obtain penalties or
to restrain, correct, or abate such violation, including, but not limited to,
the closure of any business which is not in compliance with this Part or a
section thereof.
§ 339-213. Violations and penalties.
Any person operating a business within the City without obtaining a business
privilege license as provided herein or failing to comply with any and all
provisions of this Part shall be, upon conviction thereof, sentenced to pay a
fine of not less than $600 but no more than $1,000 plus costs, and in default
of payment of said fine and costs, to a term of imprisonment not to exceed 30
days. Each day on which such person violated this Part may be considered as a
separate offense and punishable as such as provided above and by law.
§ 339-214. Collections.
Nothing in this Part shall preclude the City of Reading Finance Director from
directing all bills or accounts and business privilege licenses not paid or not
renewed by March
31 of each year to be turned over to a collection agency for receipt.
§ 339-215. Nonexclusive remedies.
The penalty, injunctive relief and collection provisions of this section and
the license nonrenewal, suspension and revocation procedures provided in this
Part shall be independent, non-mutually exclusive separate remedies, all of
which shall be available to the City of Reading as may be deemed appropriate
for carrying out the purposes of this Part. The remedies and procedures
provided in this Part for violation hereof are not intended to supplant or
replace to any degree the remedies and procedures available to the City in the
case of a violation of any other City of Reading ordinance or provision of its
Code, whether or not such other ordinance or chapter is referenced in this Part
and whether or not an ongoing violation of such other ordinance or chapter is
cited as the underlying ground for a finding of a violation of this Part.
§ 339-216. Regulations.
The Administration for the City of Reading by and through the Managing Director
is hereby authorized to promulgate rules, regulations and policies to implement
this Part.
Part 3
Immigration Assistance Services
[Adopted 4-13-2015 by Ord. No. 15-2015]
§ 339-301. Definitions.
As used in this Part, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
   BIA — The Board of Immigration Appeals as determined under Title 8 (Aliens
and Nationality) of the Code of Federal Regulations, as amended.
   DIRECTOR - The Director of the Finance Department.
   COMPENSATION — Money, property, services, promise of payment, or anything
else of value.
   CSC — Customer Service Center.
   DEPARTMENT - The Department of Finance.
   EMPLOYED BY — That a person is on the payroll of the employer and the
employer deducts from the employee's paycheck social security and withholding
taxes, or receives compensation from the employer on a commission basis or as
an independent contractor.
   IMMIGRATION ASSISTANCE SERVICE — The business of providing any form of
assistance, for a fee or other compensation, to any person in an immigration
matter.
   IMMIGRATION MATTER — Any proceeding, filing or action affecting the status
of any person which arises under immigration and naturalization law,
regulations, procedure, executive order or presidential proclamation, including
those which arise under actions or jurisdiction of the United States Department
of Homeland Security, the Department of Justice, the United States Department
of Labor, the United States Department of Revenue, the United States Department
of State or any successor agencies or department(s).
   PROVIDER — Any person or entity, including but not limited to a corporation,
partnership, limited-liability company, sole proprietorship or natural person,
that provides immigration assistance services, but shall not include persons or
entities exempt under §
339-302.
§ 339-302. Exemptions.
Nothing in this Part shall regulate any business to the extent that such
regulation is prohibited by state or federal law. The requirements of this Part
shall not apply to any of the following persons or entities if such person or
entity can prove eligibility for an exemption as follows:
   A.   Any person who is a member in good standing of the bar of the highest
court of any state, possession, territory, commonwealth or the District of
Columbia, and is not under any order of any court suspending, enjoining,
restraining, disbarring, or otherwise restricting him or her in the practice of
law, or any person working under the supervision of such person;
   B.   Any organization recognized by the BIA that provides immigration
assistance services via representatives accredited by such board to appear
before the Department of Homeland Security or the Executive Office for
Immigration Review, that does not charge a fee or charges nominal fees, as
defined by the BIA;
   C.   Any person employed by the federal government or by the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania and authorized to provide services in an immigration matter, when
acting within the scope of such employment or authority;
   D.   Any elected official who, acting within the scope of his or her
official capacity, without a fee or other payment makes inquiries in an
immigration matter;
   E.   Any City official or employee who, acting within the scope of his or
her duties, without requiring a separate fee or other payment, makes inquiries
in an immigration matter on behalf of an individual.
§ 339-303. Provider requirements.
   A.   Registration. In addition to obtaining a business privilege license as
required under
Chapter 339, Part 2, a provider shall register with the CSC annually, pursuant
to such registration process as may be established by the Department. A single
registration shall include all locations at which a provider performs
immigration-related services.
      (1)   At the time of registration, a provider must sign a form designated
by the Department, attesting the provider's knowledge and consent to conduct
business in accordance with the provisions of this Part, and acknowledging that
any violation of the provisions of this Part by the provider may result in
fines and penalties in addition to those stated in
Chapter 339, as well as cease operations orders and suspension or revocation of
the provider's business privilege license.
      (2)   At the time of registration, a provider must provide proof of a
surety bond in the amount of $50,000 in order to ensure payment of all final
judgments and decrees entered against the provider for damages arising from the
provision of immigration assistance services. The surety bond shall be in
effect for the entire period in which the provider provides immigration
assistance services, plus one year after the provider ceases all operations.
   B.   Signs. All providers shall post signs at the provider's place of
business, and every location where the provider regularly meets with customers.
Signs shall be posted in a conspicuous interior location where the signs will
be visible to customers who enter the office. Signs shall meet all of the
following requirements:
      (1)   Each sign shall be at least 11 inches by 17 inches.
      (2)   If the signs are placed on the exterior of the building or are
located in a window, the signs shall comply with zoning and historic
preservation regulations.
      (3)   Notice signs shall contain the following statement:
"This office is not an authorized government agency. I am not an attorney
licensed to practice law or a representative accredited by the Board of
Immigration Appeals. I cannot represent you before any immigration authority or
agency and may not give legal advice or accept fees for legal advice. Advice on
obtaining legal representation can be obtained from the Berks County Bar
Association. Fingerprints taken at this location will not be accepted by the
United States Department of Homeland Security for any purpose. You may cancel
any contract within three (3) business days and get your money back for
services not performed. If you have a complaint about this business, contact
the City of Reading Customer Services Center."
      (4)   Notice signs shall be designed and approved by the Department or
its designee and posted in a downloadable portable document format (PDF) on the
Department's website. The notice signs shall contain the statements required
under this section in English and any other language as determined by the
Department. Providers shall reproduce the PDF from the Department website,
without modification, and post as required herein.
      (5)   A fee sign, which contains a schedule of all services and fees
regularly charged, shall be posted.
   C.   Brochure. Before providing any services, a provider shall provide each
customer with a brochure or handbill containing all disclosures in the form
required under this section. Such brochure or handbill shall be designed and
approved by the Department, and shall be posted on the Department's website in
PDF format. Providers shall reproduce and distribute the brochure exactly as
obtained from the Department website, without modification. The brochure or
handbill shall be in English and any other language as determined by the
Department.
   D.   Documents. Providers shall retain copies of all documents prepared or
obtained in connection with services provided to a customer for a period of
three years after the date a written contract is executed by the provider and
the customer, whether or not the contract is subsequently cancelled.
      (1)   Documents shall be retained at the provider's principal place of
business and made available for confirmation of such retention by the Director
or his representative upon demand, during normal business hours.
   E.   Advertising. When advertising immigration assistance services by signs,
pamphlets, newspapers, internet, television, radio or any other means, a
provider shall post or otherwise include with the advertisement a notice in
English and in every other language in which the person provides or offers to
provide assistance. The notice shall be of a conspicuous size and shall state
the following: "The individual offering to provide assistance to you is NOT an
attorney licensed to practice law or a representative accredited by the Board
of Immigration Appeals. The individual cannot represent you before any
immigration authority or agency and may not give legal advice or accept fees
for legal advice."
      (1)   No advertisement for immigration assistance services shall
expressly or impliedly guarantee that the licensee will achieve any particular
government action, including, but not limited to, the granting of employment
authorization, lawful permanent residence status, citizenship, or any other
form of immigration benefit or relief.
      (2)   Advertising posted at a provider's place of business shall be
subject to confirmation of compliance with Subsection E by the Director or his
representative, upon demand, during normal business hours.
      (3)   All advertising in violation of this section may be subject to
penalties.
   F.   Providers shall comply with all reasonable and lawful requests by the
Department.
§ 339-304. Legal duties of provider.
Each provider may only perform the following immigration assistance services:
   A.   Transcribing responses to a government agency form which is related to
an immigration matter, but not advising a customer as to his or her answers on
those forms;
   B.   Translating information on forms, including the instructions, to a
customer and translating the customer's answers to questions posed on those
forms, but not advising a customer as to his or her answers on those forms;
   C.   Securing for the customer supporting documents, requested by the
customer, currently in existence, including but not limited to birth and
marriage certificates, foreign passports, tax forms, police clearances and
educational credentials, which may be needed to submit with government agency
forms;
   D.   Translating documents from a foreign language into English;
   E.   Notarizing signatures on government agency forms, if the person
performing the service is a notary public licensed in Pennsylvania;
   F.   Arranging for the performance of medical testing and the obtaining of
reports of such test results.
§ 339-305. Written agreements.
Each provider shall execute a written contract with the customer before
providing any form of assistance in an immigration matter.
   A.   The written contract shall include the following provisions:
      (1)   Name, address and telephone number of the provider;
      (2)   Itemization of all services to be provided and performed for the
customer;
      (3)   Identification of all compensation and costs to be charged to the
customer for the services to be performed;
      (4)   A statement that any originals of documents prepared, submitted or
obtained may not be retained by the provider for any purpose, including payment
of compensation or costs;
      (5)   A statement that the provider shall give the customer a copy of
each document filed with a government entity;
      (6)   A statement that the customer is not required to obtain supporting
documents through the provider, but may obtain such documents himself or
herself;
      (7)   A statement, on the face of the contract and in print larger and
more conspicuous than other print on the contract, in plain language and
substantially similar to the following: "The individual providing assistance to
you under this contract is not an attorney licensed to practice law or
accredited by the Board of Immigration Appeals to provide representation to you
and may not give legal advice or accept fees for legal advice.";
      (8)   A statement that the customer may rescind the contract within three
business days, which shall be conspicuously set forth in the contract in plain
language substantially similar to the following: "You have three business days
to cancel this contract. Notice of cancellation must be in writing. If you
cancel this contract within three business days, you will get back your
documents along with any fees that you have paid.";
      (9)   A statement conspicuously set forth in plain language substantially
similar to "The individual providing assistance to you under this contract is
prohibited from disclosing any information or filing any forms or documents
with immigration or other authorities without your knowledge and consent.";
      (10)   A statement conspicuously set forth in plain language
substantially similar to "A copy of all forms completed and documents
accompanying the forms shall be kept by the service provider for three years. A
copy of the customer's file shall be provided to the client on demand and
without fee.";
      (11)   A statement that the provider has financial surety in effect for
the benefit of any customer in the event that the customer is owed a refund, or
is damaged by the actions of the provider, together with the name, address and
telephone number of the surety. The statement should be in plain language and
substantially similar to "The provider is required by law to have insurance,
which is called a financial surety. If you are not given the services you
agreed on, as the customer you may be able to get your money back through this
insurance."
   B.   The contract shall be in a language understood by the customer; an
English language version of the contract shall also be provided.
   C.   A copy of the contract shall be provided to the customer upon the
customer's execution of the contract.
   D.   Receipts shall be issued for all services provided, and any guarantee
must be made in writing.
   E.   The customer has the right to cancel the contract within three business
days after his or her execution of the contract, without fee or penalty.
   F.   The contract may be cancelled at any time after execution. If the
contract is cancelled after three business days, the provider may retain fees
for services rendered, and any additional amounts actually expended on behalf
of the customer. All other amounts must be returned to the customer within 15
days after cancellation.
   G.   If any interpreter services are provided, the contract shall include an
attestation from the interpreter affirming the accuracy of the translation and
the translator's certification that he or she is competent to translate from
the specified foreign language into English.
   H.   Upon demand of the customer, providers must provide to the customer any
documents prepared, submitted or obtained in relation to an immigration matter.
   I.   Signature. Where a form has a section for the preparer to fill out, the
provider must provide his or her own information and sign the form as the
preparer.
§ 339-306. Prohibited acts.
It shall be unlawful for any provider, person, or business entity engaged in
the business of immigration assistance services to:
   A.   In the course of dealing with customers or prospective customers:
      (1)   Make any statement that the person can or will obtain special
favors from or has special influence with the United States Department of
Homeland Security, the Department of Justice or any other government agency; or
threaten to report the client to immigration or other authorities or undermine
in any way the client's immigration status or attempt to secure lawful status;
      (2)   Make any guarantee or promise to a customer, regarding outcomes in
an immigration matter;
      (3)   Demand or retain any compensation for service not performed or
costs that are actually not incurred;
      (4)   Fail to provide a customer with copies of documents filed with a
governmental entity, or refuse to promptly return documents supplied by,
prepared by, or paid for by the customer upon the request of the customer, or
upon termination of the contract, even if there is a fee dispute between the
licensee and the customer;
      (5)   Give any legal advice concerning an immigration matter or otherwise
engage in the practice of law, including, but not limited to, any advice
regarding the selection of forms to be completed and submitted to any
government agency in connection with an immigration matter.
   B.   Represent or advertise, in connection with the provision of assistance
in immigration matters, the title of lawyer or attorney at law, or equivalent
terms in the English language, or any other language, including, but not
limited to, "notary public," "accredited representatives of the Board of
Immigration Appeals" or "immigration consultant," that could reasonably cause a
customer to believe that the person possesses any form of license,
accreditation, or official authorization to provide advice on an immigration
matter; provided, however, that a notary public licensed in Pennsylvania may
use the term "notary public" if such use is accompanied by the statement that
the person is not an attorney.
   C.   State, imply, offer or otherwise represent that a person, business,
agency, office or organization is authorized to provide fingerprinting services
which will be accepted by the United States Department of Homeland Security
(DHS) for the process of DHS applications or for any other purpose.
   D.   Charge fees, directly or indirectly, for referring an individual to an
attorney for any immigration matter; provided, however, that a person may
charge a fee for notarizing documents as permitted by the Pennsylvania laws
regarding notary publics.
   E.   Represent that a fee may be charged, or charge a fee, for the
distribution, provision or submission of any official document or form issued
or promulgated by a state or federal governmental entity, or for the referral
of the customer to another person or entity that is qualified to provide
services or assistance which the provider will not provide.
   F.   Disclose any information to, or file any forms or documents with,
immigration or other authorities without the knowledge or consent of the
customer.
   G.   Refuse to comply with any reasonable and lawful request from a
Department inspector acting within the scope of responsibility under this Part.
   H.   Perform, or offer to perform, any immigration assistance services or
other act which requires a business privilege license under this chapter and
registration under this Part without a valid business privilege license issued
by the Department and registration approved by the Department.
   I.   Fail to adhere to any provision of this Part.
§ 339-307. Violations and penalties; enforcement.
   A.   Enforcement. In addition to any other penalty provided by law, any
person who violates any provision of this Part shall be subject to appropriate
code enforcement proceeding and subject to fines and penalties specified. Each
day that a violation of any provision of this Part continues shall constitute a
separate and distinct offense. Any person who violates any provision of this
Part shall further be liable in a private action as provided herein.
   B.   Penalties. Upon the Department's determination that a provider is in
violation of this Part hereof, or upon receipt of information of a provider's
violation of this Part, the Department may take appropriate action against the
individual or business entity, including:
      (1)   Suspension or revocation of license. Suspension or revocation of
licenses granted under
Chapter 339, Part 2, for all premises operated by the individual where
violations have occurred. During any period of license suspension, each and
every location of the individual's business shall cease operation as an
immigration assistance service provider.
      (2)   Cease operations order. The Department may issue a cease operations
order for each business location operated by the individual whose license(s)
has been suspended in accordance with the same procedures as set out in
Chapter 339, Part 2, provided that the cease operations order shall identify
the prohibited operations and shall state that the applicable license has been
suspended for violation(s) of the code.
      (3)   No license. No new license shall be issued for a business location
posted with a cease operation order or a license suspension, so long as any
person under a license suspension imposed by the Department, or any member of
such person's immediate family, or, in the case of a corporation, the
corporation or any affiliated business entities, retain a pecuniary interest in
the property at that location.
§ 339-308. Private right of action.
Any person aggrieved by any violation of this Part or any rule or regulation
promulgated hereunder may bring an action in an appropriate court against any
person subject to this Part, for injunction against the violation or for such
other or additional relief as may be appropriate to deter, prevent or
compensate for the violation. Remedies for violation of this Part shall be
cumulative, and shall include costs, compensatory damages, and punitive
damages, to the extent allowed by law. Any judgment obtained against a provider
under this Part may be provided to the Department and provide a basis for a
suspension of license and cease operations order.
Chapter 346
LITTER AND ADVERTISING MATERIAL
§
346-101.   Definitions.
§
346-102.   Deposit of litter and private advertising matter.
§
346-103.   Restrictions on distributing advertising matter.
§
346-104.   Deposit in receptacles.
§
346-105.   Sweeping litter into public places.
§
346-106.   Throwing litter from vehicles.
§
346-107.   Depositing litter in storm sewer.
§
346-108.   Violations and penalties.
[HISTORY: Adopted by the City Council of the City of Reading 7-26-1972 by Ord.
No. 31-19721 (Ch. 6, Part 5, of the 2001 Code of Ordinances). Amendments noted
where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Property maintenance — See
Ch. 180, Part 13.
STATE LAW REFERENCES
Scattering rubbish — See 18 Pa.C.S.A. § 6501.
Littering — See 30 Pa.C.S.A. § 2503.
Depositing waste and other material on highway, property or waters — See 75
Pa.C.S.A. § 3709.
1.   Editor's Note: Ordinance No. 28-2010, adopted 6-28-2010, repealed this
chapter to the extent inconsistent with or in direct contrast to the Property
Maintenance Rules and Regulations, enacted and authorized by Ord. No. 28-2010 (
Ch. 180, Part 12).
§ 346-101. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, certain terms are defined as follows:
   AUTHORIZED RECEPTACLE — A litter storage and collection receptacle made of a
durable material and so constructed so as to prevent litter from being carried
from it by the elements.
   LITTER — All waste material and sweepings and abandoned personal property of
all types.
   PRIVATE ADVERTISING MATTER — Flyers, brochures in newspaper or booklet form,
and pamphlets, published or printed for the principal purposes of advertising
any commercial or noncommercial products or enterprises which are distributed
other than through the U.S. mail, and without payment or subscription thereto
or the specific request of the intended recipient.
§ 346-102. Deposit of litter and private advertising matter.
No person shall throw, place, deposit or sweep litter or private advertising
matter in any public place such as a street, sidewalk, park or playground, nor
in the open entrances to buildings or on open porches or on private sidewalks,
entranceways or doors of public or private buildings, including but not limited
to residences within the City.
§ 346-103. Restrictions on distributing advertising matter.
[Added 12-10-1980 by Ord. No. 52-1980; amended 4-14-2014 by Ord. No. 33-2014]
No person, partnership, firm or corporation shall distribute or cause to be
distributed any handbills, advertisements, circulars, wastepapers or other
advertising matter whatever in the City by casting, scattering, placing or
handing the same upon any of the streets of the City or on the pavements,
sidewalks, alleys, footways or automobiles thereof. However, nothing herein
shall prevent any person from handing any noncommercial literature or other
printed matter upon any of the streets, pavements, sidewalks, alleys or
footways in the City to any person willing to receive the same, and nothing
herein shall prevent any person with permission of the owner from distributing
or causing to be distributed handbills, advertisements, circulars or other
advertising matter upon private property located within the City.
§ 346-104. Deposit in receptacles.
Persons placing litter in authorized receptacles shall do so in such a manner
as to prevent it from being carried or deposited by the elements upon any
street, sidewalk, or other public place or upon private property.
§ 346-105. Sweeping litter into public places.
No person owning or occupying premises within the City shall sweep into or
deposit in any gutter, street or any other public place an accumulation of
litter from any building or lot or from any public or private sidewalk or
driveway. Persons owning or occupying premises within the City shall keep the
sidewalk in front of such premises free of litter.
§ 346-106. Throwing litter from vehicles.
No person, while a driver or a passenger in a vehicle, shall throw or deposit
litter upon any street or other public place within the City or upon private
property.
§ 346-107. Depositing litter in storm sewer.
No person shall throw or deposit litter in any storm sewer in the City.
§ 346-108. Violations and penalties.
[Amended 12-10-1980 by Ord. No. 52-1980; 8-24-1983 by Ord. No. 32-1983; 5-29-
2001 by Ord. No. 14-2001]
Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any provision of this chapter
shall be, upon conviction thereof, sentenced to pay a fine of not more than
$1,000 plus costs and, in default of payment of said fine and costs, to a term
of imprisonment not to exceed 30 days.
Chapter 353
LOITERING AND PANHANDLING
§
353-101.   Purpose.
§
353-102.   Definitions.
§
353-103.   Loitering; obstructing public places.
§
353-104.   Panhandling.
§
353-105.   Enforcement.
§
353-106.   Violations and penalties.
[HISTORY: Adopted by the City Council of the City of Reading 9-23-2002 by Ord.
No. 48-2002 (Ch. 6, Part 4, of the 2001 Code of Ordinances). Amendments noted
where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Curfew — See
Ch. 188.
STATE LAW REFERENCES
Loitering and prowling at night — See 18 Pa.C.S.A. § 5506.
Obstructing highways and other public passages — See 18 Pa.C.S.A. § 5507.
Procedure in court cases initiated by arrest without warrant - Title 234,
Chapter 5, PA Code Rule 519.
§ 353-101. Purpose.
[Added 5-10-2021 by Ord. No. 37-2021]
The purpose of this section is to balance the constitutional right of free
speech of someone to ask for money with the right of someone to walk the
streets free of harassment based on laws used in Lancaster and Harrisburg PA.
It is the intent of this chapter to provide the Reading Police Department with
an additional tool to address aggressive panhandling or loitering when it is
reported or when they encounter it and provide the option for a diversionary
program for those who violate this section.
§ 353-102. Definitions.
[Amended 5-10-2021 by Ord. No. 37-2021]
As used in this chapter, certain terms are defined as follows:
AUTOMATED TELLER MACHINE - A device, linked to a financial institution's
account records, which is able to carry out transactions, including but not
limited to account transfers, deposits, cash withdrawals, balance inquiries,
and mortgage and loan payments.
AUTOMATED TELLER MACHINE FACILITY - The area comprised of one or more automatic
teller machines and any adjacent space which is made available to banking
customers after regular banking hours.
CHECK CASHING BUSINESS - Any entity duly licensed by the Pennsylvania
Department of Banking to engage in the business of cashing checks, drafts, or
money orders for consideration pursuant to the Check Casher Licensing Act, of
February 18, 1998, P.L. 146, as amended, 63 P.S. § 2301 et seq.
FINANCIAL INSTITUTION - Any entity authorized to engage in the business of
receiving money for deposit or transmission pursuant to Section 105 of the
Pennsylvania Banking Code Act of November 30, 1965, P.L. 847, as amended, 7
P.S. § 105.
LOITERING -
A.   To stand around or remain or to park or remain parked in a motor vehicle
at a public place or place open to the public and to engage in any conduct
prohibited under this law; or
B.   To collect, gather, congregate, or to be a member of a group or a crowd of
people who are gathered together in any public place or place open to the
public and to engage in any conduct prohibited under this law.
OBSTRUCTING HIGHWAYS AND OTHER PUBLIC PASSAGES.
A.   Obstructing. A person, who, having no legal privilege to do so,
intentionally or recklessly obstructs any highway, railroad track or public
utility right-of-way, sidewalk, navigable waters, other public passage, whether
alone or with others, commits a summary offense, or, in case he persists after
warning by a law officer, a misdemeanor of the third degree. No person shall be
deemed guilty of an offense under this subsection solely because of a gathering
of persons to hear him speak or otherwise communicate, or solely because of
being a member of such a gathering.
B.   Refusal to move on.
   (1)   A person in a gathering commits a summary offense if he refuses to
obey a reasonable official request or order to move:
      (a)   To prevent obstruction of a highway or other public passage; or
      (b)   To maintain public safety by dispersing those gathered in dangerous
proximity to a fire or other hazard.
   (2)   An order to move, addressed to a person whose speech or other lawful
behavior attracts an obstructing audience, shall not be deemed reasonable if
the obstruction can be readily remedied by police control of the size or
location of the gathering.
   (3)   Definition of obstructs. As used in this section the word "obstructs"
means renders impassable without unreasonable inconvenience or hazard.
OUTDOOR CAFE - A use characterized by outdoor table service of food or
beverages prepared for service in a structure located adjacent, attached or in
close proximity thereto for consumption on the premises.
PANHANDLING IN AN AGGRESSIVE MANNER -
A.   Following behind, ahead or alongside a person for more than 25 feet either
before, during or after soliciting if that conduct is intended or is likely to
cause a reasonable person to fear bodily harm to oneself or to another or
damage to or loss of property or otherwise be intimidated into giving money or
other thing of value;
B.   Continuing to solicit from a person after that person has given a negative
response to such soliciting or walked away from the solicitor;
C.   Intentionally touching or causing physical contact with the solicited
person without such person's consent;
D.   Intentionally blocking or interfering with the safe or free passage of a
person or vehicle being solicited by any means, including unreasonably causing
a person or vehicle operator to take evasive action to avoid physical contact;
E.   Using profane or abusive language or speaking in an unreasonably loud
volume, either during the solicitation or following a refusal to make a
donation, or making any statement or gestures toward a solicited person which
would cause a reasonable person to be fearful or feel compelled; or
F.   Soliciting from a person while that person is waiting in line for entry to
a building or for another purpose.
PANHANDLING, SOLICITING and BEGGING - "Panhandling," "soliciting" and "begging"
shall be used interchangeably in this chapter and shall mean asking a person
for an immediate donation of money or objects of value, with the intention that
the money or object be transferred at that time and at that place, for charity
or personal gain that is not authorized. "Panhandling" shall include, but not
be limited to, using the spoken, written or printed word, bodily gestures, or
signs, with the purpose of obtaining an immediate donation of money or other
thing of value. "Panhandling" shall also include exchanges in which the person
being solicited asked receives an item or thing of little or no monetary value
in exchange for a donation, under circumstances where a reasonable person would
understand that the transaction is in substance a donation. Panhandling does
not include passively standing or sitting with a sign or other indication that
one is seeking donations, without addressing any solicitation to any specific
person other than in response to an inquiry by that person. Music, singing or
other street performances are exempted.
PLACE OPEN TO THE PUBLIC.
A.   "Place open to the public" means any place open to the public or any place
to which the public is invited and in, on, or around any privately owned place
of business, private parking lot, or private institution, including places of
worship, cemetery, or any place of amusement and entertainment, whether or not
a charge of admission or entry thereto is made.
B.   It includes the elevator, lobby, halls, corridors, streets and highways,
and areas open to the public at any store, office, or apartment building.
PUBLIC PLACE - A place to which the public or a substantial group of persons
has access, including but not limited to any street, highway, sidewalk, parking
facility, plaza, transportation facility, school, place of worship, cemetery,
place or amusement, park or playground, and any doorway, entrance, hallway,
lobby or other portion of any business establishment, apartment house or hotel
not constituting a room or apartment designed for actual residence.
PUBLIC TOILET - Any "porta potty" located on public property or any rest room
facilities located within any public park or swimming pool which are intended
for use by the general public.
PUBLIC TRANSPORTATION VEHICLE - Any vehicle, including a trailer bus, designed,
used or maintained for carrying 10 or more persons, including the driver, or a
passenger vehicle designed for carrying fewer than 10 persons, including the
driver, and used to carry passengers for hire.
SIDEWALK CAFE - A use located on a public sidewalk which is located adjacent to
a full service restaurant where food and beverages are prepared, served and
sold and are delivered for consumption on the sidewalk. It is characterized by
the presence of tables and chairs and may be shaded by canopies, awnings or
umbrellas. It shall also include the public right-of-way connecting the main
restaurant to the sidewalk cafe.
§ 353-103. Loitering; obstructing public places.
[Amended 5-10-2021 by Ord. No. 37-2021]
A.   No person shall loiter in a public place, as heretofore defined, in such
manner as to obstruct any public street, public sidewalk, public bridge, or
other public place or public building by hindering or impeding or tending to
hinder or impede the free and uninterrupted passage of vehicles or pedestrians.
B.   No person shall commit in or upon any public street, public sidewalk,
public bridge, or other public place or public building any act which obstructs
or interferes with the free and uninterrupted use of property or the lawful
conducting of any business by anyone in or upon or facing or fronting on any
such public street, public sidewalk, public bridge, or other public place or
public building, in such manner as to hinder or impede or tend to hinder or
impede the free and uninterrupted ingress and egress thereto.
C.   If the person's conduct constituting the offense is upon the officer's
view imperiling the personal security of any person or endangering public or
private property, the officer shall have the ability to employ Title 234,
Chapter 5, PA Code Rule 519, Procedure in Court Cases Initiated by Arrest
Without Warrant.
§ 353-104. Panhandling.
[Added 5-10-2021 by Ord. No. 37-2021]
A.   No person shall engage in an act of panhandling, solicitation or begging:
   (1)   Within 25 feet of the outside perimeter of an outdoor cafe or a
sidewalk cafe.
   (2)   On private or residential property without permission from the owner
or other person lawfully in possession of such property.
   (3)   Within 20 feet of public toilets.
   (4)   Within 20 feet of an entrance to or exit from any financial
institution, check cashing business or automated teller machine; provided,
however, that when an automated teller machine is located within an automated
teller machine facility, such distance shall be measured from the entrance or
exit of the facility.
   (5)   With an operator or occupant of a motor vehicle while such vehicle is
located on any public street, for the purpose of the sale of goods or offering
to perform a service in connection with such vehicle, or in exchange for
blocking, occupying or otherwise reserving a public parking space or directing
the operator or occupant to a public parking space; provided, however, that
this subsection shall not apply to services being offered in connection with
emergency repairs requested by the operator or occupant of such vehicle.
   (6)   In any public transportation vehicle, stop or facility or in any
public parking lot or facility.
   (7)   In an aggressive manner, as defined in §
353-102 above, in any public place within the City.
B.   If the person's conduct constituting the offense is upon the officer's
view imperiling the personal security of any person or endangering public or
private property, the officer shall have the ability to employ Title 234,
Chapter 5, PA Code Rule 519, Procedure in Court Cases Initiated by Arrest
Without Warrant.
§ 353-105. Enforcement.
[Amended 5-10-2021 by Ord. No. 37-2021]
When any person causes or commits any of the conditions enumerated in the
definition of LOITERING as set forth in §
353-102, a law enforcement officer for the City of Reading (Department of
Police) shall order that person to stop causing or committing such condition.
If any person receiving any such order from a law enforcement officer fails or
refuses to obey the same, then the person(s) shall be subject to Title 234,
Chapter 5, PA Code Rule 519, Procedure in Court Cases Initiated by Arrest
Without Warrant and subject to the violations and penalties in §
353-106.
§ 353-106. Violations and penalties.
[Amended 5-10-2021 by Ord. No. 37-2021]
Persons who violate any provision of this chapter may be eligible to
participate in a diversionary program as established by the City of Reading.
The diversionary program shall be available for both first and second
violations, and may be available for third and subsequent violations at the
discretion of the court. The diversionary program shall include community
service and counseling. Upon successful completion of the diversionary program,
the violation(s) under this chapter shall be dismissed.
A.   Any person who commits a first violation of any provision of this chapter
shall pay a fine not to exceed $25 OR participate in a diversionary program
that will require the completion of no more than 5 hours of community service
and no more than 2 hours of counseling.
B.   Any person who commits a second violation of any provision of this chapter
shall pay a fine not to exceed $50 OR participate in a diversionary program
that will require the completion of no more than 10 hours of community service
and no more than 4 hours of counseling.
C.   Any person or persons who commit a third or subsequent violation of any
provision of this chapter shall pay a fine not to exceed $100, and shall not be
eligible to participate in the diversionary program unless the court determines
that participation is appropriate and the arresting officer is in agreement.
Chapter 360
MARIJUANA USE AND POSSESSION
§
360-101.   Definitions.
§
360-102.   Possession of a small amount of marijuana.
§
360-103.   Smoking or consumption in public.
§
360-104.   Diversion program for offenders.
§
360-105.   Enforcement.
§
360-106.   Relation to federal and/or Pennsylvania State law.
[HISTORY: Adopted by the City Council of the City of Reading 7-28-2025 by Ord.
No. 45-2025.]
§ 360-101. Definitions.
For the purposes of this chapter, unless the context clearly requires a
different meaning, the words, terms and phrases set forth in this section shall
have the meanings given them in this section.
SMALL AMOUNT OF MARIJUANA - Thirty (30) grams or less of marijuana or eight (8)
grams or less of hashish.
§ 360-102. Possession of a small amount of marijuana.
It shall be unlawful for any person to possess a small amount of marijuana
within the City of Reading. However, possession of a small amount of marijuana
shall be classified as a civil offense rather than a criminal offense,
punishable as follows:
A.   A civil fine of fifty dollars ($50.00) plus enrollment and completion of
the Marijuana Diversion Program provided by Council On Chemical Abuse for a
first offense.
B.   A civil fine of one hundred dollars ($100.00) for a second offense.
C.   A civil fine of one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00) for a third or
subsequent offense.
§ 360-103. Smoking or consumption in public.
It shall be unlawful for any person to smoke or consume marijuana or hashish of
any amount in a public space. However, the smoking or consumption of marijuana
or hashish in a public space shall be classified as a civil offense rather than
a criminal offense, punishable by a civil fine of one hundred fifty dollars
($150.00) per offense.
§ 360-104. Diversion program for offenders.
If a minor is in violation of any provision of this chapter, said minor shall
be referred to appropriate diversion programs or youth services in lieu of the
civil fines, at the discretion of the City of Reading Police Department. If an
adult is in violation of any provision of this chapter, said adult shall be
referred to the appropriate diversion program as set forth in §
360-102 above for a first offense and may be referred to an appropriate
diversion program for a second or subsequent offense but not in lieu of the
civil fines, at the discretion of the City of Reading Police Department.
§ 360-105. Enforcement.
This chapter shall be enforced by the City of Reading Police Department through
the issuance of civil citations and fines, without arrest, detention, or the
creation of a criminal record for violators.
§ 360-106. Relation to federal and/or Pennsylvania State law.
Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to authorize conduct otherwise
prohibited under state or federal law or limit the ability of the City of
Reading Police Department to enforce applicable federal or state. Rather, this
chapter expresses the intent of the City of Reading to use its Home Rule
authority to exercise discretion in enforcement and penalty-setting within the
City of Reading boundaries.
Chapter 364
MASSAGE THERAPISTS
§
364-101.   Purpose and intent.
§
364-102.   Definitions.
§
364-103.   Massage therapist permit required.
§
364-104.   Permit applications and fees.
§
364-105.   Requirements for issuance of massage therapist permit.
§
364-106.   Appeal of denial of massage therapist permit.
§
364-107.   Revocation or suspension of permits; appeal.
§
364-108.   Existing massage practitioner permits.
§
364-109.   Exemptions.
§
364-110.   Exemptions from zoning restrictions.
§
364-111.   Violations and penalties.
[HISTORY: Adopted by the City Council of the City of Reading 10-13-2004 by Ord.
No. 44-2004 (Ch. 10, Part 14, of the 2001 Code of Ordinances) and amended in
full 8-14-2017 by Ord. No. 74-2017. Other Amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Licenses and permits — See
Ch. 339.
Zoning — See
Ch. 600.
STATE LAW REFERENCES
Massage Therapy Law — See 63 P.S. § 627.1 et seq.
§ 364-101. Purpose and intent.
The purpose and intent of this chapter is to recognize massage as a business
occupation and health enhancement service and provide a means for issuing
appropriate permits.
§ 364-102. Definitions.
For the purposes of this chapter, unless the context clearly requires a
different meaning, the words, terms and phrases set forth in this section shall
have the meanings given them in this section.
   PERMIT — The permit to engage in the activities of a massage therapist as
required by this chapter.
   PERMIT ADMINISTRATOR — The Health Officer will be responsible for issuing,
revoking and otherwise administering the permit program.
   MASSAGE or MASSAGE THERAPY — The skillful application of touch to enhance
health and well-being, in which soft tissue manipulation is primary.
   MASSAGE THERAPIST or MASSAGE PROFESSIONAL — A health care practitioner who
offers services to the public for compensation, using a massage specialty in
caring for clients, and
has obtained a permit as required by this chapter. A person who has engaged in
"disqualifying conduct" means a person who:
   A.   Within five years immediately preceding the date of filing of the
application for an issuance of a permit under this chapter has been convicted
in a court of competent jurisdiction in the commonwealth.
   B.   Any misdemeanor or felony offense which relates directly to the
practice of massage therapy, whether as a massage business owner or operator,
or as a massage technician or professional.
   C.   Any felony the commission of which occurred on the premises of a
massage establishment.
   D.   Within five years immediately preceding the date of the filing of the
application for a permit under this chapter has had any massage establishment,
operator, technician or trainee license or permit, which was issued by the
State of Pennsylvania, or by any county or municipality, revoked.
   E.   Within five years immediately preceding the date of the filing of the
application for a permit under this chapter has been convicted in a court of
competent jurisdiction of:
      (1)   Any misdemeanor under the Pennsylvania Crimes Code, 18 Pa.C.S.A.,
Chapter 59.
      (2)   Any offense in a jurisdiction outside the State of Pennsylvania
which is the equivalent of any of the aforesaid offenses.
   RECOGNIZED SCHOOL OF MASSAGE - Any school or institution of learning which:
teaches the theory, ethics, practice, profession and work of massage therapy;
requires a residence course of study before the student shall be furnished with
a diploma or certificate of completion; and has been approved pursuant to
Pennsylvania Statutes Title 24, §§ 18-1803 through 18-1841, or Pennsylvania
State Code Title 22, Chapter 339, Vocational-Technical Education, §§ 339.1
through 339.62, or, if said school is not located in Pennsylvania, has complied
with standards commensurate with those required in the aforementioned sections
and has obtained certification under any similar state-approval program, if
such exists. Transcripts from more than one recognized school can be combined
to meet the educational standards required.
   STATE OR NATIONAL PROFESSIONAL MASSAGE THERAPY ORGANIZATION OR ASSOCIATION
DEVOTED TO THE MASSAGE SPECIALTY AND HEALTH ENHANCEMENT APPROACH — An
organization or association that has been determined by the permit
administrator to meet each of the following requirements:
   A.   Requires a minimum of at least 600 hours of classroom instruction.
   B.   Offers and encourages participation in continuing education programs.
   C.   Has an established code of ethics and has enforcement procedures for
the suspension and revocation of membership of persons violating the code of
ethics.
   D.   The organization does not discriminate on the basis of race, sex,
creed, color, age or sexual orientation.
§ 364-103. Massage therapist permit required.
   A.   It shall be unlawful for any person to act as a massage therapist
unless such person holds a valid permit issued by the permit administrator.
   B.   A massage therapist permit shall be issued to any person who has
fulfilled the requirements of this chapter, unless grounds for denial of such
permit are found to exist. The permit administrator may deny a permit to the
permit applicant if:
      (1)   The applicant made a material misstatement in the application for a
permit.
      (2)   The applicant is a person who has engaged in other, stated
disqualifying conduct, as described under this chapter.
      (3)   All fees have not been paid.
§ 364-104. Permit applications and fees.
   A.   The permit administrator shall provide each applicant with an
application form, requesting the information needed to determine whether the
applicant meets the requirements for issuance of a permit pursuant to this
chapter.
   B.   All fees shall be in the amount set forth in
Chapter 212, Fees. Fees shall reflect actual costs of investigation and
issuance of massage permits. 1
   C.   Within 60 working days following receipt of a completed application,
the permit administrator shall either issue the permit, or mail a written
statement of his or her reasons for denial thereof. If the administrator takes
neither action, the permit shall be deemed to be issued. The applicant shall
furnish the following information:
      (1)   Name, residence address and telephone number; the previous
addresses of applicant, if any, for a period of three years immediately prior
to the date of the application and the dates of residence at each.
      (2)   Social Security number and driver's license number, if any.
      (3)   Applicant's weight, height, color of hair and eyes.
      (4)   Two prints of a recent passport-size photograph of applicant.
      (5)   Written evidence that the applicant is at least 18 years of age.
      (6)   Business, occupation or employment of the applicant for the three
years immediately preceding the date of application. This information shall
include, but not be limited to, a statement as to whether or not the applicant,
in working as a massage or bodywork technician or similar occupation under a
permit or license, has had such permit or license revoked or suspended, and the
reasons therefor.
      (7)   The name and address of the recognized school attended, the dates
attended, and a copy of the diploma or certificate of completion awarded the
applicant. All applicants may be required to furnish additional evidence of
enrollment and attendance of the required class hours or if such evidence is
not available are subject to an oral interview by the permit administrator or
his or her appointee to establish the bona fide completion of educational
requirements.
      (8)   Such other identification and information as the City may require
in order to discover the truth of the matters required to be set forth in the
application.
   D.   Temporary permit. Massage therapists may request a sixty-day temporary
permit upon payment of all fees for the first year. A temporary permit will be
issued for use during the interim period. However, the temporary permit may be
revoked at any time upon failure to meet the requirements for a permanent
permit, or upon violation of other provisions of this chapter.
   E.   The massage permit shall have a number assigned by the City for the
purposes of identification.
1.   Editor's Note: Amended during codification (see
Ch. 1, General Provisions, Part 2).
§ 364-105. Requirements for issuance of massage therapist permit.
Requirements for issuance of massage therapist permit. No permit will be issued
unless the applicant meets all of the following criteria:
   A.   Is a member in good standing in a state or national professional
association as defined in §
364-102.
   B.   Holds a current national certification under a recognized school of
massage.
   C.   Satisfies one of the following conditions:
      (1)   Has completed 600 hours of instruction, as per 49 Pa. Code § 20.11
in the massage specialty and health enhancement approach from an approved
school as defined in the definitions Section or classes in massage therapy and
related topics offered through State-approved colleges and universities.
      (2)   Has completed 250 hours of such instruction and, in addition, 250
hours of practical experience in the massage specialty and health enhancement
approach in the form of paid employment as documented by IRS tax returns or
other affidavit. Proof of practical experience may include, but is not limited
to, 1040 tax returns or W-2 tax forms provided to the applicant and certified
by the employing professional and documentation of hours.
      (3)   Has completed a minimum of 100 hours of such training from an
approved school, and proof of 400 hours additional training in:
         (a)   Continuing educational classes in the massage field and related
classes offered by a recognized school of massage or bodywork as defined above.
         (b)   Classes and workshops as in Subsection C(3)(a) approved by the
Board of Registered Nurses for nursing CE credit or approved in Category A by
the National Certification Board for Therapeutic Massage and Bodywork (NCBTMB).
         (c)   Programs as in Subsection C(3)(a) approved and certified by
qualifying professional organizations as defined above.
         (d)   Adult education classes in massage and related topics offered
through state- approved colleges and universities.
      (4)   Has completed a minimum of 100 hours of such training from an
approved school, and proof of 150 hours additional training as described above,
and in addition, 250 hours of practical experience as defined above.
      (5)   Has passed an independently prepared and administered National
Certification exam which has been recognized by objective standards to fairly
evaluate professional levels of skill, safety and competence, as determined by
the National Commission for Certifying Agencies (NCCA) or a similar certifying
body. The practitioner need not maintain this certification after passing the
exam, unless to meet the requirements prescribed herein.
§ 364-106. Appeal of denial of massage therapist permit.
   A.   The permit administrator shall give written notice to the applicant of
a denial of an application for a massage therapist permit. Said notice shall
set forth the grounds for the denial of the license or permit, and shall be
mailed to the applicant at the applicant's address.
   B.   Within 30 days from the date of receipt of the notice of denial in the
mail, the applicant may appeal the decision in writing to the permit
administrator, setting forth in detail the ground or grounds for the appeal.
   C.   Upon receipt of a notice of appeal; the permit administrator shall
designate a person to conduct a hearing in accordance with the City's hearing
procedures. Such hearing shall be not less than 30 days from the date the
appeal was received by the permit administrator. Written notice shall be given
by mail to the applicant of the date, time, and place for the hearing.
§ 364-107. Revocation or suspension of permits; appeal.
   A.   The permit administrator may suspend or revoke any permit issued
pursuant to this chapter in the event that he or she determines:
      (1)   The permittee has violated any provisions of this chapter.
      (2)   The permittee has engaged in disqualifying conduct, as described in
this chapter.
      (3)   The permittee has made a material misstatement in the application
for a permit.
   B.   A person may appeal from the suspension or revocation of his or her
permit pursuant to the procedure set forth in §
364-106 of this chapter.
§ 364-108. Existing massage practitioner permits.
All persons currently authorized by the City to practice massage holding
existing massage permits who desire to continue practice, shall be granted two
years from the effective date to comply with all requirements of this chapter
providing that their massage services are not sexually oriented, are open to
the general public and made equally available to both sexes, and that their
business is open for inspection by zoning or health inspectors during their
business hours.
§ 364-109. Exemptions.
   A.   This chapter shall not apply to the following classes of individuals
while engaged in the performance of the duties of their respective professions:
      (1)   Any person holding an unrevoked license by the state while
performing activities encompassed by the legal scope of practice of such
professional license.
      (2)   Practitioners who work on fully clothed clients using one of the
following systems while in the course of providing work under this system:
         (a)   Reflexology practitioners providing massage exclusively to the
feet and/or hands and/or ears.
         (b)   Practitioners of educational systems in which touch is
incidental and in which touch and words are used to deepen awareness of
existing patterns of movement in the human body as well as to suggest new
possibilities of movement.
         (c)   Practitioners using a non-touch contact to affect the energy
systems of the human body.
   B.   The permit administrator may exempt from the requirements of this
section practitioners of recognized proprietary somatic modalities which are
not "massage" as commonly understood but which may fall within the definition
of massage herein because of touching or other contact, if said practitioners
are certified to practice by that modality's guild or other professional
organization.
   C.   This chapter shall not apply to individuals administering massages or
health treatment involving massage to persons participating in road races,
track meets, triathlons, educational events or conferences and similar single
occurrence athletic or recreational or educational events; provided that all of
the following conditions are met:
      (1)   The massage services are made equally available to all participants
in the event.
      (2)   The event is open to participation by the general public or a
significant segment of the public such as employees of sponsoring corporations.
      (3)   The massage services are provided at the site of the event in a
public setting and either during, immediately preceding or immediately
following the event.
      (4)   The sponsors of the event have been advised of and have approved
the provision of massage services and the qualifications required of those
performing such services.
   D.   Out-of-state visitors.
      (1)   This chapter shall not apply to individuals in the City or state
temporarily for educational events or disaster relief.
§ 364-110. Exemptions from zoning restrictions.
Those massage businesses in which all persons engaging in activities which
require them to obtain a permit under this chapter possess the qualifications
of, and have obtained valid permits as massage therapists shall be zoned as
business, health-professional or commercial, and shall be permitted in any
neighborhood that allows for home occupations or in areas where home
occupations are not excluded.
§ 364-111. Violations and penalties. 2
Any person operating a business recognized as a massage occupation and/or
health enhancement service within the City without obtaining a permit as
provided herein or failing to comply with any and all provisions of this
chapter, shall be, upon conviction thereof, sentenced to pay a fine of not less
than $600 but no more than $1,000 plus costs, and in default of payment of said
fine and costs, to a term of imprisonment not to exceed 30 days. Each day on
which such person violated this chapter may be considered as a separate offense
and punishable as such as provided above and by law.
2.   Editor's Note: Added during codification (see
Ch. 1, General Provisions, Part 2).
Chapter 378
MUNICIPAL CLAIMS AND LIENS
Part 1
Collection of Delinquent Property Taxes
§
378-101.   Schedule.
§
378-102.   Charges.
§
378-103.   Interest.
§
378-104.   Powers.
§
378-105.   Effective date.
§
378-106.   Delinquent real estate tax.
§
378-107.   Collection costs.
Part 2
Unpaid Claims
§
378-201.   Fees to be added to the unpaid claim.
§
378-202.   Costs to be added to unpaid claims.
§
378-203.   Interest.
§
378-204.   Collection procedures.
§
378-205.   Related action.
§
378-206.   Appointment of Solicitor.
Part 3
Collection of Delinquent Non-Real Estate Based Taxes
§
378-301.   Collection of fees; procedures.
§
378-302.   Empowerment of officials.
[HISTORY: Adopted by the City Council of the City of Reading as indicated in
part histories. Amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Tax abatements — See
Ch. 543.
Tax amnesty program — See
Ch. 546.
Taxation — See
Ch. 549.
STATE LAW REFERENCES
Municipal Claims and Tax Liens Law — See 53 P.S. § 7101 et seq.
Part 1
Collection of Delinquent Property Taxes
[Adopted 8-27-2001 by Ord. No. 26-2001 (Ch. 24, Part 9, of the 2001 Code of
Ordinances)]
§ 378-101. Schedule.
[Amended 5-13-2002 by Ord. No. 7-2002]
   A.   The City hereby approves the following schedule of attorney fees for
services in connection with the collection of delinquent property tax accounts.
Said schedule is determined to be fair and reasonable compensation for services
set forth, all in accordance with principles set forth in § 3 of the Municipal
Claims Law: 1
Schedule of Fees
Legal Services Fee for Services
Schedule of Fees
Legal Services                                      Fee for Services
Process and notice of delinquency                   $35
Initial review and sending first demand letter      $160
Filing and mailing second demand letter             $50
Filing lien                                         $175
Title search                                        $250
Preparation and service of writ of scire facias     $175
Notice of intention to file judgment for want of an $30
answer
Alternative service of legal pleadings              $250
Entry of judgment                                   $175
Preparation of writ of execution and attend initial $800
sheriff sale
Preparation of document and attendance at second    $600
sheriff sale
Review schedule of distribution and resolve         $250
distribution issues
Services not covered above                          $150 per hour, attorney
                                                    $75 per hour, paralegals
 
   B.   There shall be added to the above amounts the reasonable out-of-pocket
expenses of counsel in connection with each of these services, including
sheriff's and prothonotary's costs.
   C.   The amount of fees determined, as set forth above, shall be added to
the City's claim in each account.
   D.   The following collection procedures are hereby established in
accordance with 53 P.S. § 7106:2
      (1)   At least 30 days prior to assessing or imposing attorney fees in
connection with the collection of an account, City shall mail or cause to be
mailed, by certified mail, return receipt requested, a notice of such intention
to the taxpayer or other entity liable for the account (the "Account Debtor").
      (2)   If the certified mail notice is undeliverable, then, at least 10
days prior to the assessing or imposing such attorney fees, the City shall mail
or cause to be mailed, by first class mail, a second notice to such Account
Debtor.
      (3)   All notices required by this Part shall be mailed to the Account
Debtor's last known post office address as recorded in the records or other
information of the City, or such other address as it may be able to obtain from
the Berks County Office of Assessment.
      (4)   Each notice, as described above, shall include the following:
         (a)   The type of tax or other charge, the date it became due, and the
amount owed, including penalty and interest.
         (b)   A statement of the City's intent to impose or assess attorney
fees within 30 days after the mailing of the first notice, or within 10 days
after the mailing of the second notice.
         (c)   The manner in which the assessment or imposition of attorney
fees may be avoided by payment of the account.
         (d)   The place of payment for accounts and the name and telephone
number of the City representative designated as responsible for collection
matters.
1.   Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 7103.
2.   Editor's Note: Amended during codification (see
Ch. 1, General Provisions, Part 2).
§ 378-102. Charges.
The City hereby imposes a 5.5% charge on the total outstanding delinquency
(including tax principal, penalty and accrued interest) of any delinquent tax
account returned to the Berks County Tax Claim Bureau. Said 5.5% charge shall
be in addition to any attorney fees pursuant to §
378-101.
§ 378-103. Interest.
[Amended 5-13-2002 by Ord. No. 7-2002]
The City imposes 10% per annum interest on any delinquent tax account from the
date of filing a lien for said claim.
§ 378-104. Powers.
The proper official of the City are hereby authorized and empowered to take
such additional action as they may deem necessary to appropriate to implement
this Part.
§ 378-105. Effective date.
This Part shall take effect at the expiration of 20 days after passage by
Council and approval by the Mayor, or repassage by Council over the Mayor's
veto.
§ 378-106. Delinquent real estate tax.
[Added 4-22-2002 by Ord. No. 16-2002]
The City hereby authorized the imposition of a $35 delinquent real estate tax
account fee upon any such account.
§ 378-107. Collection costs.
[Added 4-22-2002 by Ord. No. 16-2002]
The City hereby authorized the imposition of collection costs up to and
including 33 1/3% of the outstanding delinquent real estate tax account. Said
outstanding account for collection costs computation shall include only the
delinquent tax, applicable penalty amount, $35 fee and interest. However, all
incidental expenses (court fees, filing fees, process of service fees, postage,
etc.) shall also be part of the delinquent real estate tax account total to be
collected along with the above collection costs.
Part 2
Unpaid Claims
[Adopted 5-26-2009 by Ord. No. 28-2009]
§ 378-201. Fees to be added to the unpaid claim.
City of Reading hereby approves the following fee schedule for the collection
of unpaid claims, which fees shall be added to the unpaid claim:
   A.   Notice expense: not to exceed $50, together with all costs and expenses
incurred, shall be added to the unpaid claim for mailing a notice of
delinquency pursuant to § 7106 of the Municipal Claims and Tax Liens Act. 3
   B.   Collection fees.
      (1)   Handling fee for returned check: $30.
      (2)   Handling fee to issue refund check: $20.
      (3)   Bookkeeping fee for payment plan of three months or less: $25.
      (4)   Bookkeeping fee for payment plan of more than three months $50.
      (5)   Guaranteed payoff fee: $25.
   C.   Legal fees.
      (1)   Initial review and sending first demand letter: $160.
      (2)   File lien and prepare satisfaction: $175.
      (3)   Prepare writ of scire facias: $175.
      (4)   Obtain reissued writ: $30
      (5)   Prepare and mail letter under Pa.R.C.P. § 237.1: $30
      (6)   Prepare motion for alternate service: $175.
      (7)   Prepare default judgment: $175.
      (8)   Prepare writ of execution: $800.
      (9)   Attendance at sale; review schedule of distribution and resolve
distribution issues: $400.
      (10)   Continue sheriff sale: $50.
      (11)   Petition to assess damages: $0.50.
      (12)   Petition for free and clear sale: $400.
      (13)   Prepare bankruptcy proof of claim: $100.
      (14)   Services not covered above: at an hourly rate between $60 and $225
per hour.
3.   Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 7106.
§ 378-202. Costs to be added to unpaid claims.
In addition, the reasonable and necessary out-of-pocket charges, costs,
expenses, commissions and fees incurred in collection, such as but not limited
to, postage, title searches, prothonotary fees and sheriff fees, shall be added
to the unpaid claims.
§ 378-203. Interest.
Interest will be assessed upon all delinquent unpaid municipal claims at a rate
of 10% per annum and added to the unpaid claim.
§ 378-204. Collection procedures.
The following collection procedures are hereby established in accordance with
the Act:
   A.   At least 30 days prior to assessing or imposing attorney fees in
connection with the collection of an account, the City of Reading or its
designee shall mail or cause to be mailed, by certified mail, return receipt
requested, a notice of such intention to the taxpayer or other entity liable
for the account (the "property owner").
   B.   If the certified mail notice is undelivered, then, at least 10 days
prior to the assessing or imposing such attorney fees, City of Reading or its
designee shall mail or cause to be mailed, by first class mail, a second notice
to the property owner.
   C.   All notices required by this Part shall be mailed to the property
owner's last known post office address as recorded in the records or other
information of City of Reading, or such other address as it may be able to
obtain from the County Office of Assessment and Revision of Taxes.
   D.   Each notice as described above shall include the following:
      (1)   The type of tax or other charge, the date it became due and the
amount owed, including penalty and interest;
      (2)   A statement of City of Reading's intent to impose or assess
attorney fees within 30 days after the mailing of the first notice, or within
10 days after the mailing of the second notice;
      (3)   The manner in which the assessment or imposition of attorney fees
may be avoided by payment of the account; and
      (4)   The place of payment for accounts and the name and telephone number
of City of Reading's representative designated as responsible for collection
matters.
§ 378-205. Related action.
The proper officials of City of Reading are hereby authorized and empowered to
take such additional action as they may deem necessary or appropriate to
implement this Part.
§ 378-206. Appointment of Solicitor.
City of Reading appoints Michelle R. Portnoff, Esquire, as Solicitor for the
limited purpose of collecting delinquent municipal claims and hereby authorizes
her, and attorneys under her supervision, to sign any and all documents,
including tax and municipal claims, on behalf of the City.
Part 3
Collection of Delinquent Non-Real Estate Based Taxes
[Adopted 11-9-2009 by ord. No. 58-2009 (Ch. 24, Part 10, of the 2001 Code of
Ordinances)]
§ 378-301. Collection of fees; procedures.
   A.   The City hereby approves attorneys' fees for delinquent collections
associated with earned income tax, business privilege tax, business privilege
license fees, per capita tax, and other non-real estate based tax and
receivables. Said schedule is determined to be fair and reasonable compensation
for services rendered pursuant to the Pennsylvania Municipal Claims and Tax
Liens Act. 4
 
SCHEDULE OF FEES
Legal Services                    Fee for Services
                                  20% contingency fee, calculated against the
Collection of delinquent accounts base tax, penalty and interest of the
                                  delinquent account
 
   B.   There shall be added to said fee amounts the reasonable out-of-pocket
expenses incurred by legal counsel in connection with the collection of the
accounts, including Sheriff's and Prothonotary's costs.
   C.   The amount of attorneys' fees determined, as set forth above, shall be
added to the City's claim for each account.
   D.   The following collection procedures are hereby established:
      (1)   At least 30 days prior to assessing or imposing attorneys' fees in
connection with the collection of a delinquent account, City shall mail or
cause to be mailed, by certified mail, return receipt requested, a notice of
such intention to the taxpayer or other entity liable for the account (the
"account debtor").
      (2)   If the certified mail notice is undeliverable, then, at least 10
days prior to assessing or imposing such attorneys' fees, the City shall mail
or cause to be mailed, by first class mail, a second notice to such account
debtor.
      (3)   All notices required by this section shall be mailed to the account
debtor's last known post office address as recorded in the records or other
information of the City, or such other address as it may be able to obtain.
      (4)   Each notice, as described above, shall include the following:
         (a)   The type of tax or other charge, the date it became due, and the
amount owed, including penalty and interest.
         (b)   A statement of the City's intent to impose or assess attorneys'
fees within 30 days after mailing of the first notice, or within 10 days after
the mailing of the second notice.
         (c)   The manner in which the assessment or imposition of attorneys'
fees may be avoided by payment of the account.
         (d)   The place of payment for accounts and the name and telephone
number of the City representative designated as responsible for collection
matters.
4.   Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 7101 et seq.
§ 378-302. Empowerment of officials.
The proper officials of the City are hereby authorized and empowered to take
such additional action as they may deem necessary and appropriate to implement
this Schedule of Attorneys' Fees.
Chapter 387
NOISE
§
387-101.   Intent and purpose.
§
387-102.   Definitions.
§
387-103.   Noise disturbance prohibited.
§
387-104.   Specified prohibited acts.
§
387-105.   Motor vehicle prohibitions.
§
387-106.   Prima facie violation.
§
387-107.   Exemptions.
§
387-108.   Enforcement.
§
387-109.   Violations and penalties.
[HISTORY: Adopted by the City Council of the City of Reading 10-28-1996 by Ord.
No. 33-1996 (Ch. 10, Part 2, of the 2001 Code of Ordinances). Amendments noted
where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Animals — See
Ch. 141.
For noise disturbances in parks, preserves and other property owned by the City
or its agencies, please refer to
Chapter 396 Parks and Recreation, Parts 304, 305 and 312.
STATE LAW REFERENCES
Preventing noises — See 53 P.S. § 37403(25).
§ 387-101. Intent and purpose.
Council finds that excessive levels of sound are detrimental to the physical,
mental, and social well-being of the people as well as to their comfort, living
conditions, general welfare and safety, and being therefore a public health and
welfare hazard, hereby declares it to be necessary to provide for the greater
control and more effective regulation of excessive sound and the sources of
excessive sound within the City.
§ 387-102. Definitions.
The following words, terms, and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have
the meaning ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly
indicates a different meaning.
   CONSTRUCTION OPERATION — The erection, repair, renovation, demolition or
removal of any building or structure; and the excavation, filling, grading, and
regulation of lots in connection therewith.
   EMERGENCY — Any occurrence or set of circumstances involving actual or
imminent physical trauma or property damage.
   EMERGENCY WORK — Any work performed for the purpose of preventing or
alleviating the physical trauma or property damage threatened or caused by an
emergency.
   MUFFLER OR SOUND-DISSIPATIVE DEVICE — A device designed or used for
decreasing or abating the level of sound escaping from an engine or machinery
system.
   NOISE — Any sound which annoys or disturbs humans or which causes or tends
to cause an adverse psychological or physiological effect on humans.
   NOISE DISTURBANCE — Any sound which:
   A.   Endangers or injures the safety or health of humans or animals.
   B.   Annoys or disturbs a reasonable person of normal sensitivities.
   C.   Endangers or injures a personal or real property.
   D.   Is audible on a public street for a distance of 50 feet from the place
or origin of such sound or noise.
   PERSON — Any individual, association, partnership or corporation, and
includes any officer, employee, department, agency or instrumentality of a
state or any political subdivision of a state. Whenever used in any clause
prescribing and imposing a penalty, person includes the individual members,
partners, officers and managers, or any of them, of partnerships and
associations, and as to corporation, the officers and managers thereof or any
of them.
   POWERED MODEL VEHICLE — Any self-propelled airborne, waterborne or landborne
plane, vessel or vehicle, which is not designed to carry persons including, but
not limited to, any model airplane, boat, car or rocket.
   PROPERTY LINE (BOUNDARY) — An imaginary line drawn through the points of
contact of adjoining lands, apartments, condominiums, townhouses and duplexes
owned, rented or leased by different persons, a demarcation or a line of
separation of properties, and also, for any two or more buildings sharing
common grounds, the line drawn midway between any two such buildings. All areas
devoted to public right-of-way shall be deemed to be across the property line.
For the purpose of this regulation, the property line includes all points on a
plane formed by projecting the property line in a manner deemed appropriate by
the enforcing police officer.
   PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY — Any street, avenue, boulevard, highway, sidewalk,
alley or similar place which is owned or controlled by a governmental entity.
   PUBLIC SPACE — Any real property or structures thereon which are owned or
controlled by a governmental entity.
   REAL PROPERTY — All land whether publicly or privately owned, whether
improved or not improved, with or without structures, exclusive of any areas
devoted to public right-of-way.
   SOUND — An oscillation in pressure, particle displacement, particle velocity
or other physical parameter, in a medium with internal forces that causes
compression and rarefaction of that medium, or the superposition of such
propagated oscillation which evokes an auditory sensation. The description of
sound may include any characteristics of such sound, including duration,
intensity and frequency.
§ 387-103. Noise disturbance prohibited.
No person shall make, continue or cause to be made or continued any noise
disturbance, nor shall any person suffer, allow or permit any noise disturbance
to be made or continued from or at any property, whether real or personal, that
is subject to such person's right to control.
§ 387-104. Specified prohibited acts.
[Amended 7-11-2022 by Ord. No. 64-2022]
The following acts, and the causing thereof, are declared to be noise
disturbances and therefore in violation of this chapter. For noise disturbances
in parks, preserves and other property owned by the City or its agencies,
please refer to
Chapter 396 Parks and Recreation, Parts 304, 305 and 312.
   A.   Radios, television sets, musical instruments and similar devices.
Operating, playing or permitting the operation or playing of any radio,
television, phonograph, drum, musical instrument, sound amplifier, automobile
radio, automobile stereo or high fidelity equipment, disc or tape player,
loudspeaker or other similar device, not in connection with the lawful
operation of an emergency vehicle such as an ambulance, police or fire vehicle
nor in connection with a lawfully permitted parade, public assembly, or other
activity for which a permit is issued by the duly constituted legal authority,
or similar device which produces, reproduces or amplifies sound:
      (1)   At any time in such a manner as to cause a noise disturbance across
a property line (boundary), or between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. so
as to be plainly audible across a property line (boundary); or which is audible
on a public street for a distance of 50 feet from the place or origin of such
sound or noise.
      (2)   In such a manner as to create a noise disturbance across a property
line (boundary) or at 50 feet from such device, whichever is less, when the
device is operated in or on a motor vehicle, or hand carried, on a public
right-of-way or public space.
      (3)   In such a manner as to create a noise disturbance to any person
other than the operator of the device, when operated by an passenger on a
common carrier.
   B.   Yelling or shouting. Engaging in loud or raucous yelling, shouting,
hooting, whistling or singing:
      (1)   On the public streets between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m.
      (2)   At any time or place in such a manner as to create a noise
disturbance.
   C.   Construction tools or equipment. Operating or permitting the operation
of any tools or equipment used in construction operations, drilling or
demolition work:
      (1)   Between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. the following day on
weekdays and Saturdays or at any time on Sundays or legal holidays, such that
the sound therefore creates a noise disturbance across a residential real
property line (boundary), except for emergency work.
      (2)   This Subsection C shall not apply to the use of domestic power
tools as hereinafter provided in Subsection D hereof.
   D.   Domestic power tools. Operating or permitting the operation of any
mechanically powered saw, drill, sander, grinder, lawn or garden tool,
snowblower or similar device used outdoors in residential areas between the
hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. so as to cause a noise disturbance across a
residential property line (boundary) except in an emergency.
   E.   Loading and unloading. Loading, unloading, opening, closing or other
handling of boxes, crates, containers, building materials, garbage cans, or
similar objects between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. the following day
in such a manner as to cause a noise disturbance across a residential property
line (boundary). This Subsection E shall not apply to municipal or utility
services in or about the public right-of-way.
   F.   Animals and birds. Owning, possessing, harboring or controlling any
animal or bird which howls, barks, meows, squawks, or makes other sounds
continuously and/or incessantly for a period of 10 minutes or makes such noise
intermittently for 1/2 hour or more to the disturbance of any person at any
time of the day or night regardless of whether the animal or bird is situated
in or upon private property; provided, however, that at the time the animal or
bird is making such noise, no person is trespassing or threatening to trespass
upon private property in or upon which the animal or bird is situated or for
any other legitimate cause which teased or provoked the animal or bird.
   G.   Powered model vehicles. Operating or permitting the operation of
powered model vehicles so as to create a noise disturbance across a residential
property line (boundary) between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m.
   H.   Street sales. Offering for sale or selling by shouting or outcry or by
any other amplified or unamplified sound within any residential or commercial
area of the City.
   I.   Tampering. The following acts or the causing thereof are prohibited:
      (1)   The removal or rendering inoperative by any person, other than for
the purposes of maintenance, repair or replacement, of any muffler or sound
dissipative device or element of design or noise label of any product.
      (2)   The use of a product which has had a muffler or sound dissipative
device or element of design or noise labeled removed or rendered inoperative,
with knowledge that such action has occurred.
   J.   Vehicle, motorboat or aircraft repairs and testing. Repairing,
rebuilding, or testing any motor vehicle, motorcycle, or aircraft in such a
manner as to cause a noise disturbance across a residential real property line
(boundary).
§ 387-105. Motor vehicle prohibitions.
   A.   Motor vehicles and motorcycles on public right-of-way. No person shall
operate or cause to be operated a public or private motor vehicle or
motorcycle, or any equipment attached to such a vehicle, on a public right-of-
way at any time in such a manner that the sound level emitted by the motor
vehicle or motorcycle, or any equipment that causes noise disturbances in
violation of this chapter (see noise and noise disturbance definition herein)..
[Amended 7-11-2022 by Ord. No. 64-2022]
   B.   Standing motor vehicles. No person shall operate or permit the
operation of any motor vehicle or any auxiliary equipment attached to such a
vehicle for a period longer than 15 minutes in any hour while the vehicle is
stationary, for reasons other than traffic congestion, anywhere within 150 feet
of any residence in such a manner as to cause a noise disturbance across a
residential property line (boundary).
   C.   Unnecessary horn blowing. No person shall at any time sound the horn or
other warning device of a vehicle except when absolutely necessary as a warning
while actually driving such vehicle.
   D.   Sound trucks. No person shall operate sound amplifying equipment
mounted on or attached to any motor vehicle at any time in such a manner as to
exceed the maximum permissible motor vehicle noise emissions as set forth in
Subsection A hereof.
   E.   The sensory mechanism used in connection with an automatic motor
vehicle protection device shall be adjusted to suppress false indications of
burglary or intrusion so that the device will not be activated by impulse or
vibration caused by any force not related to the alarms. All components
comprising such a device shall be maintained by the owner or lessee in good
repair to assure maximum reliability of operation. [Amended 8-10-1998 by Ord.
No. 26-1998]
§ 387-106. Prima facie violation.
[Amended 8-10-1998 by Ord. No. 26-1998; 7-11-2022 by Ord. No. 64-2022; 10-13-
2025 by Ord. No. 61-2025]
For noise disturbances in parks, preserves and other property owned by the City
or its agencies, please refer to
Chapter 396 Parks and Recreation, Parts 304, 305 and 312.
Prima facie evidence of a noise disturbance shall exist if the noise from any
of the acts prohibited in §§ 387-103 to 387-105:
   A.   A minimum of one resident located across a property line (boundary)
from the property on which the source of the noise is generated.
   B.   Solely witnessed/observed by a police officer when citing any section
hereunder.
§ 387-107. Exemptions.
[Amended 7-11-2022 by Ord. No. 64-2022]
For noise disturbances in parks, preserves and other property owned by the City
or its agencies, please refer to
Chapter 396 Parks and Recreation, Parts 304, 305 and 312.
The following sounds are exempted from the provisions of this chapter:
   A.   Amplified announcements. Stationary electronically amplified
announcements at athletic events, political events and civic events.
   B.   Blasting. Blasting, under proper permit. Such blasting may occur only
between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m., Monday through Friday, unless
specifically authorized by permit.
   C.   Concerts, etc. Band concerts, block parties, church carnivals or other
performances or similar activities publicly or privately sponsored and
presented in any public or private space outdoors provided that such activities
do not occur between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. and all necessary
permits as defined by City ordinances have been procured.
   D.   Emergency work. Sounds caused by the performance of emergency work, or
by the ordinary and accepted use of emergency apparatus and equipment.
   E.   Municipal and utility services. Sounds resulting from the repair or
replacement of any municipal or utility installation in or about the public
right-of-way.
   F.   School and public activities. Sounds not electronically amplified,
created by organized school-related programs, activities, athletic and
entertainment events, or other public programs, activities or events, other
than motor vehicle racing events.
   G.   Warning devices. Sounds made by warning devices operating continuously
for three minutes or less except in the event of an actual emergency the time
limitation shall not apply.
   H.   Special permits. The Chief of the Department of Police, or his
designee, may, upon application, grant special permits for infrequent events or
activities.
§ 387-108. Enforcement.
[Amended 7-11-2022 by Ord. No. 64-2022; 3-13-2023 by Ord. No. 29-2023; 10-13-
2025 by Ord. No. 61-2025]
For noise disturbances in parks, preserves and other property owned by the City
or its agencies, please refer to
Chapter 396 Parks and Recreation, Parts 304, 305 and 312.
This chapter shall be enforced by the Police Department of the City and
providing the Police with the ability to impound vehicles owned or operated by
repeat offenders as provided in Chapter 576 Part 8 Immobilization and
Impoundment and to immediately seize any device(s) deemed to be the source of
the noise. The seized device shall be returned to the owner when evidence is
provided that the fine charged as per § 387-109.A. below was paid in full
without an appeal or the violation was dismissed or found not guilty.
§ 387-109. Violations and penalties.
[Amended 5-29-2001 by Ord. No. 14-2001; 7-11-2022 by Ord. No. 64-2022; 10-13-
2025 by Ord. No. 61-2025]
For noise disturbances in parks, preserves and other property owned by the City
or its agencies, please refer to
Chapter 396 Parks and Recreation, Parts 304, 305 and 312.
   A.   Whoever violates any provision of this chapter shall be, upon
conviction thereof, sentenced to pay a fine not less than $100 nor more than
$1,000 plus costs and, in default of payment of said fine and costs, to a term
of imprisonment not to exceed 30 days. Each day during which any person
violates any provision of this chapter shall constitute a separate offense.
   B.   This chapter and the foregoing penalties shall not be construed to
limit or deny the right of the City or any person to such equitable or other
remedies as may otherwise be available with or without process of law.
Chapter 396
PARKS AND RECREATION
Part 1
Firemen's Memorial Band Shell
§
396-101.   Permit application; compliance with laws; fee.
§
396-102.   Permit revocation.
§
396-103.   Fee; exceptions.
§
396-104.   Permit issuance.
§
396-105.   Electrical sound facilities.
§
396-106.   Permit form.
§
396-107.   Applicant to have permit in possession.
§
396-108.   Permit required for event.
§
396-109.   Permit required for use.
§
396-110.   Violations and penalties.
Part 2
Reserved
Part 3
Park Use
§
396-301.   Short title.
§
396-302.   Purpose.
§
396-303.   Definitions.
§
396-304.   Time of use.
§
396-305.    Rules of conduct.
§
396-306.   Use of bodies of water for fishing, boating, swimming, wading,
floating or ice skating.
§
396-307.   Use of roller skates, roller blades, skateboards.
§
396-308.   Geo-caching.
§
396-309.   Bicycles.
§
396-310.   Permits.
§
396-311.   Severability.
§
396-312.   Enforcement.
§
396-313.   Penalty.
Part 4
Public Private Partnerships
§
396-401.   Purpose.
§
396-402.   Definitions.
§
396-403.   Authorization.
§
396-404.   Public private partnership agreement.
§
396-405.   Qualifications of organizations.
§
396-406.   Notice to Council.
Part 5
Memorial Structures on Public Property
§
396-501.   Evaluation of proposed monuments, statuary, markers and plaques.
§
396-502.   Maintenance of existing memorial structures.
§
396-503.   Moratorium.
[HISTORY: Adopted by the City Council of the City of Reading as indicated in
part histories. Amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Animals — See
Ch. 141.
Part 1
Firemen's Memorial Band Shell
[Adopted 6-15-1949 by Ord. No. 27-1949 (Ch. 16, Part 3, of the 2001 Code of
Ordinances)]
§ 396-101. Permit application; compliance with laws; fee.
[Amended 6-13-1950 by Ord. No. 21-1950]
All persons or organizations seeking or desiring the use of the Firemen's
Memorial Band Shell in the City Park shall make application in writing to the
Director of the Department of Public Works, such application to be in the
following form:
   A.                                                                                                                                                   
   Name of applicant
   B.                                                                                                                                                   
   Location or P.O. Address
   C.                                                                                                                                                   
   Type of Organization — religious, recreational, musical, etc.
   D.                                                                                                                                                   
   Date and time of requested use of Band Shell — day of the month and hours of
the day
   E.                                                                                                                                                   
   Approximate number of participant in exercise — or number of members of
band, etc.
   F.                                                                                                                                                   
   Estimated attendance
   G.   The undersigned applicant for use of the Band Shell and the electrical
sound facilities of the City therein, makes this application by its duly
authorized agent and covenants, warrants and agrees that in the conducting of
any religious services or exercises or any functions held by the applicant, if
permit is granted to it, that it shall faithfully obey and observe the laws of
the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, that it shall not engage in conduct tending
to a breach of the peace, that its proceedings shall be free from slander as
the same is defined under the laws and decisions of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania; and further, that it and its servants, agents and employees shall
faithfully observe the laws of the United States of America.
   H.   The undersigned applicant makes request for a permit for the purpose,
or purposes, hereinbefore stated and for the date and time hereinbefore set
forth and tenders the permit fee to the Director of the Department of Public
Works and requests the issuance of a permit for the use of the Band Shell in
accordance with the representations set forth in this application.
[Amended 8-26-2013 by Ord. No. 35-2013]
     (Seal) Applicant
Authorized agent signing on behalf of organization
§ 396-102. Permit revocation.
The Director of the Department of Public Works is authorized and directed to
revoke the permit issued to the applicant upon any violation of the conditions
set forth and contained in the application.
§ 396-103. Fee; exceptions. 1
The fee set forth in
Chapter 212, Fees, shall be paid for the use of the Firemen's Memorial Band
Shell for its use between the hours of 6:00 a.m. and 11:00 p.m., for each day,
or any part of a day; provided, however, that graduation exercises for any
grammar school or high school, or any band concert, shall be exempt from the
payment of such fee.
1.   Editor's Note: Amended during codification (see
Ch. 1, General Provisions, Part 2).
§ 396-104. Permit issuance.
The Director of the Department of Public Works, upon receipt of an application
in the form hereinbefore prescribed in §
396-101, shall issue a permit to the applicant for the date so requested.
However, if more than one application is made for the same date, the Director
shall issue a permit to the applicant whose application is first received by
him.
§ 396-105. Electrical sound facilities.
The Director of the Department of Public Works, upon issuance of a permit for
the use of the Firemen's Memorial Band Shell shall make available the
electrical sound facilities, situate therein, for the use of the holder of the
permit during the hours specified on the application and permit.
§ 396-106. Permit form.
The permit to be issued by the Director of the Department of Public Works shall
be in the following form:
   PERMIT FOR USE OF THE FIREMEN'S MEMORIAL BAND SHELL, CITY PARK, READING,
PENNSYLVANIA
Permission is hereby granted to in accordance with application, in writing,
received and approved by the undersigned, for the use of the Firemen's Memorial
Band Shell, City Park, Reading, Pennsylvania, and the use of the sound
facilities, owned by the City of Reading, situate therein, for the ______ day
of A.D. __________, between the hours of ______m. and _______ m.
   CITY OF READING
By _______________________________
Director of the Department of Public Works
§ 396-107. Applicant to have permit in possession.
The permit issued, under and in accordance with this Part, shall be in the
possession of the applicant or an accredited representative thereof, in
attendance at the function or exercise, and be exhibited upon request to any
police officer or any park guard employed by the City during the hours
specified and the date set forth on the permit.
§ 396-108. Permit required for event.
No person, or persons, firm, association or corporation shall hold, carry on or
participate in any exhibit, meeting, ceremony, service, religious or otherwise,
in or about the Firemen's Memorial Band Shell, without having first obtained
the permit required under the terms of this Part.
§ 396-109. Permit required for use.
No use of the Firemen's Memorial Band Shell or any portion thereof, shall be
permitted to any person, or persons, firm, association or corporation, without
the obtaining of the permit required by this Part.
§ 396-110. Violations and penalties.
[Amended 5-29-2001 by Ord. No. 14-2001 2 ]
Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any provision of this Part,
shall be, upon conviction thereof, sentenced to pay a fine of not more than
$1,000 plus costs and, in default of payment of said fine and cost, to a term
of imprisonment not to exceed 30 days. Each day that a violation of this Part
continues shall constitute a separate offense.
2.   Editor's Note: Amended during codification (see
Ch. 1, General Provisions, Part 2).
Part 2
Reserved
[Repealed 4-11-2022 By Ord. No. 31-2022]
Part 3
Park Use
[Adopted 5-12-2003 By Ord. No. 14-2003(Ch. 16, Part 1, Of The 2001 Code Of
Ordinances); Amended in full 8-14-2017 by Ord. No. 77-2017, 8-27-2018 by Ord.
No. 52-2018, and 5-13-2019 by Ord. No. 14-2019]
§ 396-301. Short title.
This Part shall be known and may be cited as the "Reading Park Code."
§ 396-302. Purpose.
The purpose of this Part is to create an atmosphere conducive to the enjoyment
of, and to protect the substantial public investment in, the City's parks.
§ 396-303. Definitions.
[Amended 4-11-2022 by Ord. No. 31-2022; 7-11-2022 by Ord. No. 63-2022]
   A.   Intent. For the purpose of this Part, all words used in the present
tense include the future tense. All words in the singular number include the
plural number, unless the natural construction of the word indicates otherwise.
The word "shall" is mandatory and not directory.
   B.   As used in this Part, certain words are defined as follows:
   CITY — The City of Reading, including but not limited to the Public Works
Director or their designee and the Police Chief or other law enforcement agency
approved by City Council.
   DIRECTOR OF PUBLIC WORKS — The official appointed and confirmed and/or his
designee so designated, or his authorized representatives.
   NATURAL AREA — A geographical area (as in a city) having a physical and
cultural individuality developed through natural growth rather than design or
planning.
   PARK — Any area zoned as preservation, park, preserve, playground,
recreation center, swimming pool, watershed including the Mt. Penn Preserve
area or other place devoted to active or passive recreational use owned by the
City of Reading and any of its agencies. During times of park closure, Skyline
Dr. will remain open to vehicular traffic but said traffic must continue
through the Preserve and not stop, stand or park within it.
   PEDALCYCLE — Any wheeled vehicle propelled manually by pedaling without the
use of a motor (unicycle, bicycle, tricycle, etc.)
   PERMIT — The written authorization, issued by the City of Reading, to
conduct activities governed by this Part or
Chapter 576.
   PERSON — Any individual, firm, partnership, corporation or association, or
any agent, assistant, employee or representative thereof.
   SOLICITING — Persons selling goods or services by sample or taking orders
for future delivery with or without accepting advance payment for the goods.
Persons seeking any form contributions.
   VEHICLE — Any conveyance (except baby carriages and motorized wheel chairs)
including motor vehicles, buses, trailers of all types, campers, motorized
bicycles, snowmobiles, all-terrain vehicles (ATVs), pushcarts or vehicles
propelled by other than muscular power.
   VENDING — Selling or trading any item or service.
§ 396-304. Time of use.
[Amended 7-11-2022 by Ord. No. 63-2022]
   A.   Parks are open 7:00 a.m. until 7:00 p.m. prevailing time from October 1
through April 30 and 7:00 a.m. until 9:00 p.m. prevailing time from May 1
through September 30, except with a permit. During hours the park area is
closed, law enforcement authorities described herein shall have the ability to
clear the area of all parties and property.
   B.   This shall not apply to City personnel engaged in the performance of
their duties or to those having a permit or authorization from the Public Works
Director, or his designee, Police Department, Pagoda Foundation or the Reading
Recreation Commission to conduct activities during closed hours.
§ 396-305. Rules of conduct.
[Amended 12-27-2021 by Ord. 97-2021; 7-11-2022 by Ord. No. 63- 2022; 3-13-2023
by Ord. No. 29-2023]
No person shall do any of the acts hereinafter described within the limits of
any City parks, playgrounds, preserves and public spaces:
   A.   General uses and activities. Prohibitions.
      (1)   Disfigure, disturb, injure, tamper with, move or remove any flower,
fruit, plant, tree, shrub, bench, apparatus, public sign, notice, bridge,
table, fireplace, railing, paving or paving materials, monument, sculpture,
stake, post, or other boundary marker, or other property whatsoever.
      (2)   Move or remove any wood, turf, grass, soil, rock, sand or gravel in
any way to injure the natural beauty of the area.
      (3)   Climb, stand, roller skate, roller blade, skateboard or sit upon
monuments, sculptures, vases, planters, fountains, railings, fences or upon any
other property not designated or customarily used for such purposes.
      (4)   Hunt for, shoot at, chase, catch or kill, or attempt to shoot at,
chase, catch or kill, with or without dogs, any bird or animal except at Lake
Ontelaunee where the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania Game Commission has been
authorized to control game propagation and hunting, except that no hunting
shall be allowed within 1,000 feet of any picnic area; nor shall one remove or
have in one's possession the young of any wild animal, the eggs or nest, or
young wild creature.
      (5)   Release any waterfowl, bird, animal, or fish in any City park,
playground, preserve or public space.
      (6)   Throw stones or projectiles to injure any public property or to
injure the natural beauty of the park.
      (7)   Dump or discard any refuse including yard waste, other waste
materials or litter of any kind, junk, dead animal or offensive matter of any
kind except in the containers provided by the City for the deposit of such
items. Where receptacles are not provided, all such rubbish or waste shall be
carried away from the park, preserve or playground by the person responsible
for its presence, and properly disposed of elsewhere.
      (8)   Post or erect any bills, notices or advertising matter of any kind
without a permit.
      (9)   Sell or offer for sale any merchandise, food, article or thing
whatsoever, without a permit.
      (10)   Violate any posted rules for, or to misuse, any park, preserve,
picnic area, court, playfield, swimming pool or other recreational area, and
public spaces.
      (11)   Engage in camping, archery, golfing, or horseback riding. Camping
includes overnight stays in a tent or recreational vehicle. Horseback riding is
allowed in parts of the Mt. Penn Preserve area.
   (12)   Have any ceremony or any musical, theatrical or other entertainment
event without a permit. Any device used to broadcast music or sound without the
required permit and within the period of time specified may be seized, in
accordance with §
396-312 and may be subject to forfeit by the responding law enforcement
authorities for violating this chapter, and any vehicle involved therewith may
be subject to removal or impoundment as per
Chapter 576 Part 8 Immobilization and Impoundment.
      (13)   Engage in any unlawful gaming or have possession of any instrument
or device for gambling without a permit.
      (14)   Bring food trucks or carts or ice cream trucks or carts into a
park without valid Health and Business licenses and a permit.
      (15)   Consume, drink or have possession or custody of any alcoholic
beverages including malt or brewed beverages or vinous or spirituous liquors
except where a valid Commonwealth of Pennsylvania Liquor Control Board license
is displayed.
      (16)   Solicit contributions for any purpose, whether public or private,
except with a permit.
      (17)   Play, engage, or take part in any game or competitive sport for
money or other valuable thing.
      (18)   Engage in any disorderly conduct or behavior tending to breach the
public peace. Any device or equipment used to broadcast sound or music without
the required permit and/or breach the public peace may be seized in accordance
with §
396-312 and may be subject to forfeit by the responding law enforcement
authorities for violating this chapter.
      (19)   Discharge firearms, paintball guns, air or spring rifles or
slings.
      (20)   Set off any fireworks without a permit. Permits for the use of
fireworks must be obtained from the Fire Marshal or his designee. Permits will
ensure that fireworks are properly conducted and supervised in designated
areas.
      (21)   Operate a licensed or unlicensed motor vehicle of any type,
including motor bikes, mopeds, motorcycles, ATVs and snowmobiles.
      (22)   Stand or park any vehicle, except at designated locations.
   B.   Control of pets. Pets must be on a leash which is no longer than six
(6) feet and must be under the control of the owner or temporary custodian
thereof. All City health codes including Reading Code of Ordinances
Chapter 141 Animals and
Chapter 288 Health & Safety, Part 1 Health Code, Section
288-111 Animal Maintenance governing animal maintenance shall apply including
cleaning up and removing all waste.
   C.   Use of fire.
      (1)   Fires are permitted only in a City owned non-portable fireplace or
picnic stove or in a privately owned stove or similar device designed
specifically for the cooking of food. Fire is prohibited in the Lake Ontelaunee
watershed area.
      (2)   All smoking materials must be disposed of properly.
      (3)   Bonfires or any form of open burning are prohibited without a
Special Events Permit.
      (4)   All fires shall be continuously under the care and direction of the
user beginning with the time it is kindled until it is extinguished. Embers
must be disposed of properly.
§ 396-306. Use of bodies of water for fishing, boating, swimming, wading,
floating or ice skating.
   A.   Ice fishing is prohibited at Lake Ontelaunee.
   B.   Only persons having attained 16 years of age may fish at Bernhart's
Reservoir.
   C.   Fishing in or upon the entire premises known as Egelman's Park is
prohibited.
   D.   Using a boat upon any body of water owned or controlled by the City is
prohibited.
   E.   Boats may not be launched onto the Schuylkill River or Tulpehocken
Creek from the banks of the City-owned or controlled riverfront unless such
boat or craft can be hand-carried over City-owned or controlled property.
   F.   Swimming, bathing, wading or floating at any place except in a public
swimming or wading pool is prohibited.
   G.   Ice skating is prohibited.
§ 396-307. Use of Roller Skates, Roller Blades, Skateboards.
Roller skates, roller blades, and skateboards shall stay on pathways and must
yield to pedestrians on pathways. Also see
Chapter 396 Parks and Recreation, Part 5 Memorial Structures on Public
Property, Section
396-502 Maintenance of existing memorial structures, Letter D Vandalism.
§ 396-308. Geo-Caching.
   A.   Geo-caching is allowed on public property.
   B.   The following guidelines apply to all geocaches placed within City of
Reading parks and recreation facilities:
      (1)   All geocaches must be registered at www.geocaching.com.
      (2)   There should be no earth disturbance or vegetative impact to any
site, nor should the cache be readily discernable by the general public.
      (3)   All cache seekers and cache owners must abide by park hours and all
other park rules and regulations. Cache owners should also review and follow
the listing requirements and guidelines at: http://www.geocaching.com/about/
guidelines.aspx.
      (4)   The City of Reading and the Reading Recreation Commission, its
officers, board of directors, managing agents and their personnel or
representatives do not assume responsibility or liability for injury to any
person or damage to any property sustained as a result of the placement or
existence of the geocache, or use of the geocache by any person with any device
or for any purpose. Participants in geocaching also absolve the City of
Reading, its officials, and its employees of any liability.
      (5)   Cache(s) shall not be placed in PVC pipe, ammo cans, or have any
military markings. Cache owners should use their discretion to determine what
would be a permissible container to house the cache contents.
      (6)   The cache may not be placed within natural areas, wild plant
sanctuaries, stream banks, riparian zones, wetlands, historical sites,
exemplary nature communities, ecologically sensitive areas, unique geological
features, dam structures, or unsafe areas.
      (7)   A cache may remain at the approved site for no more than three (3)
years, at which time it must be removed, and the site restored to its original
condition.
      (8)   Distracting, nuisance or otherwise inappropriate geocaches on
public or City-owned property will be removed and treated as abandoned
property.
      (9)   The placement of “Premium Member Only” geocaches will not be
permitted in any City park, recreation facilities, or publicly owned
properties. These caches require a monthly fee to access their coordinates and
therefore make it impossible for the Commission and the City to monitor their
locations. All caches on public lands shall be available to the public without
a fee.
      (10)   Cache owner shall delete site location(s) from all publications
and/or website(s) within seven (7) days of removal from their geocache sites.
      (11)   Geocaching is a privilege that may be revoked if policy and
guidelines are not met. The City of Reading and the Recreation Commission
reserve the right, at their discretion, to remove a geocache when it deems the
geocache conflicts with park development, infrastructure repairs, maintenance,
natural ecosystems, historical resources, or any other reason.
      (12)   It is mutually agreed that the geocache and its contents have no
monetary value, and will not contain hazardous, illegal or pornographic
materials of any kind.
      (13)   Additional regulations may be set by the City and the Recreation
Commission and approved by City Council by ordinance.
   C.   All rules and regulations as stipulated above and provided by the City
and the Reading Recreation Commission must be followed.
§ 396-309. Bicycles.
All bicycles shall be operated in compliance with all provisions relating to
pedalcycles as specified in the Pennsylvania Vehicle Code.
§ 396-310. Permits.
[Amended 4-11-2022 by Ord. No. 31-2022]
   A.   All permits issued by the City under this part, as defined herein,
Recreation Commission, and/or Pagoda Foundation shall be subject to park rules
and regulations and a person to whom such permits may be granted shall be bound
by such rules and regulations as fully as though the same were inserted in such
permits.
   B.   Any person to whom such permits may be granted shall be liable for any
loss, damage or injury sustained by reason of negligence of such person.
   C.   As a condition of issuing a permit, the City, as defined herein,
Recreation Commission, and/or Pagoda Foundation may require a permit applicant
to secure liability insurance, to post bond or to make any other guarantees the
City considers reasonable.
   D.   No person shall conduct any activities for which a permit is required
without first securing a valid permit to conduct such activities.
   E.   Permits must be produced and exhibited upon request of any authorized
person who shall desire to inspect the permit for the purpose of enforcing
compliance with exceptions for permitted special events.
   F.   No person shall make any alteration to a permit.
§ 396-311. Severability.
If any provision, paragraph, word, section, or subsection of this ordinance is
invalidated by a court of competent jurisdiction, remaining provisions shall
not be affected and shall remain in full force and effect.
§ 396-312. Enforcement.
[Amended 7-11-2022 by Ord. No. 63-2022]
The Park Code of the City of Reading shall be enforced by City of Reading
Police Department. The provisions of the Park Code may be enforced by the
Central Berks Police Department and the State Police in all areas owned by the
City of Reading including the Mount Penn Preserve.
Any device, equipment or property used to broadcast sound or music without the
required permit that disturbs or breaches the public peace may be seized by the
law enforcement agency as per §
396-305 Rules of conduct subsections A.(12) and A.(18) herein.
The device, equipment or property seized may be returned to the owner as per
the policy of the law enforcement agency. However, on the third citation and
seizure, the seized device, equipment property will not be returned to the
owner. If the device, equipment or property remains unclaimed for 45 days, the
device, equipment or property shall be deemed forfeited and disposed of by the
responding law enforcement agency.
§ 396-313. Penalty.
Whoever violates or fails to comply with the provisions of this Part, or any
regulations made thereunder shall be, upon conviction thereof, sentenced to pay
a fine of not more than $1,000 plus costs and, in default of payment of said
fine and costs, to a term of imprisonment not to exceed 30 days. Each day that
a violation continues shall constitute a separate offense.
Part 4
Public Private Partnerships
[Adopted 5-14-2012 by Ord. No. 48-2012]
§ 396-401. Purpose.
The purpose of this Part is to authorize the City to enter into public private
partnerships with private organizations for the maintenance of City parks.
Nothing in this Part shall be construed as prohibiting the City from entering
into such partnerships for the maintenance of other City facilities or for any
other purpose authorized by Pennsylvania Statute, City Charter, or other law.
§ 396-402. Definitions.
For the purposes of this Part:
   ORGANIZATION — An association, corporation or other entity having a formal
structure.
   PARK — Includes athletic fields, tennis courts, swimming pools, playgrounds
or other park area, facility or group of such facilities under the control,
maintenance and management of the City of Reading.
   PUBLIC PRIVATE PARTNERSHIP AGREEMENT or AGREEMENT — Includes any contractual
agreement or concession, or both, for the maintenance of a City park.
   PUBLIC WORKS DIRECTOR — The Director of the City of Reading Public Works
Department.
§ 396-403. Authorization.
   A.   The City Public Works Department may enter into a public private
partnership agreement with an organization to maintain a City park or
designated portion thereof.
   B.   Any organization selected to maintain a City park shall be selected
pursuant to the procedures and requirements as outlined and contained in this
Part.
§ 396-404. Public private partnership agreement.
   A.   An agreement shall be in the form as established by the City and shall
contain:
      (1)   The name of the organization.
      (2)   The address of the organization.
      (3)   The name of the contact person within the organization.
      (4)   The address of the contact person.
      (5)   The phone number of the contact person.
      (6)   The name of the park/playground/facility.
      (7)   The maintenance to be performed.
      (8)   The maintenance schedule.
   B.   A public private partnership agreement entered into between the City
and an organization pursuant to this Part shall expressly provide that:
      (1)   The supervision and control over the maintenance of the park rests
with the City and any structural or landscaping modifications to the park and
any structure therein is prohibited without the prior consent of the City;
      (2)   The City shall have the right to terminate the agreement at the
City's sole discretion if the organization is not satisfactorily performing its
maintenance responsibilities or complying with any provision of the agreement;
      (3)   The park shall remain open and be accessible to all members of the
public during park hours;
      (4)   No fees may be charged for the use of the park or any facility
therein other than the fees established by ordinance;
      (5)   The agreement does not constitute a lease; and
      (6)   The agreement shall conform and be subject to all applicable
ordinances and policies of the City, the rule-making authority of the City's
departments and any trust requirements, restrictions or conditions.
§ 396-405. Qualifications of organizations.
   A.   The City shall specify the minimum qualifications of an organization
and its officers and employees, including previous experience in maintaining a
park or comparable facility, the organization's financial stability including
funds available to the organization, a business plan indicating how it will
fund the maintenance of the facility, and any other factors that indicate its
ability to adequately maintain the park.
   B.   The purpose of the organization shall be consistent with the
maintenance of the park for public benefit.
§ 396-406. Notice to Council.
Prior to executing an agreement for a public private partnership pursuant to
this Part, City Council shall approve said agreement via ordinance/resolution
which shall include a copy of the agreement.
Part 5
Memorial Structures on Public Property
[Adopted 11-12-2013 by Ord. No. 55-20113; amended in its entirety 1-23-2017 by
Ord. No. 7-2017 and 1-28-2019 by Ord. No. 1-2019]
§ 396-501. Evaluation of proposed monuments, statuary, markers and plaques.
   A.   Any organization or entity wishing to place upon public property any
artwork, artwork installation, monument, statue, marker or plaque (the memorial
structure) for the purpose of memorializing an individual, group, or event,
shall submit such proposal to the Director of Public Works. The Public Works
Director shall review the proposal with the mayor.
   B.   A Memorial Review Committee (the MRC) shall have the responsibility of
reviewing each such proposal. The Committee shall be composed of the Historic
Preservation Specialist, a City Planner, the Public Works Operations Division
Manager, the City Clerk and the Director of the Berks County Office of Veterans
Affairs. The Director of Public Works shall appoint a MRC Chairperson from the
membership and provide the MRC with the mayor’s input about the proposal.
   C.   The MRC shall provide a written evaluation of each proposal based on
the following factors: the suitability of the proposed location of the memorial
structure; the appropriateness of the design thereof; the appropriateness and
anticipated longevity of the proposed material comprising the memorial; the
proposers' plan and ability for long-term maintenance and upkeep of the
memorial; and provisions for insuring the memorial against damage, vandalism
and disrepair. In addition, if the proposed location of a memorial structure
has been subject to a master- or comprehensive-planning initiative, the
proposed memorial should be in comport with any such valid plan. The MRC shall
provide this written evaluation to City Council with a recommendation.
   D.   At its discretion, the MRC may request the approval for or advice of a
proposed memorial structure from the Planning Commission.
   E.   Any proposed memorial structure located within or immediately adjacent
to a designated historic or conservation district shall be subject to the
advance approval of the Historic Architectural Review Board.
   F.   Approval of the placement or relocation of any memorial structure shall
require the approval of City Council.
§ 396-502. Maintenance of existing memorial structures.
   A.   It shall be the policy of the City of Reading that the maintenance and
upkeep of any memorial structure shall be the responsibility of the entity
placing such approved structure on public property. A plan for the perpetual
care thereof shall be specified in a memorandum of understanding to which the
Director of Public Works shall be a party.
   B.   In the event a memorial structure falls into disrepair and is not
promptly repaired, at the sole discretion of the Director of Public Works, the
City may remove such structure and dispose of it.
   C.   The MRC shall have purview over existing memorial structures and may
promulgate policies and programs that encourage their perpetual care, upkeep
and repair with little or no public expense.
   D.   Vandalism to any memorial structure or the grounds that the structure
sits on shall be enforced by the PA Crimes Code 18 Pa. C.S. §3304 Criminal
Mischief, §3307 Institutional Vandalism and §5509 Desecration, Theft or Sale of
Venerated Objects.
   E.   The following shall be prohibited:
      (1)   The use of any scooter, skateboard, rollerskates, pedalcycle, or
any other human powered or motor powered vehicle or conveyance on any memorial
structure or on the grounds where any memorial structure sits located on public
property, or using any object or substance that could cause damage to any
memorial structure or the grounds where the structure sits located on public
property. An offense under this section is a summary offense punishable by a
fine not to exceed $500.
§ 396-503. Moratorium.
The Council of the City of Reading places a moratorium on the placement of any
additional memorial structure on public lands, unless the structure is reviewed
and recommended by the MRC and approved by City Council resolution.
Chapter 403
PAWNBROKERS
§
403-101.   Report of articles in pawn or purchased.
§
403-102.   Violations and penalties.
[HISTORY: Adopted by the City Council of the City of Reading 12-24-1913 by Ord.
No. 18a-1913 (Ch. 13, Part 13, of the 2001 Code of Ordinances). Amendments
noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Licenses and permits — See
Ch. 339.
STATE LAW REFERENCES
Pawnbrokers Licences Act — See 63 P.S. § 281-1 et seq.
§ 403-101. Report of articles in pawn or purchased.1
All pawnbrokers, junk dealers and dealers in secondhand goods shall make out
and deliver to the Chief of Police, at his office, every day before the hour of
10:00 a.m., or upon demand, a legible and accurate report of all articles taken
in pawn or purchased during the preceding day. Such report shall contain an
accurate description of all articles taken in pawn or purchased, together with
the amount loaned on or paid for such articles.
1.   Editor's Note: Amended during codification (see
Ch. 1, General Provisions, Part 2).
§ 403-102. Violations and penalties.
[Amended 8-24-1983 by Ord. No. 32-1983; 5-29-2001 by Ord. No. 14-2001]
Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any provision of this chapter
shall be, upon conviction thereof, sentenced to pay a fine of not more than
$600 plus costs and, in default of payment of said fine and costs, to a term of
imprisonment not to exceed 30 days.
Chapter 410
PEDDLING AND SOLICITING
Publisher's Note: This Chapter has been AMENDED by Charter Amendment. The text
of the amendment will be incorporated below when the ordinance is codified.
Part 1
Transient Retail Merchants
§
410-101.   License required.
§
410-102.   Definitions.
§
410-103.   License application.
§
410-104.   Investigation and license issuance.
§
410-105.   Bond.
§
410-106.   Service of process.
§
410-107.   License to be displayed.
§
410-108.   License fees; expiration.
§
410-109.   License transfer.
§
410-110.   Exceptions.
§
410-111.   Loud noises and speaking devices.
§
410-112.   Enforcement by police.
§
410-113.   Records and complaints.
§
410-114.   License revocation.
§
410-115.   Appeals.
§
410-116.   Violations and penalties.
Part 2
Canvassing and Soliciting
§
410-201.   Purpose.
§
410-202.   Definitions.
§
410-203.   Permit requirements.
§
410-204.   Responsibility for payment of taxes.
§
410-205.   Appeals.
§
410-206.   Violations and penalties; enforcement.
§
410-207.   Exemptions.
[HISTORY: Adopted by the City Council of the City of Reading as indicated in
part histories. Amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Licenses and permits — See
Ch. 339.
Sales — See
Ch. 453.
STATE LAW REFERENCES
Power to regulate and license transient retail merchants — See 53 P.S. § 37620
et seq.
Farmers, insurance business and sample sales exempted — See 53 P.S. § 37610 et
seq.
Part 1
Transient Retail Merchants
[Adopted 1-14-1953 by Ord. No. 62-1952 (Ch. 13, Part 3, of the 2001 Code of
Ordinances)]
§ 410-101. License required.
No transient merchant, itinerant merchant or itinerant vendor as defined in §
410-102 shall engage in such business within the City without first obtaining a
license therefor in compliance with the provisions of this Part.
§ 410-102. Definitions.
For the purpose of this Part, the following terms shall have the meaning
indicated:
   TRANSIENT MERCHANT, ITINERANT MERCHANT or ITINERANT VENDOR — Any person,
firm or corporation, whether as owner, agent, consignee or employee, whether a
resident of the City or not, who engages in a temporary business of selling and
delivering goods, wares and merchandise within the City, and who in the
furtherance of such purpose, hires, leases, uses or occupies any building,
structure, motor vehicle, tent, railroad car, boat, hotel room, lodging house,
apartment, shop or any street, alley or other place within the City, for the
exhibition and sale of such goods, wares and merchandise, either privately or
at public auction, provided that this definition shall not be construed to
include any person, firm or corporation who, while occupying such temporary
location, does not sell from stock, but exhibits samples only for the purpose
of securing orders for future delivery only. Any person, firm or corporation so
engaged shall not be relieved from complying with the provisions of this Part
merely by reason of associating temporarily with any local dealer, trader,
merchant or auctioneer, or by conducting such transient business in connection
with, as a part of or in the name of any local dealer, trader, merchant or
auctioneer.
§ 410-103. License application.
[Amended 6-30-1954 by Ord. No. 31-1954; 8-24-1983 by Ord. No. 34-1983; 5-29-
2001 by Ord. No. 14-2001]
Applicants for license under this Part shall file a written sworn application
signed by the applicant, if an individual, by all partners if a partnership,
and by the president if a corporation, with the Finance Director, showing:
   A.   The name or names of the person or persons having the management or
supervision of applicant's business during the time that it is proposed that it
shall be carried on in the City; the local address or addresses of such person
or persons while engaged in such business; the permanent address or addresses
of such person or persons; the capacity in which such person or persons shall
act, that is whether as proprietor, agent or otherwise; the name and address of
the person, firm or corporation for whose account the business shall be carried
on, if any; and, if a corporation, under the laws of what state the same is
incorporated.
   B.   The fingerprints of the person or persons having the management or
supervision of applicant's business or in lieu thereof, at least three letters
of recommendation from reliable property owners in the County of Berks,
Pennsylvania, certifying as to the applicant's good character and business
responsibility, or other evidence which establishes to the satisfaction of
theFinance Director the good character and business responsibility of such
person or persons.
   C.   The place or places in the City where it is proposed to carry on
applicant's business, and the length of time during which it is proposed that
such business shall be conducted.
   D.   The place or places, other than the permanent place of business of the
applicant where the applicant within the six months preceding the date of such
application conducted a transient business, stating the nature thereof and
giving the post office and street address of any building or office in which
such business was conducted.
   E.   A statement of the nature, character and quality of the goods, wares or
merchandise to be sold or offered for sale by applicant in the City; the
invoice value and quality of such goods, wares and merchandise; whether the
same are proposed to be sold from stock in possession, from stock in possession
and by sample, at auction by direct sale or by direct sale and by taking orders
for future delivery; where the goods or property proposed to be sold are
manufactured or produced; and where such goods or products are located at the
time the application is filed.
   F.   A brief statement of the nature and character of the advertising done
or proposed to be done in order to attract customers, and, if required by the
Finance Director, copies of all such advertising whether by handbills,
circular, newspaper advertising or otherwise, shall be attached to the
application as exhibits thereto.
   G.   Whether or not the person or persons having the management or
supervision of the applicant's business have been convicted of a crime,
misdemeanor or the violation of any municipal ordinance, the nature of such
offense and the punishment assessed therefor.
   H.   Credentials from the person, firm or corporation for which the
applicant proposes to do business, authorizing the applicant to act as such
representative.
   I.   Such other reasonable information as to the identity or character of
the person or persons having the management or supervision of applicant's
business or the method or plan of doing such business as the Finance Director
may deem proper to fulfill the purpose of this Part in the protection of the
public good.
§ 410-104. Investigation and license issuance.
[Amended 6-30-1954 by Ord. No. 31-1954; 8-24-1983 by Ord. No. 34-1983; 5-29-
2001 by Ord. No. 14-2001]
Upon receipt of such application, the Finance Director shall cause such
investigation of such person's or persons' business responsibility or moral
character to be made as he deems necessary to the protection of the public
good. If, as a result of such investigation, the applicant's character and
business responsibility are found to be unsatisfactory, the application shall
be denied. If, as a result of the investigation, the character and business
reputation appear to be satisfactory, the Finance Director shall so certify in
writing and a license shall be issued by theFinance Director. The Finance
Director shall keep a full record in the Finance Department of all licenses
issued. Such license shall contain the number of the license, the date the same
is issued, the nature of the business authorized to be carried on, the amount
of the license fee paid, the expiration date of such license, the place where
the business may be carried on under such license and the names of the persons
authorized to carry on the same.
§ 410-105. Bond.
[Amended 6-30-1954 by Ord. No. 31-1954; 8-24-1983 by Ord. No. 34-1983; 5-29-
2001 by Ord. No. 14-2001]
Before any license, as provided by this Part, shall be issued for engaging in a
transient or itinerant business as defined in §
410-102 in the City, such applicant shall file with the Finance Director a bond
running to the City in the sum of $1,000 executed by the applicant, as
principal and by a corporate surety duly registered and qualified to do
business in the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania; such bond to be approved by the
City Solicitor, conditioned that the applicant shall comply fully with all of
the provisions of the ordinances of the City and the statutes of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, regulating and concerning the sale of goods,
wares and merchandise, and shall pay all judgments rendered against such
applicant for any violation of such ordinances or statutes, or any of them.
Action on the bond may be brought in the name of the City. Such bond shall be
approved by the City Solicitor, both as to form, and as to the responsibility
of the surety thereon.
§ 410-106. Service of process.
[Amended 6-30-1954 by Ord. No. 31-1954; 8-24-1983 by Ord. No. 34-1983; 5-29-
2001 by Ord. No. 14-2001]
Before any license as herein provided shall be issued for engaging in business
as an itinerant merchant, as defined in §
410-102, in the City, such applicant shall file with the Finance Director an
instrument nominating and appointing the Finance Director, or the person
performing the duties of such position, his true and lawful agent with full
power and authority to acknowledge service of notice or process for and on
behalf of such applicant with respect to any matters connected with or arising
out of the business transacted under such license and the bond given as
required by §
410-105, or for the performance of the conditions of such bond or for any
breach thereof, which such instrument shall also contain recitals to the effect
that the applicant for such license consents and agrees that service of any
notice or process may be made upon such agent, and when so made shall be taken
and held to be as valid as if personally served upon the person or persons
applying for the license under this Part, according to the law of this or any
other state, and waiving all claim or right of error by reason of such
acknowledgment of service or manner of service. Immediately upon service of
process upon the Finance Director, as herein provided, the Finance Director
shall send to the licensee at his last known address, by registered mail, a
copy of such process.
§ 410-107. License to be displayed.
The license issued under this Part shall be posted conspicuously in the place
of business named therein. In the event that such person or persons applying
for such license shall desire to do business in more than one place within the
City, separate licenses shall be required for each place of business, and shall
be posted conspicuously in each place of business.
§ 410-108. License fees; expiration.
[Amended 12-22-1976 by Ord. No. 46-1976]
   A.   Licensees under this Part shall pay a fee of $50 per license for each
month or fractional part thereof during which they engage in a transient
business as defined by this Part.
   B.   Such fee shall be paid in advance prior to issuance of the license, and
on the first day of each calendar month thereafter. All licenses issued under
the provision of this Part shall expire on the last day of each calendar month
unless renewed by payment of an additional fee of $50.
§ 410-109. License transfer.
[Amended 6-30-1954 by Ord. No. 31-1954; 8-24-1983 by Ord. No. 34-1983; 5-29-
2001 by Ord. No. 14-2001]
No license shall be transferred without written consent from the Finance
Director as evidenced by an endorsement on the face of the license by the
Finance Director showing to whom the license is transferred and the date of the
transfer.
§ 410-110. Exceptions.
[Added 5-29-2001 by Ord. No. 14-2001]
   A.   No license fee shall be charged:
      (1)   To farmers selling their own produce.
      (2)   For the sale of goods, wares, and merchandise, donated by the
owners thereof, the proceeds whereof are to be applied to any charitable or
philanthropic purpose.
      (3)   To any manufacturer or producer in the sale of bread and bakery
products, meat and meat products, or milk and milk products.
      (4)   To children under the age of 18 years who take orders for and
deliver newspapers, greeting cards, candy, bakery products and the like, or who
represent the Boy Scouts or Girl Scouts or similar organizations.
      (5)   To the seeking or taking of orders by insurance agents or brokers
licensed under the insurance laws of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
      (6)   To a person who has complied with the provisions of the
Solicitation of Funds for Charitable Purposes Act, 10 P.S. § 162.1 et seq., as
hereafter amended, supplemented, modified or reenacted by the General Assembly
of Pennsylvania.
      (7)   For taking orders for merchandise, by sample, from dealers or
merchants for individuals or companies who pay a license or business privilege
tax at their chief place of business.
   B.   But all persons exempted hereby from the payment of the license fee
shall be required to register with the Finance Director and obtain a license
without fee; provided, any person dealing in one or more of the above mentioned
exempted categories, and dealing with other goods, wares, or merchandise not so
exempted, shall be subject to the payment of the license fee fixed by this
section for his activities in connection with the sale of goods, wares, and
merchandise not in such exempted categories. Provided, further, the Finance
Director may similarly exempt from payment of the license fee, but not from
registering with him, persons working without compensation and selling goods,
wares, or merchandise for the sole benefit of a nonprofit corporation.
Provided, further, every license issued under the provisions of this Part shall
be issued on an individual basis to any person or persons engaging in such
business; every individual shall obtain a separate license, issued to him in
his name, and the license fee hereby imposed shall be applicable to every such
individual license, except that a representative of a charitable organization
may obtain licenses for the applicants.
§ 410-111. Loud noises and speaking devices.
No licensee under this Part, nor anyone in his behalf, shall shout, make any
outcry, blow a horn, ring a bell or use any other sound device including any
loud-speaking radio or amplifying system upon any of the streets, alleys, parks
or other public places of the City or upon any private premises in the City
where sound of sufficient volume is emitted or produced therefrom capable of
being plainly heard upon the streets, avenues, alleys, parks or other public
places, for the purpose of attracting attention to any goods, wares or
merchandise which such licensee proposes to sell.
§ 410-112. Enforcement by police.
It shall be the duty of the police officers of the City to examine all places
of business and persons in their respective territories subject to the
provisions of this Part, to determine if this Part has been complied with and
to enforce the provisions of this Part against any person found to be violating
the same.
§ 410-113. Records and complaints.
[Amended 6-30-1954 by Ord. No. 31-1954; 8-24-1983 by Ord. No. 34-1983; 5-29-
2001 by Ord. No. 14-2001]
The Finance Director shall deposit the record of fingerprints of licenses,
together with a list of license numbers with the Chief of Police; the Chief of
Police shall report to the Finance Director any complaints against any person
licensed under the provisions of this Part and any conviction for violation of
this Part; the Finance Director shall keep a record of all such licenses and of
such complaints and violations.
§ 410-114. License revocation.
   A.   The licenses issued pursuant to this Part may be revoked by the Mayor
after notice and hearing, for any of the following causes: 1
      (1)   Any fraud, misrepresentation or false statement contained in the
application for license.
      (2)   Any fraud, misrepresentation or false statement made in connection
with the selling of goods, wares or merchandise.
      (3)   Any violation of this Part.
      (4)   Conviction of the licensee of any felony or of a misdemeanor
involving moral turpitude.
      (5)   Conducting the business licensed under this Part in an unlawful
manner or in such a manner as to constitute a breach of the peace or to
constitute a menace to the health, safety or general welfare of the public.
   B.   Notice of hearing for revocation of a license shall be given in
writing, setting forth specifically the grounds of the complaint and the time
and place of the hearing. Such notice shall be mailed, postage prepaid, to the
licensee, at his last known address, at least five days prior to the date set
for the hearing.
1.   Editor's Note: Amended during codification (see
Ch. 1, General Provisions, Part 2).
§ 410-115. Appeals.
[Amended 6-30-1954 by Ord. No. 31-1954; 8-24-1983 by Ord. No. 34-1983; 5-29-
2001 by Ord. No. 14-2001]
Any person aggrieved by the decision of the Finance Director in regard to the
denial of application for license as provided for in §
410-104 or of the Mayor in connection with the revocation of a license as
provided for in §
410-114 shall have the right to appeal to Council. Such appeal shall be taken
by filing with Council within 14 days after notice of the decision by the
Finance Director or by the Mayor has been mailed to such person's last known
address, a written statement setting forth the grounds for the appeal. Council
shall set the time and place for a hearing on such appeal and notice of such
hearing shall be given to such person in the same manner as provided in § 410-
314 for notice of hearing on revocation. The order of Council on such appeal
shall be final.
§ 410-116. Violations and penalties.
[Amended 5-29-2001 by Ord. No. 14-2001]
Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of this Part
shall be, upon conviction thereof, sentenced to a fine not more than $600 plus
costs and, in default of payment of said fine and costs, to a term of
imprisonment not to exceed 30 days. Each day upon which any person continues to
violate any provision of this article shall constitute a separate offense.
Part 2
Canvassing and Soliciting
[Adopted 5-12-2008 by Ord. No. 21-2008 (Ch. 6, Part 8, of the 2001 Code of
Ordinances)]
§ 410-201. Purpose.
The purpose of this Part is to protect, maintain and enhance the public health,
safety, and general welfare by regulating solicitation and canvassing. The
citizens and visitors to the City of Reading are subject to unregulated
solicitation and canvassing by sometimes questionable people and organizations
in a hazardous manner and in vulnerable locations such as their own residence.
It is the purpose of this Part to regulate solicitation and canvassing in the
City of Reading to protect the public health, safety and welfare.
§ 410-202. Definitions.
The following words as used in this Part shall have the following meanings:
   APPLICANT — The person or organization seeking a permit.
   CANVASSING — The act of going from residence to residence throughout the
City of Reading to solicit votes or orders; to conduct a survey (public
opinion) or poll; or, to conduct an uninvited detailed discussion, whether on
foot or by use of vehicle.
   CHIEF OF POLICE — The Chief of the City of Reading Police Department or his
designee.
   ORGANIZER — The person responsible for organizing the solicitation or
canvassing activity and whose name shall be on the application.
   PERMIT — Written authorization dispensed by the Chief of Police or his
designee which allows the solicitation and canvassing activity and specifies
the given solicitation and canvassing period.
   POLITICAL CANDIDATE — A person seeking or wanting to be considered for a
political office including "write-in candidates."
   RECOGNIZED YOUTH ORGANIZATION — A national, state or local youth group
having specific structure, responsibilities and united for a particular
purpose.
   RESIDENCE — Includes every separate living unit occupied for residential
purposes by one or more persons contained within any type of building or
structure.
   SOLICITATION — The act of going from residence to residence asking for
donations of money; tickets for money and coupon books for money; or, selling
items for money with or without the distribution by such Solicitor or canvasser
of literature, samples, free gifts or other materials within the City of
Reading and whether on foot or by use of vehicle.
   SOLICITATION AND CANVASSING PERIOD — A period not to exceed seven calendar
days.
§ 410-203. Permit requirements.
   A.   General. The City of Reading prohibits any person or organization from
conducting solicitations and canvassing of residences without a permit. It
shall be a violation of this Part to engage in solicitation and canvassing
without a permit or otherwise not in accordance with the terms of this Part and
the permit requirement.
   B.   Permit required. Every person, prior to engaging in activity as a
solicitor or canvasser, whether acting on his or her own behalf, as principal,
or as the employee or agent of another, shall apply for and obtain a permit as
hereinafter provided:
      (1)   Application. All requests for a permit must be provided to the
Chief of Police or his designee at least 10 business days but no more than 60
calendar days prior to the date of the requested activity. The Chief of Police
or his designee shall issue a decision within three business days of the
application being filed. The Chief of Police, for good cause shown, shall have
the authority to consider any application under this section which is filed
less than 10 business days before the date such event is proposed to be
conducted, provided the Chief of Police or his designee shall have adequate
time to conduct the investigation. An application and permit shall be required
for each solicitation and canvassing period.
      (2)   Required information. All applications for permits must include at
a minimum the following information and shall be signed by the organizer(s):
         (a)   Name(s). The name(s) of the person(s) making application for
solicitation or canvassing within the City of Reading.
         (b)   Address. The permanent address and local address, if any, of
each organizer.
         (c)   Physical features of applicant(s) including height, weight, age,
sex, race, and social security number of each for background check purposes.
         (d)   Photocopy of driver's license or other official photo
identification of each organizer.
         (e)   Description of the proposed solicitation or canvassing activity
and purpose for activity (i.e., use of funds).
         (f)   Specific location(s) for solicitation or canvassing activity,
including specific houses targeted, and number of Solicitors or canvassers at
each such location.
         (g)   Dates and times of solicitation or canvassing activity.
         (h)   Names of all participants proposed to be solicitors or
canvassers, and their ages. If any solicitors or canvassers are under 18, the
names and addresses of adult supervisors; one adult supervisor per four
solicitors or canvassers under age 18 is required.
         (i)   The application shall contain a statement that the submission of
the application shall be considered to be consent by each organizer for a
background check to be run by the Chief of Police at his discretion on any
person named on the application and a statement that all information contained
thereon is true and correct.
         (j)   Any additional information the Chief of Police may find
reasonably necessary for a fair determination as to whether the proposed event
will endanger public health, safety or welfare.
   C.   Investigation. The Chief of Police or his designee shall review the
application for completeness and compliance with the terms of this Part. The
Chief of Police shall check to see if there are any records of complaints
against the applicant in the records of the Police Department or the NCIC crime
database system. The Chief of Police may, at his discretion, conduct a
background check of the organizers. The Chief of Police may, at his discretion,
make any other inquiries he deems necessary for the investigation of the
applicant or the organizers.
   D.   Decision. The Chief of Police may grant, deny, or grant a restricted
permit. The Chief of Police shall issue a permit as provided in this Part from
a consideration of the application and from such information as may otherwise
be obtained, unless he finds that any or all of the following apply:
      (1)   The applicant or any organizers or participants have any criminal
complaints pending against them, or have a criminal record involving crimes of
theft, fraud, or other moral turpitude.
      (2)   The Chief of Police has reason to believe that the request for the
solicitation or canvassing activity is of a fraudulent nature.
      (3)   The conduct of the solicitation or canvassing activity is contrary
to the public's health, safety or general welfare.
      (4)   The application was not complete, or the application or permits
requested are not fully in compliance with the requirements of this Part. The
Chief of Police shall indicate on the application review form all reasons for
rejection of the application.
   E.   Location and times.
      (1)   Prohibited times. No solicitation or canvassing shall be allowed
before 9:00 a.m. or after 7:00 p.m., Sunday through Saturday.
      (2)   Locations. Solicitation and canvassing shall be permitted in all
areas where residential use is permitted.
      (3)   Duration. A solicitation or canvassing activity may last no longer
than seven days. A separate permit shall be required for each additional
solicitation and canvassing period.
   F.   Permit. The Chief of Police shall indicate on the permit the permitted
activities, locations, and duration of the permit. The Chief of Police may
approve a smaller or shorter duration than requested; may reduce the number of
solicitors or canvassers; may approve a different location; or, may generally
make any other adjustments he believes necessary to the application to serve
the public health, safety and welfare. The signed permit is to be kept on-site
and in the possession of all organizers at all times that solicitation or
canvassing is underway. If multiple locations are involved, a permit copy shall
be kept at each location by each organizer. Permits shall be displayed at the
request of any citizen or law enforcement personnel.
   G.   Non-content-based review. The content of the message of any applicant,
their beliefs, the identification of the participants, or any other matter
which does not directly impact on the public health, safety, and welfare, shall
not be relevant to the determination of whether to grant or deny a permit.
   H.   Special requirements.
      (1)   There shall be no physical contact by the solicitor or canvasser
with anyone being solicited or canvassed without the person's consent. This
shall be deemed to include not only physical force or restraint but also the
act of placing objects on the person or clothing of the solicitee.
      (2)   Solicitors and canvassers shall not occupy a fixed location on any
public sidewalk or street. There shall be no interference with or blocking of
movement or any pedestrian or vehicle by any solicitor or canvasser.
      (3)   A solicitor or canvasser shall not be permitted to make or cause to
be made any loud noise to attract attention or for any other purpose. Such
noises may include, but shall not be limited to, shouting, use of loud
speakers, horns, drums, musical instruments or other sound devices.
      (4)   A solicitor or canvasser who is conducting such activity on private
property, which is not open to the public, shall immediately leave such
premises on request of any lawful occupant thereof.
§ 410-204. Responsibility for payment of taxes.
It shall be the responsibility of every solicitor or canvasser given a permit
under this Part to pay to the City of Reading Tax Administration the proper
taxes, including business privilege and income taxes, for himself or any
employee on income earned as a result of the soliciting or canvassing.
§ 410-205. Appeals.
   A.   Appeals. Any person aggrieved by the denial or restriction of a permit
shall have the right to appeal the denial or restriction to the City of Reading
City Council. A written appeal shall be filed with the City Clerk within 10
days after the denial or restriction is received.
   B.   Procedure. The Chief of Police shall appear and present his case and
evidence as to why the application was denied. The applicant shall have the
opportunity to present his or her case and evidence in support of the
application. The hearing shall be conducted as a evidentiary proceeding.
   C.   Standard of review. City Council, keeping in mind the purpose of this
Part, the substantive provisions, and giving deference to the judgment of the
Chief of Police, shall make a determination as to whether the denial or
restriction was lawful and in the interests of the public health, safety and
welfare, or whether the permit should be issued or modified. If the latter,
City Council shall enter an order providing guidance as to the location, time,
persons, and other criteria of this Part. City Council shall render a decision
within 10 days after the hearing.
§ 410-206. Violations and penalties; enforcement.
   A.   Revocation of permit. The Chief of Police or his designee is hereby
authorized to revoke a permit issued under this Part under the following
circumstances:
      (1)   If the organizer is convicted of a felony during the solicitation
and canvassing period.
      (2)   If the Chief of Police or his designee determines that the goods or
items being sold or distributed are unsafe, harmful or misrepresented to the
public.
      (3)   If it is determined that the organizer has given false information
on the application.
      (4)   If the organizer fails to abide by any of the provisions of this
Part.
      (5)   If the Chief of Police becomes aware of illegal or unauthorized
activity and the revocation of said permit is required in the best interests of
public health, safety and welfare.
   B.   Persons soliciting without a permit or in violation of the permit shall
be cited with a citation for prosecution in the Magisterial District Judges
Court, in accordance with the requirements of law for such citations. All City
of Reading police officers are authorized to issue such citations.
   C.   Any person, organization, business or entity in violation of the
provisions of this Part is subject to a fine of up to $300 per day per
violation per individual participant. The minimum fine shall be $50 per day per
violation per individual participant.
   D.   Any person, organization, business or entity found guilty of violating
this Part may not be issued a permit for a two-year period from the date of the
violation. Upon second offense, the person, organization, business or entity
found guilty of violating this Part shall be banned from further solicitation
or canvassing in the City of Reading.
   E.   The City Solicitor shall be authorized to seek injunctive relief and
other relief in a court of competent jurisdiction if necessary to effectuate
the intent of this Part. The City of Reading shall be entitled to seek civil
fines in the amounts specified above and shall be entitled to its attorney's
fees for any successful action.
§ 410-207. Exemptions.
This Part shall not apply to recognized youth organizations including school
sponsored clubs; canvassing conducted by political candidates for public
office, their workers or representatives from political parties; solicitation
of donations by mail, either the solicitation of money or canvassing, as
otherwise defined herein, from personal acquaintances of the person engaging in
the activity, persons who solicit for or on behalf of religious organizations,
or in pursuit of religious beliefs and activities. A permit is not required for
any solicitation or canvassing activity sponsored or conducted by City of
Reading or its departments and agencies, nor by any municipality or government
agency in the City, such as firefighter or police department fund- raisers or
other similar collections.
Chapter 424
POLES
§
424-101.   Purpose.
§
424-102.   Short title.
§
424-103.   Definitions.
§
424-104.   Prohibited installations.
§
424-105.   Pole permit applications.
§
424-106.   Pole permits.
§
424-107.   Condemnation reports.
§
424-108.   Notice of condemnation; service.
§
424-109.   Failure to comply with condemnation notice.
§
424-110.   Prosecution for failure to comply.
§
424-111.   Removal of condemned equipment.
§
424-112.   Recovery of removal expenses.
§
424-113.   Emergency removal.
§
424-114.   Enforcement and inspection.
§
424-115.   Resisting or obstructing inspection.
§
424-116.   Inspectors identification.
§
424-117.   Appeals.
§
424-118.   Regulations.
§
424-119.   Violations and penalties.
[HISTORY: Adopted by the City Council of the City of Reading 11-22-1939 by Ord.
No. 39-1939 (Ch. 13, Part 12, of the 2001 Code of Ordinances). Amendments noted
where applicable.]
STATE LAW REFERENCES
Underground electric wires - See 11 Pa.C.S. § 12601.
Power to license utility companies - See 11 Pa.C.S. § 12601.
Streetlighting - See 11 Pa.C.S. § 73501.1 .
Attaching metal or hard substance to utility poles - See 18 Pa.C.S.A. § 6905.
§ 424-101. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to provide for the welfare, protection and
safety of the people of the City.
§ 424-102. Short title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Pole Code."
§ 424-103. Definitions.
[Amended 5-29-2001 by Ord. No. 14-2001]
The words defined herein shall include the singular or the plural meanings or
both. As used in this chapter, certain terms are defined as follows:
   ANCHOR GUY — A wire, cable, chain or rod used as a support for a pole or
stub and which is attached to an anchor buried below the surface of the ground.
   CHIEF ELECTRICIAN — The Public Works Director or his designee.
   EQUIPMENT — All of the subjects regulated in this chapter.
   GUY or GUY WIRE — A wire or cable used to support a pole, fixture, or other
wire, and includes span wire, but does not include anchor guys.
   GUY HOOK or EYEBOLT — A hook or eyebolt attached to a building and to which
is attached a guy or any electric or communication wire except such wires
supplying service to the occupants of the building.
H-STRUCTURE or H-RACK — A framework of two or more legs which supports one or
more "transformers" or "load coils" or "load pots" and for the purpose of this
chapter, each leg of such structure or rack shall be deemed a pole.
   PERSON — Any individual, firm, partnership, corporation or association, and
any servant, agent, assistant, employee or representative thereof.
   POLE — A support for electric, communication or signal wire, planted in the
ground or in any foundation planted therein, or fastened to a pole reinforcing
stub or the surface of the ground or any paving thereon.
   POLE or APPURTENANCE — A pole, guy stub, H-structure, guy hook, or push
brace or any or all of them.
   POLE INSPECTOR — Any Pole Inspector of the Department of Public Works.
   POLE PERMIT — The permit issued for any of the work regulated by this
chapter.
   PUSH BRACE — A brace attached directly to a pole in lieu of an anchor guy or
stub and guy.
   SPAN WIRE — A guy used to support trolley wire, and shall include cross span
and curve span wire.
   STUBS —
   A.   POLE-REINFORCING STUB — A patented device, iron, or wood support
planted at the base of a pole and lashed to it for the purpose of prolonging
the life of the pole.
   B.   GUY STUB — A pole used solely for the purpose of supporting any other
pole, or wire, attached to it by a guy.
   STREET — The sidewalk and the roadway area of any way open to the use of the
public as a matter of right.
   WIRE — Communication, signal and electric wires or all of them.
§ 424-104. Prohibited installations.
   A.   No person shall set up, maintain or replace any pole for the purpose of
conveying electricity by means of wires strung thereon where such wires are
required by ordinance to be placed underground in conduits.
   B.   No person shall install or replace any anchor guy, or pole reinforcing
stub for the support of any pole or guy stub on any street or alley within the
corporate limits of the City, wherever other practicable construction is
possible. 1
1.   Editor's Note: Original § 13-1205, Application for annual permits, as
amended 5-29-2001 by Ord. No. 14-2001, and § 13-1206, Annual permits, which
immediately followed this section, were repealed during codification (see
Ch. 1, General Provisions, Part 2).
§ 424-105. Pole permit applications.
[Amended 5-29-2001 by Ord. No. 14-2001]
   A.   Any person desiring to erect a new pole or appurtenance or to remove,
replace or relocate an existing pole or appurtenance or to place on, or replace
any guy now upon a tree or to remove an anchor guy or pole reinforcing stub in
or upon any public or private street or alley within the City shall make an
application for a pole permit to the Director of Public Works.
   B.   The application shall set forth:
      (1)   Name and address of the applicant.
      (2)   An exact description of the location at which the new installation,
removal, replacement or relocation is to be made, or of the tree to be used.
      (3)   If a relocation, the point from which the pole or appurtenance is
being removed.
      (4)   The identifying number and size or description of all the poles or
appurtenances or other things concerned in the application.
      (5)   If a new pole is to be erected, or a pole relocated, or a tree is
to be used as a guy stub, in, upon, or along a street, a statement shall be
made that the owner or occupant of the abutting property has been notified of
such intention.
      (6)   Such other pertinent information as may be required by the Public
Works Director.
      (7)   An agreement that if the permit is issued:
         (a)   The City may install fire and police telegraph equipment on the
pole if located in any street or alley.
         (b)   The work shall be done as stated.
         (c)   The pole or appurtenance shall not be placed at any point
different from that indicated in the application.
         (d)   Any other required permits shall be obtained.
   C.   Applications shall be numbered serially as received and shall be made
in four copies and disposed of as follows:
      (1)   The original of every application shall be retained in the
Department of Public Works as a permanent record. Upon this copy shall be noted
such facts as will indicate the disposition of the application, over the
signature of the Director of Public Works.
      (2)   One copy each shall be sent immediately to the Director of Public
Works.
      (3)   A copy shall be retained by or given to the applicant.
      (4)   Procedure before approval:
         (a)   Upon the filing of an application, the Pole Inspector shall
inspect the location of the proposed work within two days and make written
report on the application to the Director of Public Works.
         (b)   If the application is for a new location, the Pole Inspector
shall interview the owner or occupant of the property upon which or abutting
the street upon which the proposed work is to be done, and determine if the
required notice was given by the applicant, and if there is any objection
thereto, inform the owner or occupant of the procedure for making objection, if
any, and shall endorse on the original application, the substance of the
interview.
         (c)   When the application is for a guy hook, the Public Works
Director shall request the Building Inspector to inspect the location and
report to him, which report shall be endorsed upon the application before its
return to the Director of Public Works.
         (d)   Upon receipt of a copy of an application, the Director of
Streets and Public Improvements shall determine, or cause to be determined, if
the proposed work or the location thereof conflicts with work or plans of his
department, or will interfere with any municipal service or structure, and
shall report thereon in writing to the Director of Public Works within three
days.
         (e)   In the case of an application to do work upon City-owned or -
used property, no permit shall be issued until Council has by resolution
consented thereto.
         (f)   If the owner or occupant of the property on which or abutting
the side of the street upon which the proposed work is to be done or any of the
officials of whom a report is required objects thereto, the Director of Public
Works shall hear the objection and the report of the Public Works Director
thereon. If the objection is not then withdrawn the application, with written
report of objections thereto, shall be presented by the Director of Public
Works to the next regular meeting of Council, whose decision shall be final.
         (g)   If no objections are made, or if all objections are withdrawn
the Director of Public Works may approve the application without action by
Council except as provided in Subsection C(4)(e) hereof.
§ 424-106. Pole permits.
[Amended 5-29-2001 by Ord. No. 14-2001]
   A.   No person shall erect a new pole or appurtenance, or remove, replace or
relocate an existing pole or appurtenance, or replace a guy wire upon a tree,
or remove an anchor guy or pole reinforcing stub in or upon any public or
private street or alley, without having obtained a pole permit and such other
permits as may be required by any other ordinance, except, as herein provided,
in the case of an emergency when such permit shall be obtained as promptly as
possible.
   B.   It shall be a separate violation of this chapter for any person to
permit or direct any employee, subordinate or other person under his
supervision to do any of the things prohibited in Subsection A hereof without
having obtained all the required approvals and permits and given such permits
or proper evidence thereof to the person immediately in charge of those doing
the work.
   C.   No pole permit shall be issued to any person for the erection of poles
or appurtenances, or wires, unless all permissions and franchises required for
the erection and maintenance thereof have been obtained.
   D.   Upon approval of an application for permission to remove, replace or
relocate an existing pole or appurtenance, guy wire, anchor guy or pole-
reinforcing stub, no fee pole permit shall be issued by the Public Works
Director.
      (1)   In the event of a replacement or relocation, such permit shall act
as a transfer of the annual permit as to the pole or equipment replaced.
      (2)   In event of a removal, such permit shall act as a cancellation of
the annual permit as to the pole or equipment removed.
   E.   Upon approval of an application for any other work for which a permit
is required under this chapter, a permit shall be obtained by paying to the
City Treasurer the proper fee as hereinafter listed.
   F.   Work for which permits have been obtained shall be done within 60 days
of the date of the permit. If not performed within that period, the permit
shall expire and a new permit obtained. However, the Director of Public Works
shall have authority to extend the effective period of any permit for one
period of 60 days, if in his opinion such extension is justified, and he so
endorses the permit.
   G.   There shall be no transfer of permits except as provided in this
section.
   H.   No person shall alter a permit, or use a permit for work not included
in the application upon which the permit was issued. 2
2.   Editor's Note: Original § 13-1208, Pole permit fees, which immediately
followed this section, was repealed during codification (see
Ch. 1, General Provisions, Part 2).
§ 424-107. Condemnation reports.
[Amended 5-29-2001 by Ord. No. 14-2001]
The Public Works Director shall have the power and is hereby directed to:
   A.   Condemn any unsafe, damaged, dangerous or defective pole or
appurtenance, pole- reinforcing stub, anchor guy or a guy attached to a tree,
or a tree used in lieu of a pole or as an anchor stub, street or traffic light
standard, or any wood or metal post or metal pipe supporting a lighting
fixture, in or upon any public or private street, lane, or alley, and report
such condemnation to the Director of Public Works.
      (1)   If a private streetlight, he shall send a copy of the condemnation
report to the Director of Public Works.
      (2)   If a streetlight owned by any person supplying streetlighting to
the City, he shall send a copy of the condemnation report to the Director of
Public Works.
      (3)   If a traffic light standard, he shall send a copy of the
condemnation report to the Mayor.
   B.   Make a written report to the Director of Public Works of all unused
poles or appurtenances, pole-reinforcing stubs, anchor guys and guys attached
to trees.
   C.   Keep copies of all reports he may make pursuant to the provisions of
this section.
§ 424-108. Notice of condemnation; service.
[Amended 5-29-2001 by Ord. No. 14-2001]
On receipt of a condemnation report, the Director of Public Works shall have
prepared a notice of condemnation which shall set forth the identification
number, if any, and location of the condemned pole or other equipment and
direct its removal, repair or replacement at the option of the owner thereof.
Notice shall be signed by the Director and served by a Pole Inspector upon the
owner, if an individual or, if a corporation, upon the individual officer
thereof, named in the application for an annual permit, as authorized to
receive and accept service of any notice under this chapter, or if no annual
permit has been issued for such condemned equipment, by posting a copy upon the
equipment. Proof of service shall be made under oath or affirmation before the
City Clerk, and filed in the office of the Public Works Director.
§ 424-109. Failure to comply with condemnation notice.
No owner or the authorized representative thereof in charge of maintenance, of
any condemned pole or other equipment regulated by this chapter shall fail or
neglect to remove, repair or replace the same within 20 days after service of a
notice of condemnation as provided in §
424-111.
§ 424-110. Prosecution for failure to comply.
[Amended 5-29-2001 by Ord. No. 14-2001]
In the event of failure of the owner of any condemned pole or equipment to
remove, repair or replace the same within 20 days after service of a notice of
condemnation as provided in §
424-111, the Public Works Director shall institute a prosecution for violation
of this chapter against the owner, if an individual, or if other than an
individual, against the authorized representative thereof in charge of
maintenance.
§ 424-111. Removal of condemned equipment.
[Amended 5-29-2001 by Ord. No. 14-2001]
If prosecution as provided in §
424-113 does not result in compliance within 15 days thereafter, the Public
Works Director shall have the condemned pole or equipment removed, repaired or
replaced.
§ 424-112. Recovery of removal expenses.
   A.   In the event removal, replacement or repair is made pursuant to the
provisions of §
424-114, the cost of such work, including the restoration of the surface of the
street or pavement and all permit fees, shall be charged to and be recovered
from the owner of the condemned pole or other equipment by suit in the name of
the City to recover such costs and amount expended, as debts of like amount are
now recoverable by law.
   B.   For the purpose of collection of costs, the person who, at the time of
condemnation, holds the annual permit for the condemned pole or other equipment
shall be deemed to be the owner.
§ 424-113. Emergency removal.
Poles or appurtenances or light standards made defective by fire, flood, storm
or accident shall be removed, repaired or replaced by the owner within a
reasonable time which in no event shall exceed 30 days. Failure to do so shall
be a separate violation of this chapter.
§ 424-114. Enforcement and inspection.
[Amended 5-29-2001 by Ord. No. 14-20013]
The Public Works Director is hereby authorized and empowered, for the purpose
of inspection and to enforce the provisions of this chapter or any other
applicable ordinance:
   A.   To enter any place as often as they or any of them deem necessary
wherever poles or other equipment are erected or maintained or a tree is being
used as a pole or anchor guy or where an application has been made to erect,
replace, relocate or remove a pole or other equipment or to use a tree as a guy
stub.
   B.   To inspect any pole or other equipment, so located that its collapse
will endanger the safety of any person.
3.   Editor's Note: Amended during codification (see
Ch. 1, General Provisions, Part 2).
§ 424-115. Resisting or obstructing inspection.
[Amended 5-29-2001 by Ord. No. 14-20014]
No person shall willfully resist, obstruct, abuse or interfere with the Public
Works Director engaged in the execution of his duties.
4.   Editor's Note: Amended during codification (see
Ch. 1, General Provisions, Part 2).
§ 424-116. Inspectors identification.
[Amended 5-29-2001 by Ord. No. 14-20015]
   A.   The Public Works Director shall wear or carry a badge or other
identification while in the performance of his official duties.
   B.   No person, except the Public Works Director, shall have in his
possession, keep, or use any equipment, mark or badge provided for and used by
the Public Works Director.
   C.   The Public Works Director shall be furnished with all supplies
necessary to make inspections efficiently.
5.   Editor's Note: Amended during codification (see
Ch. 1, General Provisions, Part 2).
§ 424-117. Appeals.
[Amended 5-29-2001 by Ord. No. 14-2001]
Any person aggrieved by an act or decision of the Public Works Director may
appeal in writing within seven days thereafter to Council, the decision of
which shall be final. Pending action by Council the act or decision of the
Director of Public Works shall remain in effect, but no penalty shall be
inflicted upon the appellant.
§ 424-118. Regulations.
[Amended 5-29-2001 by Ord. No. 14-2001]
Poles or appurtenances, guys, and wires as defined herein shall be erected,
maintained and replaced in accordance with the following rules and regulations:
   A.   Regulation 1. Making poles or appurtenances.
      (1)   Rule 1. Every pole, guy, stub and H-structure shall at all times be
legibly marked or labeled with the name or initials of the owner thereof and an
identifying number.
   B.   Regulation 2. Poles and guy stubs.
      (1)   Rule 1. Poles. The wire span between poles shall not be more than
200 feet except with the consent of the Public Works Director.
      (2)   Rule 2. No pole or guy stub smaller than a Class 10 pole may be
used at any place for the support of any wire, except for the support of wires
from a distribution pole leading to a structure to whose occupants such wires
provide service and when such wires are in such locations known as "fence post
runs," a twelve-foot pole of less strength than a Class 10 pole may be used;
provided such wires and poles do not cross or are not located on any street or
any place to which the public is permitted access. "Class 10 pole" means a
creosoted southern pine pole, 16 feet long with an approximate circumference of
14 inches measured at a point six feet from the butt with strengths equivalent
to those established for Class 10 poles by the United States Bureau of
Standards, or any other wood or metal pole, equivalent in strength to such
specification for creosoted southern pine.
   C.   Regulation 3. Guying and anchoring.
      (1)   Rule 1. Guys hereafter erected, repaired or replaced shall not be
attached to any point less than eight feet above the ground.
      (2)   Rule 2. Before work begins on the demolition or reconstruction of
any building or structure, any part of which provides support for poles or
appurtenances, wire or guys the contractor or person in charge of the building,
structure, or work shall notify the Public Works Director. Any temporary
support which may be provided for such pole or appurtenance, wire or guy shall
meet the approval of the Public Works Director. Before a permanent support is
installed, a relocation permit shall be obtained as provided hereinbefore.
   D.   Regulation 4. Overhead wires.
      (1)   Rule 1. No communication wire or guy, except span wire or service
wires to a building, shall be strung across a street at less than 18 feet from
the ground measured at the point at which it is closest to the ground.
      (2)   Rule 2. No electric wire, except service wires to a building, shall
be strung across or along a street at less than 24 feet from the ground
measured above.
      (3)   Rule 3. On "joint use" poles, wherever possible, telephone and
telegraph wires and cables shall take the lowest position, electrified wire the
highest position, and police telephone and telegraph and fire alarm wires of
the City shall take the middle position. However, this shall not apply to poles
erected or maintained by permission granted by franchise which reserves the
highest cross arm for wires of the City, except, that upon the filing of a
written acceptance of this provision with the City Clerk, by the owners of any
such franchises, the franchise shall be deemed to be amended accordingly.
   E.   Regulation 5. Transformers and H-structures.
      (1)   Rule 1. On any street, transformers or loading coils on single
poles shall be so constructed that no transformer or loading coil, cross bar of
any H-structure used to support transformers or loading coils shall be closer
to the ground than 15 feet.
§ 424-119. Violations and penalties.
[Amended 5-29-2001 by Ord. No. 14-2001]
Whoever violates or fails to comply with any provisions of this chapter, or any
order, regulation or rule made thereunder, shall be, upon conviction thereof,
sentenced to a fine of not more than $1,000 plus costs and, in default of
payment of said fine and costs, to a term of imprisonment not to exceed 30
days. This shall be in addition to any liability imposed by any other section
hereof. All fines and other money imposed or collected under the provisions of
this chapter shall be paid into the City Treasury.
Chapter 431
PROPERTY SALES
Part 1
Certification of Legal Use and Zoning Classification
§
431-101.   Adoption of state law regarding illegal use of property.
Part 2
Certificate of Transfer
§
431-201.   Declaration of purpose.
§
431-202.   Definitions.
§
431-203.   Certificate of transfer required.
§
431-204.   Health and safety inspection procedure.
§
431-205.   Fees.
§
431-206.   Health and safety inspection report.
§
431-207.   Report findings.
§
431-208.   Health and safety compliance letter and rental compliance letter;
extensions.
§
431-209.   Permits for corrective work.
§
431-210.   Nonexclusive inspection.
§
431-211.   Enforcement.
§
431-212.   Regulations and forms.
§
431-213.   Exemptions.
§
431-214.   Violators subject to charge of summary offense.
§
431-215.   Penalties.
§
431-216.   Other causes of action.
§
431-217.   Liability of City, buyer and inspector.
[HISTORY: Adopted by the City Council of the City of Reading as indicated in
part histories. Amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Property maintenance — See
Ch. 180, Parts 13 and 14.
Housing — See
Ch. 308.
Zoning — See
Ch. 600.
STATE LAW REFERENCES
Use registration permits — See 21 P.S. § 611 et seq.
Part 1
Certification of Legal Use and Zoning Classification
[Adopted 2-14-2011 by Ord. No. 6-2011]
§ 431-101. Adoption of state law regarding illegal use of property.
The City of Reading hereby adopts the provisions set forth in 21 P.S. § 611 to
and including 21 P.S. § 615, Use Registration Permits.
Part 2
Certificate of Transfer
[Adopted 5-29-2012 by Ord. No. 61-2012]
§ 431-201. Declaration of purpose.
   A.   The City of Reading City Council desires to establish certain rules and
regulations related to the transfer of property within the City and requiring
the receipt of a Certificate of Transfer from the City of Reading and a post-
settlement inspection for all City of Reading residential, nonresidential and
mixed-use properties. The City Council finds that the establishment of this
program for all City residential, nonresidential, and mixed- use properties is
necessary to protect the public health, safety, and welfare by ensuring the
proper maintenance of all City properties, by identifying and requiring
correction of substandard conditions, and by preventing conditions of
deterioration and blight that could adversely affect economic conditions and
the quality of life in Reading.
   B.   The fees assessed in this Part shall be revenue neutral and will only
cover the cost of the program. The fees shall be reviewed against the cost of
the program annually and recommendations for adjustments shall be referred by
ordinance to the City of Reading City Council.
   C.   Nothing in this Part shall preclude the buyer from seeking legal
recourse against the seller, or the seller's agent, where applicable, within
the Pennsylvania Court system.
§ 431-202. Definitions.
As used in this Part, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
   AGENT — Any person who for monetary or other consideration aids a seller in
the sale of property. Whenever used in any clause prescribing or imposing a
penalty, the term "agent," as applied to partnerships and associations, shall
mean the partners or members thereof and, as applied to corporations, the
officers thereof.
   AGREEMENT — Written agreement or written instrument executed by the seller
prior to transfer or the buyer after transfer of the property which provides
the City with the ability to perform a health and safety inspection.
   BUYER — An individual who acquires legal or equitable title pursuant to an
agreement of sale.
   CERTIFICATE OF TRANSFER — The certificate issued by the City of Reading to
the owner of a property that documents that the property is permitted for the
use indicated on the certificate and is based on the property's compliance with
the applicable City of Reading ordinances, including but not limited to
Chapter 600, Zoning, and
Chapter 308, Housing. The certificate of transfer does not indicate compliance
with the City of Reading Property Maintenance Ordinance. 1
   CERTIFICATE OF TRANSFER PACKET — Packet given by the City indicating
approved use, rental housing information, and other relevant City
documentation.
   CITY INSPECTOR — An employee or contractor engaged by the City of Reading to
do, among other things, health and safety inspections.
   DAYS — Calculation of days in this Part shall be by calendar days unless
otherwise noted in this Part. If the expiration of the day is on a Saturday,
Sunday or holiday, the deadline shall be extended until the next business day.
   DEFICIENCIES — Those items indicated on a health and safety inspection
report that require repair, remediation or corrective action and/or are
hazardous conditions.
   DWELLING UNIT or UNIT — A single unit providing complete, independent living
facilities for one or more persons, including permanent provisions for living,
sleeping, eating, cooking and sanitation.
   FAILURE TO APPEAR — A failure to appear as described below includes
inspection cancellations, no-shows and no-entries into all units.
   HEALTH AND SAFETY COMPLIANCE LETTER — A letter, correspondence or document
issued by the City of Reading Property Maintenance Division stating that the
requirements of this Part and the minimum habitability requirements set forth
herein have been satisfied and any founded deficiencies have been corrected.
   HEALTH AND SAFETY INSPECTION — An inspection to determine the condition of a
property in accordance with such standards of minimum habitability and safety
as shall be determined by the Property Maintenance Division.
   HEALTH AND SAFETY INSPECTION REPORT — A report issued by a City Inspector
setting forth the results of a health and safety inspection which shall include
the designation of such conditions as shall require repair or remediation and
any hazardous conditions for the current use of the property.
   INDIVIDUAL — Any person, partnership, association, corporation or other
entity.
   INSPECTION REQUEST — A request for performance of a health and safety
inspection other than an agreement submitted by a buyer at the time of transfer
of the property.
   LOT — A measured parcel of land having fixed boundaries and designated on a
plot or survey owned or meant to be owned by an individual, group or
corporation, whether used for commercial or private use, and may consist of one
or more parcels. [Added 12-10-2012 by Ord. No. 125-2012]
   MIXED COMMERCIAL/RESIDENTIAL PROPERTY — A property, building or structure in
which part is used for residential purposes, and another part is utilized for
commercial purposes. Also referred to as "mixed residential/commercial
property" or "mixed use – commercial/ residential" or "mixed use – residential/
commercial."
   MULTIUNIT DWELLING — A building arranged, designed, and intended to provide
two or more dwelling units. Individual dwelling units may share party walls
with other units and either have common outside access areas or have individual
outside access areas. Types of such buildings shall include, but shall not be
limited to, townhouses, apartments, and/or condominiums.
   NOTICE OF VIOLATION — A written notice issued by the Property Maintenance
Division directing any repair or remediation, corrective or other action
relating to any deficiencies as set forth in a report that may include a time
frame within which any such action must be taken.
   OWNER — Entity or individual(s) that have an enforceable claim or title to
an asset or property, and is recognized as such by law. For example, a lender
is the legal owner of a property.
   PROPERTY — All residential, mixed residential/commercial buildings,
structures or real estate within the City of Reading, any and all building(s)
or other improvement(s) and the land on which the buildings and improvements
are situated. [Amended 12-10-2012 by Ord. No. 125-2012]
   PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE — For the purpose of establishing rules and
regulations for the maintenance of all structures, including administration,
enforcement and penalties, the property maintenance code known as the
International Property Maintenance Code, 2012 Edition, as published by the
International Code Council, and adopted by the City of Reading City Council as
deleted, modified or amended. From the date on which this Part shall take
effect, the provisions thereof shall be controlling in the maintenance of all
structures, and in all other subjects therein contained, within the corporate
limits of the City of Reading, Pennsylvania, as per
Chapter 180, Part 14, International Property Maintenance Code, of the Code of
the City of Reading.
   PROPERTY MAINTENANCE DIVISION — The City of Reading Property Maintenance
Division.
   RENTAL COMPLIANCE LETTER — A letter or document issued by the City of
Reading Property Maintenance Division upon finding and stating compliance with
the applicable City of Reading Codified Ordinances following performance of a
rental inspection.
   ROOM or ROOMING UNIT — Any room, area or group of rooms forming a single
habitable unit occupied or intended to be occupied for sleeping or living, but
not for cooking purposes or independent living.
   ROOMING HOUSE — A building arranged or occupied for lodging, with or without
meals, for compensation and not occupied as a one- or two-family dwelling,
excluding hotels and motels.
   SALE — The transfer of any legal or equitable interest in or title to
property, including exchanges of properties with or without monetary
consideration.
   SELLER — The owner or his authorized agent or appointee of the property that
will be transferred or sold.
   SETTLEMENT — The culmination of a particular transaction involving real
property that results in the transfer or conveyance of a property from one
party to another.
   SINGLE-FAMILY DWELLING — A single unit providing complete independent living
facilities for one or more persons, including permanent provisions for living,
sleeping, eating, cooking and sanitation. A single unit may be incorporated
within a series of row homes sharing a common firewall. Types of such buildings
shall also include mobile and modular units.
   STRUCTURE(S) — Any man-made object, including a building, radio or
television tower, fences, walls, carports, porches and decks, and permanent
signs, constructed or erected on or in the ground or water or upon another
structure or building and having an ascertainable stationary location. The term
"structure" shall not include walks, sidewalks or driveways.
   VACANT PROPERTY — A residential or mixed use (residential and other
permitted use) property shall be deemed to be a "vacant property" if it is
continuously unoccupied by the same individual or basic family unit as a
residence and/or it is unoccupied. A vacant property can include a vacant
property for sale, a vacant property for rehabilitation, a code-compliant
vacant property and a vacation/second residence.
1.   Editor's Note: See
Ch. 180, Parts 13 and 14.
§ 431-203. Certificate of transfer required.
   A.   A certificate of transfer is required for any property held for sale or
transfer within the City of Reading. A person seeking a certificate of transfer
must request and complete, in its entirety, a certificate of transfer
application supplied by the Property Maintenance Division within 15 days of
offering the property for sale.
   B.   Issuance of certificate of transfer. On receipt of the certificate of
transfer application, the Property Maintenance Division shall prepare and issue
the certificate of transfer property packet to the seller, or his authorized
agent by first-class mail.
   C.   Zoning permits and other licenses do not transfer to the new owner. The
new owner must make application to the proper City office(s).
   D.   If a property will be a rental unit which was not a recognized rental
property at the time of sale, the buyer may request a rental inspection in
place of a health and safety inspection. If the buyer does not inform the
Property Maintenance Division of the intent to rent until after the completion
of the health and safety inspection, the property must undergo a full rental
inspection at full price according to the Housing Fee Schedule.
§ 431-204. Health and safety inspection procedure.
   A.   To commence a health and safety inspection prior to settlement or
transfer of a property, the seller should submit a request to the City of
Reading Property Maintenance Division on a form prepared and provided by the
Property Maintenance Division. If the property has not transferred to a new
owner after 24 months of the date of the health and safety compliance letter,
any property with a health and safety compliance letter that remains for sale
for more than a twenty-four-month period, while owned by the original
applicant, shall undergo a new health and safety inspection at half price.
   B.   To commence a health and safety inspection after settlement or transfer
of a property, the Property Maintenance Division shall, within 15 business days
of notification from the Recorder of Deeds, notify the new owner of the health
and safety inspection. The Property Maintenance Division will, without
unreasonable delay, inform the seller or the buyer of the date, time and cost
of the inspection as per the City of Reading Fee Schedule. 2
   C.   An inspection of the property shall be performed and billed to
determine compliance with minimum health and safety standards and requirements
as per the current allowable use. The bill includes the first reinspection, but
further reinspections will be billed according to the Fee Schedule. These
minimum health and safety standards shall not prohibit citations for other
significant health and safety hazards that may be identified by the inspector
during the inspection:
      (1)   Each dwelling unit must have an operational (working) smoke
detector installed in all common areas, including the basement, every
designated bedroom and every finished attic space as required by the Property
Maintenance Code.
      (2)   Each dwelling unit must meet fire standards and have sufficient
egress as per the Property Maintenance Code.
      (3)   Each dwelling unit must have an existing acceptable 60 ampere
service, or a minimum 100 ampere three-wire electric service must be installed
for the dwelling as required by the Property Maintenance Code.
      (4)   Each dwelling unit must have kitchen countertop receptacles,
laundry and bathroom receptacles must be ground-fault-circuit-interrupter
protected, as required by Property Maintenance Code.
      (5)   No basement or attic may be used for habitable bedroom units except
by authorization, approval or variance of the City Zoning Hearing Board and
shall comply with the requirements of the Property Maintenance Code.
      (6)   All properties must be supplied with clearly identifiable numbers
(minimum of three inches tall) outside the property, in clear view of the
street, designating the street number of the property as required by the
Property Maintenance Code.
      (7)   The property must have a sufficient number of storage containers
for solid waste.
      (8)   The exterior of the property shall be in compliance with the
Property Maintenance Code.
      (9)   All properties must be free from infestation of insects or vermin
as required by the Property Maintenance Code.
      (10)   All properties must have the proper permits, licenses and zoning
permits if being used for anything other than single-family owner-occupied
purposes.
      (11)   All sidewalks, walkways, stairs, driveways, parking spaces and
similar areas shall be kept in a proper state of repair, and maintained free
from hazardous conditions as required by the Property Maintenance Code.
      (12)   All foundation walls shall be maintained plumb and free from open
cracks and breaks and shall be kept in such condition so as to prevent the
entry of rodents and other pests as required by the Property Maintenance Code.
      (13)   Every exterior stairway, deck, porch and balcony, and all
appurtenances attached thereto, shall be maintained structurally sound, in good
repair, with proper anchorage and capable of supporting the imposed loads as
required by the Property Maintenance Code.
      (14)   There shall be no illegal sewer/water connections, as defined
under the applicable City policies.
      (15)   Every handrail and guard shall be firmly fastened and capable of
supporting normally imposed loads and shall be maintained in good condition as
required by the Property Maintenance Code.
      (16)   All other parts of the City of Reading Property Maintenance Code.
   D.   The Property Maintenance Inspector performing the inspection has the
right to request assistance from another inspector or department of the City of
Reading, including but not limited to a property maintenance inspector or a
trades inspector. In evaluating the inspection, the inspector has the right to
review records of other City departments or divisions.
   E.   At any time after the receipt of the health and safety inspection
report, the Property Maintenance Division may undertake such further actions or
inspections as it deems appropriate consistent with the applicable ordinances
of the City of Reading, including, but not limited to, a full inspection for
any applicable codes compliance and/or the issuance of a notice of violation
based upon the health and safety inspection report to repair or remediate or
otherwise correct any deficiencies indicated in the health and safety
inspection report within such time as may be set forth in the notice of
violation.
   F.   Failure to appear for inspection. If the owner or authorized agent
cannot be available at the proposed time, said owner or authorized agent shall
provide no less than twenty-four- hour written notice to the Property
Maintenance Division. Upon failure to give such written notice or upon failure
to gain entry, an administrative fee will be assessed against the owner failing
to supply written notice to appear. If the property owner or authorized agent
fails to appear for the second scheduled inspection, an administrative fee will
be assessed against the property owner. If the property owner or authorized
agent fails to appear for the third scheduled inspection, the Property
Maintenance Division shall assess an administrative fee and may placard the
subject property and/or promptly seek an administrative search or inspection
warrant from a court of competent jurisdiction by supplying all necessary
affidavits and testimony in support thereof. Refer to the City of Reading Fee
Schedule for appropriate fees. 3
2.   Editor's Note: See
Ch. 212, Fees.
3.   Editor's Note: See
Ch. 212, Fees.
§ 431-205. Fees.
   A.   All fees required for a health and safety inspection shall be
established by City Council as adopted by the City of Reading Fee Schedule. 4
   B.   Nonpayment. Nonpayment shall not preclude performance of an inspection
or recheck. In the event of nonpayment, the City reserves the right to initiate
collection activities and the appropriate legal action if the bill is not paid.
4.   Editor's Note: See
Ch. 212, Fees.
§ 431-206. Health and safety inspection report.
   A.   Report. Upon the completion of a health and safety inspection, a report
setting forth the deficiencies found during the inspection shall be prepared.
The report shall at a minimum state the following:
      (1)   Address of the property inspected.
      (2)   Owner's name and mailing address. (P.O. box addresses will not be
accepted.)
      (3)   Date of inspection.
      (4)   Name, position (buyer or owner and their authorized agents) and
address of person(s) requesting the inspection.
      (5)   Deficiencies found per requirements of this Part. If no
deficiencies are found per this Part, it shall be so indicated.
      (6)   Time to cure deficiencies.
      (7)   Directive to cure deficiencies.
      (8)   Right to appeal as defined herein by §
431-207D. If the property has been found to be a commercial use, the health and
safety inspection report shall indicate the zoning district the property is
located in, the permitted zoning use of the property and a business license.
   B.   Service. Upon the completion of the inspection, a copy of the health
and safety inspection report shall be personally delivered, mailed by first-
class delivery or emailed to the person or party requesting the inspection. If
the health and safety inspection is performed prior to sale, the buyer or the
buyer's agent may also request a copy of the Health and Safety Inspection
Report from the Property Maintenance Division.
   C.   Validity. The certificate of transfer will be valid for a period of 24
months. If a health and safety inspection is performed prior to sale, the
Health and Safety Inspection Report shall also be valid for a period of 24
months. If deficiencies or violations are not corrected within 120 days of the
original inspection, a subsequent inspection may be required to ensure no
additional violations or deficiencies have occurred since the initial
inspection. Any property with a Health and Safety Compliance Letter that
remains for sale for more than a twenty-four-month period, while owned by the
original applicant, shall undergo a new health and safety inspection at half
price.
§ 431-207. Report findings.
   A.   Findings of deficiencies or violations. If deficiencies or violations
for the current allowable use of the requirements of this Part are discovered,
they shall be set forth on a Health and Safety Inspection Report. Upon findings
of deficiencies or violations of this Part are found, a reinspection of the
property shall be scheduled to be performed upon expiration of the time period
provided for on the report to cure, correct or abate the violations. If the
health and safety inspection is completed prior to sale, the seller is
responsible for abating, curing, or rehabilitating any deficiencies found
within the abatement time indicated on the Health and Safety Inspection Report.
If the health and safety inspection is completed after the sale, the buyer is
responsible for curing deficiencies within the abatement time indicated on the
Health and Safety Inspection Report.
   B.   No deficiencies found. If no deficiencies or violations per this Part
are discovered during the health and safety inspection, a Health and Safety
Compliance Letter shall be issued by the City of Reading Property Maintenance
Division as stated herein.
   C.   Condemnation. Nothing in this Part shall preclude an inspector from
placarding or condemning a property as unfit for human habitation pursuant to
Code of the City of Reading, if it is determined that the property is unfit for
human habitation.
   D.   Appeals. If a person disagrees with findings in a notice of violation,
they may appeal said findings by requesting a hearing in writing within five
days of receipt of the notice of violation addressed to the Director of
Community Development or his designee, Room
3-06 City Hall, 815 Washington Street, Reading, PA 19601. Any subsequent appeal
shall be filed to the Berks County Court of Common Pleas pursuant to 2
Pa.C.S.A. §§ 751 and 752.
§ 431-208. Health and safety compliance letter and rental compliance letter;
extensions.
   A.   Issuance. Upon determination by a Property Maintenance Inspector of no
findings of violations or deficiencies of this Part, a Health and Safety
Compliance Letter shall be prepared and issued to the person requesting the
inspection. The letter shall be served upon the person requesting the
inspection via first class mail or emailed and a copy shall be placed in the
property file in the Property Maintenance Division. The Health and Safety
Compliance Letter shall state that as of the date of issuance of the letter the
property complied with this Part. The letter shall not be meant to be nor
interpreted that the property is in compliance with the Code of the City of
Reading.
   B.   Request for extension. The person requesting an inspection may submit
to the City of Reading Property Maintenance Division in writing a request for
an extension of time of the validity of the Health and Safety Compliance
Letter.
   C.   Timing to request extension. A request for an extension may be
requested at the time of the first reinspection.
   D.   Requirements. A request for an extension of the Health and Safety
Compliance Letter shall, at a minimum, set forth the reason for the request and
the requested length of extension of validity of the compliance letter.
   E.   Response. The City of Reading Property Maintenance Division, at its
discretion, may approve or reject a request for an extension of the time period
for the validity of a Health and Safety Compliance Letter. The Property
Maintenance Division shall notify the person requesting the extension of its
decision to accept or reject their request within 14 calendar days of receipt
of request as evident by the time stamp of the City of Reading Property
Maintenance Division acknowledging receipt. Said notice shall be mailed via
first class mail or emailed to the person requesting the extension. If the
request is rejected, an inspection must be requested and performed as required
by this Part upon expiration of the validity of the compliance letter if
necessary to comply with this Part.
   F.   Rental compliance letter. If the property being sold is a rental unit
which has undergone a full rental inspection per the Code of the City of
Reading within six months of transfer of the property and a letter has been
issued by the City of Reading Property Maintenance Division stating that the
property is code compliant, the property is not required to undergo a health
and safety inspection. The seller or buyer may request a Health and Safety
Compliance Letter based on the Rental Compliance Letter.
§ 431-209. Permits for corrective work.
If permits are required to perform work to cure, correct, abate or remediate
any deficiencies or violations noted on the Health and Safety Inspection
Report, the person requesting the inspection shall be responsible to obtain or
ensure obtaining of any and all permits required to perform such work.
§ 431-210. Nonexclusive inspection.
   A.   The performance of a Health and Safety Inspection shall not remove a
property from the schedule of routine inspections of rental properties in the
City of Reading as conducted per the City of Reading Property Maintenance Code
(
Chapter 180, Part 14). A Health and Safety Inspection shall also not preclude
performance of an inspection by the Department of Fire and Rescue Services or
Health Inspector of the City of Reading Property Maintenance Division, City of
Reading Zoning Office or other City office as provided for in the Code of the
City of Reading.
   B.   Nothing in this Part shall preclude the performance of an inspection
upon receipt of a complaint of violation of the Code of the City of Reading
regarding the subject property.
§ 431-211. Enforcement.
This Part shall be enforced under the jurisdiction of the City of Reading
Property Maintenance Division. Enforcement is delegated to the Property
Maintenance Division.
§ 431-212. Regulations and forms.
The Property Maintenance Division is hereby authorized to establish
regulations, consistent with the provisions of this Part, to prepare and
distribute forms to implement this Part and to set criteria and provide for the
qualifications and training as to applicable City ordinances and regulations of
certified inspectors and to do any and all other acts as are necessary to
implement the terms of this Part.
§ 431-213. Exemptions.
The following real estate transactions shall be exempted from the certificate
of transfer and health and safety inspection requirements:
   A.   The conveyance of an owner occupied primary residential property
transferring from a decedent(s) to his devisee(s) or heir(s).
   B.   The conveyance of an owner-occupied primary residential property
transferring between spouses due to a divorce action.
   C.   The conveyance of a property to a municipality, township, school
district or county or its agencies pursuant to acquisition by the municipality,
township, school district or county of a tax delinquent property at sheriff
sale or tax claim department sale.
   D.   The conveyance of a property to the Commonwealth or to any of its
instrumentalities, agencies or political subdivisions by gift, dedication or
deed in lieu of condemnation or deed of confirmation in connection with
condemnation proceedings, or a reconveyance by the condemning body of the
property condemned to the owner of record at the time of condemnation, which
reconveyance may include property line adjustments, provided said reconveyance
is made within one year from the date of condemnation.
§ 431-214. Violators subject to charge of summary offense.
Any person who shall violate a provision of this Part, or who shall fail to
comply with any of the requirements thereof or any amendments thereof, shall be
subject to a charge of summary offense and the fines and/or penalties set forth
herein.
§ 431-215. Penalties.
The following penalties may be levied on either or both the seller and buyer,
or new owner should either fail to comply with the terms of this Part:
   A.   Failure to obtain a certificate of transfer within 15 days of the time
the property is offered for sale or transfer will result in a penalty as per
the City of Reading Fee Schedule. 5
   B.   Failure to correct any deficiencies per the Health and Safety
Inspection Report will result in penalties as stated in the Property
Maintenance Code.
5.   Editor's Note: See
Ch. 212, Fees.
§ 431-216. Other causes of action.
Nothing in this section shall preclude the City of Reading Property Maintenance
Inspector instituting the appropriate proceeding at law or in equity, to
restrain, correct or abate such violation, or to require the removal or
termination of the unlawful occupancy of the structure in violation of the
provisions of this Code or of the order or direction made pursuant thereto. Any
action taken by the authority having jurisdiction on such premises shall be
charged against the real estate upon which the structure is located and shall
be a lien upon such real estate.
§ 431-217. Liability of City, buyer and inspector.
   A.   The Health and Safety Inspection report should not be construed as a
full property maintenance inspection and is not intended to replace such or
supplement any private inspection of the condition of the property as may be
deemed desirable by the property owner or other entities.
   B.   Neither the enactment of this Part nor the preparation and delivery of
any document pursuant hereto shall impose any liability upon any City Inspector
for any errors or omissions contained in any report nor shall the City or City
Inspector bear any liability not otherwise imposed by law. The owner and
subsequent buyer of any property shall remain wholly liable for compliance with
the City's Property Maintenance Code (
Chapter 180, Part 14), trades codes, the Zoning Ordinance (
Chapter 600) and any and all other applicable ordinances of the City.
Chapter 433
PUBLIC ART
§
433-101.   Purpose.
§
433-102.   Evaluation and approval of public art applications.
§
433-103.   Maintenance of public art.
[HISTORY: Adopted by the City Council of the City of Reading 8-9-2021 by Ord.
No. 54-2021.]
§ 433-101. Purpose.
Art of all types and experiences located in public places and open to all is a
vital part of a creative place-making project when it is joined to a larger
vision for community goals and for the community itself. The purpose of this
Chapter is to establish a process for the City to consider public art projects
that will effectively enliven neighborhoods and create outcomes such as safety,
livability, walkability, health, and economic development.
§ 433-102. Evaluation and Approval of Public Art Applications.
   A.   Any person, organization or entity wishing to place any artwork
installation upon public property shall submit such proposal to the City
Clerk's Office.
   B.   An internal Public Art Review Committee shall review each proposal. The
Committee shall be composed of the Historic Preservation Specialist, a City
Planner, the Public Works Operations Division Manager, the City Clerk and
Traffic Sergeant or his representative. The Director of Public Works shall
appoint a Chairperson from the membership. The Berks Arts Council shall be an
ex officio member of the committee to provide advice on art but shall not have
a vote.
   C.   The Public Art Review Committee shall provide a written evaluation of
each proposal based on the following factors: the suitability and
appropriateness of the proposed location for the installation; the proposers'
plan and ability for maintenance and upkeep of the installation; and provisions
for insuring the memorial against damage, vandalism and disrepair. In addition,
if the proposed location of an art installation has been subject to a master or
comprehensive-planning initiative, the proposed installation should be in
comport with any such valid plan. The Review Committee shall provide this
written evaluation to City Council with a recommendation.
   D.   At its discretion, the Public Art Review Committee may request the
approval of or advice of the proposed art installation from the Planning
Commission.
   E.   Any mural, banner, or other artwork installation proposed to be located
within or immediately adjacent to a designated historic or conservation
district shall be subject to the advance approval of the Historic Architectural
Review Board.
   F.   Approval of the installation shall require the approval of City Council
by resolution.
§ 433-103. Maintenance of Public Art.
   A.   It shall be the policy of the City of Reading that the maintenance and
upkeep of any art installation shall be the responsibility of the person or
entity placing such approved art installation on any property for a minimum of
two years. A plan for the care and maintenance of the artwork, including
graffiti abatement, and removal of the installation at the end of the two-year
permit period or when directed to do so by the City of Reading Public Works
Director.
   B.   In the event an art installation falls into disrepair and is not
promptly repaired by the person of entity that installed it, the Director of
Public Works, the City may provide written notice ordering the person or entity
to remove the installation within 30 days. If the person or entity fails to
remove the art installation or agree to a schedule for the removal of the
artwork, approval of which is in the City's sole discretion, at the end of the
two-year permit period or within the 30-day period on order of the Public Works
Director, the City shall remove the installation at the person or entity's
expense.
   C.   The Public Art Review Committee shall have purview over existing art
installations and may promulgate policies and programs that improve this
program with little or no public expense.
   D.   Vandalism to any art installation or the grounds that the installation
sits on shall be subject to enforcement under the PA Crimes Code 18 Pa. C.S.
53304 Criminal Mischief and 53307 Institutional Vandalism.
   E.   The owner of the artwork installation shall indemnify the City, its
officials, officers, employees and/or agents, from and against any and all
third party claims related to the artwork installation.
Chapter 438
RAIN BARRELS
§
438-1.   Definitions.
§
438-2.   Authorized users.
§
438-3.   Authorized uses.
§
438-4.   Maximum size and number.
§
438-5.   Height.
§
438-6.   Location.
§
438-7.   Rain barrels in historic districts.
§
438-8.   Specifications.
§
438-9.   Alternative materials, design and methods of construction and
equipment.
§
438-10.   Connections.
§
438-11.   Operation.
§
438-12.   Maintenance.
§
438-13.   Underground cisterns and rain barrels.
§
438-14.   Abandonment.
§
438-15.   Enforcement.
§
438-16.   Violations and penalties.
§
438-17.   Appeals.
GENERAL REFERENCES
Property maintenance — See
Ch. 180, Parts 12 and 13.
Stormwater management — See
Ch. 505.
§ 438-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
   COLLECTING STRUCTURE — Any house, garage, building or canopy that possesses
a roof drainage system utilized to collect precipitation and/or rainwater in a
containment vessel.
   NONPOTABLE — Water that has not been examined, properly treated and approved
as safe for consumption.
   RAIN BARREL — A ready-made or self-fabricated aboveground durable
fiberglass, polypropylene, resin, recycled steel or lined wooden containment
vessel that collects rainwater for nonpotable outdoor use from a rooftop
drainage system.
§ 438-2. Authorized users.
Rain barrels may only be installed by fee simple owners of real property, or by
tenants who obtain written permission from the owner prior to installation.
§ 438-3. Authorized uses.
Rain barrels shall only be used to collect rainwater for nonpotable use on
lawns and gardens, for irrigation, for washing vehicles and for other outdoor
uses. Under no circumstances shall water from a rain barrel be used for any
potable purpose including, without limitation, drinking, cooking or bathing.
§ 438-4. Maximum size and number.
The maximum capacity of a rain barrel shall not exceed 75 gallons. Multiple
interconnected rain barrels are permitted.
§ 438-5. Height.
The height of a rain barrel shall not exceed six feet above the surrounding
grade. An elevated platform is permitted, but the height of the Rain barrel and
platform together shall not exceed the six-foot height limitation.
§ 438-6. Location.
   A.   Rain barrels shall be installed aboveground.
   B.   Rain barrels shall not be placed less than one foot away from any
collecting structure.
   C.   To prevent tipping, rain barrels shall be placed on a flat, stable
surface or platform.
   D.   Rain barrels must be situated at ground level and may not be installed
on porches or decks located above ground level on any multistory collecting
structure.
   E.   Rain barrels located on sidewalks may not project into the areaway
beyond that allowed by regulations of the City Engineer.
§ 438-7. Rain barrels in historic districts.
Rain barrels installed in any historic district must conform to any aesthetic
design, construction or landscaping requirements of the Historical
Architectural Review Board and shall require a certificate of appropriateness
prior to installation, including any requirement that the rain barrels be
screened or shielded to obscure their view.
§ 438-8. Specifications.
   A.   Rain barrels may be ready-made or self-fabricated of durable
fiberglass, polypropylene, resin, recycled steel or wood.
   B.   Wooden rain barrels must be lined.
   C.   Recycled rain barrels may not have been previously used as containment
vessels for substances regulated by the Toxic Substances Control Act, 15 U.S.C.
§ 2601 et seq.
   D.   All interior surfaces of a recycled rain barrel must be washed clean
with soap and water before the rain barrel is put into service.
   E.   Every rain barrel must be equipped with an automatic stormwater
diverter or automatic overflow system so that when the rain barrel is full,
rainwater is either diverted back into the collecting structure's downspout
system, or away from the foundation of the collecting structure by way of an
overflow hose and into a drainage swale. No drainage from an overflow hose
shall discharge upon any neighboring property.
   F.   Overflow piping must be at least one inch in diameter. [Amended 11-12-
2013 by Ord. No. 58-2013]
   G.   Rain barrels must be equipped with a mosquito-proof screen on the lid
and over the flow hole, constructed of corrosion-resistant wire or other
approved mesh.
   H.   Lids on rain barrels must be securely fastened to prevent access by
small children and animals.
   I.   Rain barrels fabricated from fiberglass, polypropylene and resin must
be opaque in color to inhibit algae growth.
   J.   The exterior of a rain barrel shall not be painted or decorated in such
a manner that is inconsistent with the surrounding area or offensive to the
general senses of neighboring properties and neighboring property owners.
   K.   Where not inconsistent with the standards set forth herein, rain
barrels shall otherwise conform to the standards for rain barrel design,
construction and operation set forth in the guidance document Rainwater
Catchment Design and Installation Standards, published on January 20, 2009, by
the American Rainwater Catchment Systems Association and the American Society
of Plumbing Engineers.
§ 438-9. Alternative materials, design and methods of construction and
equipment.
The provisions of this chapter are not intended to prevent the installation of
any material, or to prohibit any design or method of construction not
specifically prescribed by this chapter, provided that any such alternative has
been preapproved by the City Engineer or his/her designee. An alternative
material, design or method of construction may be approved, where the City
Engineer determines that the proposed design is satisfactory and complies with
the intent of this chapter, and that the material, method or work is offered
for the purpose intended, and is at least the equivalent of that prescribed in
this chapter in terms of quality, effectiveness, durability and safety.
§ 438-10. Connections.
Rain barrels shall be completely isolated from any potable water source.
§ 438-11. Operation.
Rain barrels shall be operated in such a manner as to avoid creating a public
or private nuisance.
§ 438-12. Maintenance.
   A.   The operation and maintenance of a rain barrel is the responsibility of
the property owner.
   B.   Rain barrel screens and associated gutters and downspouts must be kept
clear of debris and cleaned as needed to ensure proper operation.
   C.   Rain barrel constituent parts and accessories should be routinely
inspected, and if no longer functioning as intended, repaired or replaced.
   D.   During periods of time when the outdoor temperature is at or below 32°
F., the rain barrel shall either be disconnected from its water source, or the
volume of water in the rain barrel shall be maintained at 1/2 capacity, or the
rain barrel shall be drained and its spigot left open.
§ 438-13. Underground cisterns and rain barrels.
Underground cisterns or containment vessels installed below grade are not
regulated by this chapter and require a building permit, drainage plan and
approval by the City Engineer.
§ 438-14. Abandonment.
If the owner of a rain barrel elects to cease use of, or fails to properly
maintain the rain barrel, the owner shall abandon the system. To abandon the
system, the owner shall remove the rain barrel and reconfigure the connecting
structure's downspouts so that they once again drain into the City's stormwater
conveyance system.
§ 438-15. Enforcement.
The Property Maintenance Division of the Department of Community Development
for the City of Reading, Pennsylvania, shall enforce this chapter and its
sections through its officers, inspectors and/or authorized agents.
§ 438-16. Violations and penalties.
   A.   Upon complaint for the first violation of this chapter, a warning will
be issued noting the necessary action to correct the violation. A reinspection
is not necessary.
   B.   Upon complaint for the second violation of this chapter within a
twelve-month period, a violation notice shall be issued in the amount of $25
and an educational session is mandatory for the correct operation and
maintenance of rain barrels.
   C.   For the third violation of this chapter within a twelve-month period,
violation notice shall be issued in the amount of $50.
   D.   For the fourth and subsequent violation of this chapter within a
twelve-month period, a violation notice shall be issued in the amount of $100.
§ 438-17. Appeals.
Any person aggrieved may appeal the same to the Berks County Court of Common
Pleas pursuant to 2 Pa.C.S.A. §§ 751 and 752.
Chapter 442
RECORDS, PUBLIC ACCESS
§
442-101.   Purpose.
§
442-102.   Definitions.
§
442-103.   Presumptions; exceptions.
§
442-104.   Format to request.
§
442-105.   Procedure.
§
442-106.   Review of request.
§
442-107.   Denial of request.
§
442-108.   Fees associated with request.
§
442-109.   Effective date.
[HISTORY: Adopted by the City Council of the City of Reading 12-8-2008 by Ord.
No. 81-2008 (
Ch. 1, Part 10, of the 2001 Code of Ordinances). Amendments noted where
applicable.]
STATE LAW REFERENCES
Right-to-Know Law — See 65 P.S. § 67.101 et seq.
§ 442-101. Purpose. [Amended 5-29-2012 by Ord. No. 58-2012]
   A.   The purpose of this policy is to assure compliance with the
Pennsylvania Right-to-Know Law, 65 P.S. § 67.101 et seq., as amended, to
provide prompt and efficient access to public records of the City of Reading,
to preserve the integrity of records, to minimize the financial impact to the
residents of the City of Reading regarding the resources utilized in the
receipt and processing of public record requests and the retrieval and copying
of public records, and to protect the privacy rights of individuals who submit
sensitive information to the City that is considered nonpublic, confidential,
or privileged under the Right-to-Know Law. 1
   B.   It is the policy of the City of Reading to require the presence of a
designated employee when public records are examined and inspected and to
charge reasonable fees for duplication of public records of the City of
Reading. The City of Reading designates the Law Department as responsible for
assuring compliance with the Pennsylvania Right-to- Know Law, in accordance
with the following guidelines.
1.   Editor's Note: Amended during codification (see
Ch. 1, General Provisions, Part 2).
§ 442-102. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
   ADMINISTRATIVE PROCEEDING — A proceeding by an agency, the outcome of which
is required to be based on a record or documentation prescribed by law or in
which a statute or regulation is particularized in application to individuals.
The term includes an appeal.
   AGENCY — A commonwealth agency, a local agency, a judicial agency or a
legislative agency.
   AGGREGATED DATA — A tabulation of data which relate to broad classes, groups
or categories so that it is not possible to distinguish the properties of
individuals within those classes, groups or categories.
   APPEALS OFFICER — As follows:
   A.   For a commonwealth agency or a local agency, the appeals officer
designated under § 503(a). [65 P.S. § 67.503(a)]
   B.   For a judicial agency, the individual designated under § 503(b). [65
P.S. § 67.503(b)]
   C.   For a legislative agency, the individual designated under § 503(c). [65
P.S. § 67.503(c)]
   D.   For the Attorney General, State Treasurer, Auditor General and local
agencies in possession of criminal investigative records, the individual
designated under § 503(d). [65 P.S. § 67.503(d)]
   CERTIFICATION — Legal verification of a public record performed at the
behest of the requester, does not include notarization. [Added 5-23-2011 by
Ord. No. 25-2011]
   CONFIDENTIAL PROPRIETARY INFORMATION — Commercial or financial information
received by an agency:
   A.   Which is privileged or confidential.
   B.   The disclosure of which would cause substantial harm to the competitive
position of the person that submitted the information.
   FINANCIAL RECORD — Any of the following:
   A.   Any account, voucher or contract dealing with:
      (1)   The receipt or disbursement of funds by an agency.
      (2)   An agency's acquisition, use or disposal of services, supplies,
materials, equipment or property.
   B.   The salary or other payments or expenses paid to an officer or employee
of an agency, including the name and title of the officer or employee.
   C.   A financial audit report. The term does not include work papers
underlying an audit.
   HOMELAND SECURITY — Governmental actions designed to prevent, detect,
respond to and recover from acts of terrorism, major disasters and other
emergencies, whether natural or man- made. The term includes activities
relating to the following:
   A.   Emergency preparedness and response, including preparedness and
response activities by volunteer medical, police, emergency management,
hazardous materials and fire personnel.
   B.   Intelligence activities.
   C.   Critical infrastructure protection.
   D.   Border security.
   E.   Ground, aviation and maritime transportation security.
   F.   Biodefense.
   G.   Detection of nuclear and radiological materials.
   H.   Research on next-generation securities technologies.
   INDEPENDENT AGENCY — Any board, commission or other agency or officer of the
commonwealth that is not subject to the policy supervision and control of the
Governor. The term does not include a legislative or judicial agency.
   LEGISLATIVE RECORD — Any of the following relating to a legislative agency
or a standing committee, subcommittee or conference committee of a legislative
agency:
   A.   A financial record.
   B.   A bill or resolution that has been introduced and amendments offered
thereto in committee or in legislative session, including resolutions to adopt
or amend the ruler.
   C.   Fiscal notes.
   D.   The minutes of, record of attendance of members at a public hearing or
a public committee meeting and all recorded votes taken in a public committee
meeting.
   E.   The transcript of a public hearing when available.
   F.   Any administrative staff manuals or written policies.
   G.   An audit report.
   H.   Committee reports.
   LOCAL AGENCY — Any of the following:
   A.   Any political subdivision, intermediate unit, charter school, cyber
charter school or public trade or vocational school.
   B.   Any local, intergovernmental, regional or municipal agency, authority,
council, board, commission or similar governmental entity.
   OFFICE OF OPEN RECORDS — The Office of Open Records established in the
Pennsylvania Right-to-Know Law.
   PAGE — See "photocopy." [Added 5-23-2011 by Ord. No. 25-2011]
   PERSONAL FINANCIAL INFORMATION — An individual's personal credit, charge or
debit card information; bank account information; bank, credit or financial
statements; account or PIN numbers and other information relating to an
individual's personal finances.
   PHOTOCOPY — Either a single-sided copy or one side of a double-sided black-
and-white copy of a standard eight-and-one-half-inch-by-eleven-inch page.
[Added 5-23-2011 by Ord. No. 25-2011]
   PRIVILEGE — The attorney-work product doctrine, the attorney-client
privilege, the doctor- patient privilege, the speech and debate privilege or
other privilege recognized by a court interpreting the laws of this
commonwealth.
   PUBLIC RECORD — A record, including a financial record, of a commonwealth or
local agency that:
   A.   Is not exempt under § 708. [65 P.S. § 67.708]
   B.   Is not exempt from being disclosed under any other federal or state law
or regulation or judicial order or decree.
   C.   Is not protected by a privilege.
   RECORD — Information, regardless of physical form or characteristics, that
documents a transaction or activity of an agency and that is created, received
or retained pursuant to law or in connection with a transaction, business or
activity of the agency. The term includes a document, paper, letter, map, book,
tape, photograph, film or sound recording, information stored or maintained
electronically and a data-processed or image-processed document.
   REQUESTER — A person that is a legal resident of the United States and
requests a record pursuant to this chapter. The term includes an agency.
   RESPONSE — Access to a record or an agency's written notice to a requester
granting, denying or partially granting and partially denying access to a
record.
   SPECIALIZED DOCUMENTS — Nonstandard sized documents, including but not
limited to blue prints or color copies. [Added 5-23-2011 by Ord. No. 25-2011]
   TERRORIST ACT — A violent or life-threatening act that violates the criminal
laws of the
United States or any state and appears to be intended to:
   A.   Intimidate or coerce a civilian population.
   B.   Influence the policy of a government.
   C.   Affect the conduct of a government by mass destruction, assassination
or kidnapping.
   TRADE SECRET —
   A.   Information, including a formula, drawing, pattern, compilation,
including a customer list, program, device, method, technique or process that:
      (1)   Derives independent economic value, actual or potential, from not
being generally known to and not being readily ascertainable by proper means by
other persons who can obtain economic value from its disclosure or use.
      (2)   Is the subject of efforts that are reasonable under the
circumstances to maintain its secrecy.
   B.   The term includes data processing software obtained by an agency under
a licensing agreement prohibiting disclosure.
§ 442-103. Presumptions; exceptions.
   A.   Requirement. A local agency shall provide public records in accordance
with the Pennsylvania Right-to-Know Act.
   B.   Prohibition. A local agency may not deny a requester access to a public
record due to the intended use of the public record by the requester unless
otherwise provided by law.
   C.   General rule. A record in the possession of a local agency shall be
presumed to be a public record. The presumption shall not apply if:
      (1)   The record is exempt under this chapter.
      (2)   The record is protected by a privilege.
      (3)   The record is exempt from disclosure under any other federal or
state law or regulation or judicial order or decree.
   D.   Burden of proof. The burden of proving that a record is exempt from
public access shall be on the agency receiving a request by a preponderance of
the evidence.
   E.   Exceptions. The following records are exempt from access:
      (1)   Records which would result in the loss of federal or state funds.
      (2)   Records which would be likely to result in a substantial risk of
physical harm to or the personal security of an individual.
      (3)   Records maintained for homeland security, law enforcement or other
public safety activity that would jeopardize or threaten public safety or
preparedness or public protection or a record that is designated classified by
a military authority.
      (4)   Records that would create a reasonable endangering of the safety or
the physical security of a building, public utility, resource, infrastructure,
facility or information storage system including:
         (a)   Documents or data relating to computer hardware, source files,
software and system networks that could jeopardize computer security by
exposing a vulnerability.
         (b)   Lists of infrastructure, resources and significant special
events, including those defined by the federal government in the National
Infrastructure Protections, which are deemed critical due to their nature and
which result from risk analysis; threat assessments; consequences assessments;
antiterrorism protective measures and plans; counterterrorism measures and
plans; and security and response needs assessments.
         (c)   Building plans or infrastructure records that expose or create
vulnerability through disclosure of the location, configuration or security of
critical systems, including public utility systems, structural elements,
technology, communication, electrical, fire suppression, ventilation, water,
wastewater, sewage and gas systems.
      (5)   A record regarding computer hardware, software and networks,
including administrative or technical records, which, if disclosed, would be
reasonably likely to jeopardize computer security.
      (6)   A record of an individual's medical, psychiatric or psychological
history or disability status, including an evaluation, consultation,
prescription, diagnosis or treatment; results of tests, including drug tests;
enrollment in a health care program or program designed for participation by
persons with disabilities, including vocation rehabilitation, workers'
compensation and unemployment compensation; or related information that would
disclose individually identifiable health information.
      (7)   Personal identification information.
         (a)   The following personal identification information:
            [1]   A record containing all or part of a person's social security
number; driver's license number; personal financial information; home, cellular
or personal telephone numbers; personal email addresses; employee number or
other confidential personal identification number.
            [2]   A spouse's name, marital status, beneficiary or dependent
information.
            [3]   The home address of a law enforcement officer or judge.
         (b)   Nothing in this subsection shall preclude the release of the
name, position, salary, actual compensation or other payments or expenses,
employment contract, employment-related contract or agreement and length of
service of a public official or an agency employee.
         (c)   An agency may redact the name or other identifying information
relating to an individual performing an undercover or covert law enforcement
activity from a record.
      (8)   The following records relating to an agency employee:
         (a)   A letter of reference or recommendation pertaining to the
character or qualifications of an identifiable individual, unless it was
prepared in relation to the appointment of an individual to fill a vacancy in
an elected office or an appointed office requiring Senate confirmation.
         (b)   A performance rating or review.
         (c)   The result of a civil service or similar test administered by a
commonwealth agency, legislative agency or judicial agency. The result of a
civil service or similar test administered by a local agency shall not be
disclosed if restricted by a collective bargaining agreement. Only test scores
of individuals who obtained a passing score on a test administered by a local
agency may be disclosed.
         (d)   The employment application of an individual who is not hired by
the agency.
         (e)   Workplace support services program information.
         (f)   Written criticisms of an employee.
         (g)   Grievance material, including documents related to
discrimination or sexual harassment.
         (h)   Information regarding discipline, demotion or discharge
contained in a personnel file. This subsection shall not apply to the final
action of an agency that results in demotion or discharge.
         (i)   An academic transcript.
      (9)   A record pertaining to strategy or negotiations relating to labor
relations or collective bargaining and related arbitration proceedings. This
subsection shall not apply to a final or executed contract or agreement between
the parties in a collective bargaining procedure.
      (10)   In the case of the arbitration of a dispute or grievance under a
collective bargaining agreement, an exhibit entered into evidence at an
arbitration proceeding, a transcript of the arbitration or the opinion. This
subsection shall not apply to the final award or order of the arbitrator in a
dispute or grievance procedure.
      (11)   The draft of a bill, resolution, regulation, statement of policy,
management directive, ordinance or amendment thereto prepared by or for an
agency.
         (a)   A record that reflects:
            [1]   The internal, predecisional deliberations of an agency, its
members, employees or officials or predecisional deliberations between agency
members, employees or officials and members, employees or officials of another
agency, including predecisional deliberations relating to a budget
recommendation, legislative proposal, legislative amendment, contemplated or
proposed policy or course of action or any research, memos or other documents
used in the predecisional deliberations.
            [2]   The strategy to be used to develop or achieve the successful
adoption of a budget, legislative proposal or regulation.
         (b)   The following shall apply to agencies subject to 65 Pa.C.S. Ch.
7 (relating to open meetings in a manner consistent with 65 Pa.C.S. Ch. 7). A
record which is not otherwise exempt from access under this chapter and which
is presented to a quorum for deliberation in accordance with 65 Pa.C.S. Ch. 7
shall be a public record.
         (c)   This subsection shall not apply to a written or Internet
application or other document that has been submitted to request commonwealth
funds.
         (d)   This subsection shall not apply to the results of public opinion
surveys, polls, focus groups, marketing research or similar effort designed to
measure public opinion.
      (12)   A record that constitutes or reveals a trade secret or
confidential proprietary information.
      (13)   Notes and working papers prepared by or for a public official or
agency employee used solely for that official's or employee's own personal use,
including telephone message slips, routing slips and other materials that do
not have an official purpose.
      (14)   Records that would disclose the identity of an individual who
lawfully makes a donation to an agency unless the donation is intended for or
restricted to providing remuneration or personal tangible benefit to a named
public official or employee of the agency, including lists of potential donors
compiled by an agency to pursue donations, donor profile information or
personal identifying information relating to a donor.
      (15)   Unpublished lecture notes, unpublished manuscripts, unpublished
articles, creative works in progress, research-related material and scholarly
correspondence of a community college or an institution of the State System of
Higher Education or a faculty member, staff employee, guest speaker or student
thereof.
      (16)   Academic transcripts.
      (17)   Examinations, examination questions, scoring keys or answers to
examinations. This subsection shall include licensing and other examinations
relating to the qualifications of an individual and to examinations given in
primary and secondary schools and institutions of higher education.
      (18)   A record of an agency relating to or resulting in a criminal
investigation, including:
         (a)   Complaints of potential criminal conduct other than a private
criminal complaint.
         (b)   Investigative materials, notes, correspondence, videos and
reports.
         (c)   A record that includes the identity of a confidential source or
the identity of a suspect who has not been charged with an offense to whom
confidentiality has been promised.
         (d)   A record that includes information made confidential by law or
court order.
         (e)   Victim information, including any information that would
jeopardize the safety of the victim.
      (19)   Law enforcement.
         (a)   A record that, if disclosed, would do any of the following:
            [1]   Reveal the institution, progress or result of a criminal
investigation, except the filing of criminal charges.
            [2]   Deprive a person of the right to a fair trial or an impartial
adjudication.
            [3]   Impair the ability to locate a defendant or codefendant.
            [4]   Hinder an agency's ability to secure an arrest, prosecution
or conviction.
            [5]   Endanger the life or physical safety of an individual.
         (b)   This subsection shall not apply to information contained in a
police blotter as defined in 18 Pa.C.S.A. § 9102 (relating to definitions) and
utilized or maintained by the Pennsylvania State Police, local, campus, transit
or port authority police department or other law enforcement agency or in a
traffic report except as provided under 75 Pa.C.S.A. § 3754(b) (relating to
accident prevention investigations).
      (20)   A record of an agency relating to a noncriminal investigation,
including:
         (a)   Complaints submitted to an agency.
         (b)   Investigative materials, notes, correspondence and reports.
         (c)   A record that includes the identity of a confidential source,
including individuals subject to the act of December 12, 1986 (P.L. 1559, No.
169), known as the Whistleblower Law. 2
         (d)   A record that includes information made confidential by law.
         (e)   Work papers underlying an audit.
      (21)   A record that, if disclosed, would do any of the following:
         (a)   Reveal the institution, progress or result of an agency
investigation, except the imposition of a fine or civil penalty, the
suspension, modification or revocation of a license, permit, registration,
certification or similar authorization issued by an agency or an executed
settlement agreement unless the agreement is determined to be confidential by a
court.
         (b)   Deprive a person of the right to an impartial adjudication.
         (c)   Constitute an unwarranted invasion of privacy.
         (d)   Hinder an agency's ability to secure an administrative or civil
sanction.
         (e)   Endanger the life or physical safety of an individual.
      (22)   Records or parts of records, except time response logs pertaining
to audio recordings, telephone or radio transmissions received by emergency
dispatch personnel, including 911 recordings.
         (a)   This subsection shall not apply to a 911 recording, or a
transcript of a 911 recording, if the agency or a court determines that the
public interest in disclosure outweighs the interest in nondisclosure.
      (23)   DNA and RNA records.
      (24)   An autopsy record of a coroner or medical examiner and any
audiotape of a postmortem examination or autopsy, or a copy, reproduction or
facsimile of an autopsy report, a photograph, negative or print, including a
photograph or videotape of the body or any portion of the body of a deceased
person at the scene of death or in the course of a postmortem examination or
autopsy taken or made by or caused to be taken or made by the coroner or
medical examiner. This exception shall not limit the reporting of the name of
the deceased individual and the cause and manner of death.
      (25)   Draft minutes of any meeting of an agency until the next regularly
scheduled meeting of the agency.
      (26)   Minutes of an executive session and any record of discussions held
in executive session.
      (27)   Real estate.
         (a)   The contents of real estate appraisals, engineering or
feasibility estimates, environmental reviews, audits or evaluations made for or
by an agency relative to the following:
            [1]   The leasing, acquiring or disposing of real property or an
interest in real property.
            [2]   The purchase of public supplies or equipment included in the
real estate transaction.
            [3]   Construction projects.
         (b)   This subsection shall not apply once the decision is made to
proceed with the lease, acquisition or disposal of real property or an interest
in real property or the purchase of public supply or construction project.
      (28)   Library and archive circulation and order records of an
identifiable individual or groups of individuals.
      (29)   Library archived and museum materials, or valuable or rare book
collections or documents contributed by gift, grant, bequest or devise, to the
extent of any limitations imposed by the donor as a condition of the
contribution.
      (30)   A record identifying the location of an archeological site or an
endangered or threatened plant or animal species if not already known to the
general public.
      (31)   A proposal pertaining to agency procurement or disposal of
supplies, services or construction prior to the award of the contract or prior
to the opening and rejection of all bids; financial information of a bidder or
offeror requested in an invitation for bid or request for proposals to
demonstrate the bidder's or offeror's economic capability; or the identity of
members, notes and other records of agency proposal evaluation committees
established under 62 Pa.C.S.A. § 513 (relating to competitive sealed
proposals).
      (32)   A record or information relating to a communication between an
agency and its insurance carrier, administrative service organization or risk
management office.
         (a)   This subsection shall not apply to a contract with an insurance
carrier, administrative service organization or risk management office or to
financial records relating to the provision of insurance.
      (33)   Social services.
         (a)   A record or information:
            [1]   Identifying an individual who applies for or receives social
services.
            [2]   Relating to the following:
               [a]   The type of social services received by an individual.
               [b]   An individual's application to receive social services,
including a record or information related to an agency decision to grant, deny,
reduce or restrict benefits, including a quasi-judicial decision of the agency
and the identity of a caregiver or others who provide services to the
individual.
               [c]   Eligibility to receive social services, including the
individual's income, assets, physical or mental health, age, disability, family
circumstances or record of abuse.
      (34)   Correspondence between a person and a member of the General
Assembly and records accompanying the correspondence which would identify a
person that requests assistance or constituent services.
         (a)   This subsection shall not apply to correspondence between a
member of the General Assembly and a principal or lobbyist under 65 Pa.C.S.
Ch. 13A (relating to lobbyist disclosure).
      (35)   A record identifying the name, home address or date of birth of a
child 17 years of age or younger.
      (36)   Financial records. The exceptions set forth above. An agency shall
not disclose the identity of an individual performing an undercover or covert
law enforcement activity.
      (37)   Aggregated data. The exceptions set forth in Subsection E shall
not apply to aggregated data maintained or received by an agency, except for
data protected above.
      (38)   Construction. In determining whether a record is exempt from
access under this section, an agency shall consider and apply each exemption
separately.
2.   Editor's Note: See 43 P.S. § 1421 et seq.
§ 442-104. Format to request. [Amended 5-29-2012 by Ord. No. 58-2012]
All requests for public records of the City of Reading under this policy shall
be specific in identifying and describing each public record requested. In no
case shall the City of Reading be required to create a public record which does
not exist or to compile, maintain, format or organize a public record in a
manner in which the City of Reading does not currently compile, maintain,
format or organize the public record. Requests for public records shall be
submitted in writing and shall include the name and address to which the Law
Department should address its response. Requests may be made by mail, in
person, by email, or by facsimile and on a form provided by the City of Reading
entitled "Standard Right-to-Know Request Form," which is available upon request
at the City of Ready Law Department, Rm 2-54 City Hall, or on Readingpa.gov.
§ 442-105. Procedure. [Amended 5-29-2012 by Ord. No. 58-2012]
   A.   All requests for access to public records of the City of Reading shall
be directed to the City of Reading Law Department, Room 2-54 City Hall, between
the business hours of 8:00 a.m. to 4:00 p.m,. Monday through Friday, (except on
holidays) or at  solicitor@readingpa.org. Requests will be addressed within
five days of receipt.
   B.   Upon receiving a request for a public record, the Law Department shall
do all of the following:
      (1)   Note the date of receipt on the written request.
      (2)   Compute the day on which the five-day period will expire and make a
notation of the date on the written request.
      (3)   Maintain an electronic or paper copy of a written request,
including all documents submitted with the request until the request has been
fulfilled. If the request is denied, the written request shall be maintained
for 30 days or, if an appeal is filed, until a final determination is issued or
the appeal is deemed denied.
      (4)   Create a file for the retention of the original request, a copy of
the response, a record of written communications with the requestor and a copy
of other communications.
   C.   The Law Department shall respond to the requester within five business
days from the date of receipt of the written request. If the City of Reading
does not respond within five business days of receipt thereof, the request is
deemed denied.
   D.   The response provided by the City of Reading shall consist of:
      (1)   Approval for access to the public record;
      (2)   Review of the request by the Law Department; or
      (3)   Denial of access to the record requested.
   E.   If access to the public record requested is approved, the public record
shall be available for access during the regular business hours of the City of
Reading. The Law Department, or its designee, shall cooperate fully with the
requester, while also taking reasonable measures to protect the City of
Reading's public records from the possibility of theft and/or modification. The
presence of a designated employee is required when public records are examined
and inspected.
§ 442-106. Review of request.
[Amended 5-29-2012 by Ord. No. 58-2012]
   A.   If the request requires an extension of time for the City to produce
the records or provide a written response granting the request, the notice
provided by the City of Reading shall be in writing and include the reason for
the review, the expected response date, and an estimate of applicable fees owed
when the record becomes available, which shall be within 30 days of the
original deadline imposed under Chapter 9 of the Right-to-Know Law, 65 P.S. §§
67.901 through 67.905. If the City of Reading does not respond within 30 days
thereof, the request is deemed denied. Review of the request is limited to
situations where:
      (1)   The record requested contains information which is subject to
access, as well as information which is not subject to access that must be
redacted prior to a grant of access. The redacted information is considered a
denial as to that information.
      (2)   The record requires retrieval from a remote location.
      (3)   A timely response cannot be accomplished due to staffing
limitations.
      (4)   A legal review is necessary to determine whether the record
requested is subject to access.
      (5)   The requester has not complied with the City of Reading's policy
and procedure requirements.
      (6)   The requester refuses to pay the applicable fees.
      (7)   The extent or nature of the request precludes a response within the
required time period.
   B.   If access to the record requested is denied, the notice provided by the
City of Reading shall be in writing and shall outline each reason upon which
the decision to deny access to the records is based.
§ 442-107. Denial of request.
[Amended 6-15-2010 by Ord. No. 27-2010; 5-29-2012 by Ord. No. 58-2012]
   A.   A request may be denied if:
      (1)   The requester has made repeated requests for the same record and
the repeated requests have placed an unreasonable burden on the agency. A
denial for this purpose shall not restrict the ability to request a different
record.
      (2)   Timely access is not possible due to fire, flood, or other
disaster.
      (3)   Historical, ancient, or rare documents, records, archives and
manuscripts, when accessed, may, in the professional judgment of the curator or
custodian of records, cause physical damage or irreparable harm to the record.
      (4)   The record or information requested is exempt from disclosure under
any of the exceptions listed in § 708(b) of the Right-to-Know Law, 65 P.S. §
67.708(b).
      (5)   The information requested is protected by the attorney-work product
doctrine, the attorney-client privilege, the doctor-patient privilege, the
speech and debate privilege or other privilege recognized by a court
interpreting the laws of this commonwealth.
      (6)   The requested records or information is exempt from disclosure
under any other federal or state law or regulation or judicial order or decree.
      (7)   The request is not specific enough for the City to determine what
record(s) is sought.
      (8)   A request may be denied if the request requires the City to create
a record which does not currently exist or to compile, maintain, format or
organize a record in a manner in which the City does not currently compile,
maintain, format or organize the record.
   B.   If the request is denied or deemed denied, an appeal shall be filed
within 15 business days of the mailing date of the City's response or within 15
business days of a deemed denial with the Pennsylvania Office of Open Records
in accordance with the Pennsylvania Right- to-Know Law, Act 3 of 2008,
effective January 1, 2009, Chapter 11, 65 P.S. § 67.1101.
      (1)   Exception: Appeals of denials or deemed denials of requests for law
enforcement records which per the Right-to-Know Act an appeal shall be filed
the Berks County District Attorney's Office in accordance with said Act,
Chapter 11, 65 P.S. § 67.1101 and Chapter 5, 65 P.S. § 67.503.
   C.   This policy shall be posted conspicuously at the Law Department, Room
2-54 in City Hall in addition to the contact information for the State Office
of Open Records.
§ 442-108. Fees associated with request.
[Amended 5-23-2011 by Ord. No. 25-2011]
   A.   Fees for duplication of public records shall be as provided in
Chapter 212, Fees. 3
   B.   Prepayment.
      (1)   Estimate cost exceeds $100. In the event the estimated cost of
fulfilling a request submitted under this chapter is expected to exceed $100,
the Open Records Officer shall obtain payment of 50% of the expected cost in
advance of fulfilling (copying) the request to avoid unwarranted expense of
City of Reading resources. 4
      (2)   Prior to release. The City may obtain the cost of the records prior
to releasing the records.
   C.   Redaction. A fee to redact documents may not be charged. If a requester
wishes to inspect rather than receive a copy of a record and the records
contains both public and nonpublic information, the City shall redact the
nonpublic information and shall charge for copies, in accordance with the above
fee schedule, it must make of the redacted material in order for the requester
to view the public record. Should the requester choose to obtain copies of the
redacted documents after reviewing the records, no additional fee may be
charged.
   D.   Statutory fees. If a separate statute authorizes the City to charge a
set amount for a certain type of record, the City may charge no more than that
statutory amount.
   E.   Conversion to paper. If a record is only maintained electronically or
in other nonpaper media, duplication fee shall be limited to the lesser of the
fee for duplication on paper or the fee for duplication in the original media
unless the requester specifically requests for the record to be duplicated in
the more expensive media.
3.   Editor's Note: Amended during codification (see
Ch. 1, General Provisions, Part 2).
4.   Editor's Note: Amended during codification (see
Ch. 1, General Provisions, Part 2).
§ 442-109. Effective date.
This chapter shall take effect on January 1, 2009.
Chapter 453
SALES
Part 1
Sidewalk Sales
§
453-101.   Purpose.
§
453-102.   Sidewalk sales and displays.
§
453-103.   Definitions.
§
453-104.   Issuance of permit; display.
§
453-105.   Permitting for sidewalk sales outside Commercial Core.
§
453-106.   Prohibited conduct.
§
453-107.   Permit term and fees.
§
453-108.   Display standards.
§
453-109.   Special sidewalk sales.
§
453-110.   Application requirements.
§
453-111.   Review of application.
§
453-112.   Conditions for issuance of permit.
§
453-113.   Removal of improvements.
§
453-114.   Permit renewal.
§
453-115.   Written notice of violations; suspension of permit.
§
453-116.   Violations and penalties; effect on eligibility for license.
§
453-117.   Determination on application.
§
453-118.   Reservation of rights.
Part 2
Sidewalk Vendors
§
453-201.   Purpose.
§
453-202.   Title.
§
453-203.   Construal of provisions.
§
453-204.   Definitions.
§
453-205.   Permit required.
§
453-206.   Permit application; fee.
§
453-207.   Design and appearance standards.
§
453-208.   Sidewalk vendor operation standards.
§
453-209.   Suspension or revocation of permit.
§
453-210.   Code and License Appeals Board.
§
453-211.   Appeal to Court of Common Pleas.
§
453-212.   Enforcement.
§
453-213.   Construction and severability.
§
453-214.   Violations and penalties.
Part 3
Mobile Vendors
§
453-301.   Purpose.
§
453-302.   Title.
§
453-303.   Interpretation.
§
453-304.   Definitions.
§
453-305.   License required.
§
453-306.   License application.
§
453-307.   Design and appearance standards.
§
453-308.   Mobile vendor operation standards.
§
453-309.   Suspension or revocation of license.
§
453-310.   Code and License Appeals Board.
§
453-311.   Appeal to Court of Common Pleas.
§
453-312.   Enforcement.
§
453-313.   Violations and penalties.
[HISTORY: Adopted by the City Council of the City of Reading as indicated in
part histories. Amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Reading Downtown Improvement District Authority — See
Ch. 14, Part 5.
Property maintenance — See
Ch. 180, Part 14.
Peddling and soliciting — See
Ch. 410.
Streets and sidewalks — See
Ch. 508.
Part 1
Sidewalk Sales
[Adopted 5-14-2007 By Ord. No. 33-2007 (Ch. 10, Part 16, Of The 2001 Code Of
Ordinances)]
§ 453-101. Purpose.
The City of Reading City Council encourages an attractive, functional and
economically vital community and shopping areas that are safe and pleasant
environments to live near and to do business within. Council recognizes that
commercial development is a major identifying feature in a community, offering
impressions to residents and visitors alike of the quality of life available.
It is Council's intent to encourage commercial growth that contributes to a
vibrant and attractive community. As the current Code does not allow sidewalk
sales due to public health and safety concerns, Council believes that these
activities can greatly contribute to a pedestrian- friendly community if they
conform to specific public health, and safety requirements defined herein.
§ 453-102. Sidewalk sales and displays.
No person shall engage in the selling or display for sale of merchandise of any
kind on, over or upon any sidewalk without first applying for and obtaining a
permit from the City of Reading Codes Enforcement Office and then operating
within the terms and conditions of all applicable City ordinances. The sidewalk
sale permit enables the person or business to operate 52 sidewalk sales per
calendar year.
§ 453-103. Definitions.
For the purpose of this Part, the following terms shall have the following
meanings:
   ABUTTING PROPERTY — Property contiguous to a public street right-of-way on
which a sidewalk cafe will be operated under the terms of this Part.
   CITY ENGINEER — The Director of Public Works or his authorized
representative.
   COMMERCIAL CORE — The zoning district defined as the downtown center for
government services, offices, shopping, hotels, entertainment and cultural
activity.
   HEALTH OFFICER — The Health Officer of the City of Reading Codes Enforcement
Office or his authorized representative
   OWNER — Includes any owner of fee simple title, part owner, joint owner,
tenant in common, tenant in partnership, joint tenant or tenant by the entirety
of the whole of the land contiguous to the street right-of-way on which a
sidewalk cafe is to be operated under the authority of this Part.
   PEDESTRIAN WALKWAY — That portion of a sidewalk area which is free of any
obstruction, fixture or appurtenance and is used for pedestrian travel.
   PERSON — Includes a partnership, corporation, association, trust, estate or
other legally recognized entity, as well as an individual.
   PUBLIC SERVICE FACILITY — A public telephone, mailbox, bench or other
facility provided for the use of the general public.
   SIDEWALK — Any paved area between the curbline and a structure, whether
publicly or privately owned, which is used by the public or open to use by the
public.
   SIDEWALK SALE — Retail or wholesale selling of merchandise using racks,
table or freestanding merchandise outside and/or adjacent to buildings and
structures, and includes sales in areas such as sidewalks, walkways and parking
lots. Sidewalk sales do not include the sale and consumption of food and drink
in open-air, cafe-style seating with tables and chairs.
   STREET RIGHT-OF-WAY — The entire right-of-way of a public highway, public
alley or public road, including the designated sidewalk areas.
§ 453-104. Issuance of permit; display.
   A.   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, corporation, transient
merchant, church, club, charitable institution, hawker or peddler to vend, sell
or dispose of or offer to vend, sell, dispose of or display, any goods, wares,
merchandise, produce or vegetables on any public walk, street, alley or
anywhere within the City of Reading without registering with and receiving a
permit from the City Codes Enforcement Office.
   B.   The Codes Enforcement Office is hereby authorized to grant revocable
permits for the use of the sidewalks for sidewalk sales in the Commercial Core
Zoning District upon the following terms and conditions. Registration shall be
on a permit form approved by the City Council. When the Codes Enforcement
Office has approved the issuance of a sidewalk sales permit, the applicant
shall be issued a permit. The permit shall contain the information required on
the application, the expiration date, and one of the photographs submitted with
the application. The permit shall be carried by the applicant at all times when
engaged in sidewalk sales and shall be exhibited for inspection to any person
approached for purposes of sidewalk sales.
§ 453-105. Permitting for sidewalk sales outside Commercial Core.
Applications for sidewalk cafes outside the Commercial Core Zoning District
shall be submitted to the Codes Enforcement Office in accordance with the
regulations contained herein. Such applications shall be forwarded to City
Council for approval.
§ 453-106. Prohibited conduct.
No vendor or person shall exhibit, display, offer for sale or sell any indoor
furniture, appliances, mattresses or similar wares, or merchandise or place or
allow any to stand or remain on the sidewalks in the City of Reading, unless
they are set out for trash collection in accordance with the zoned trash
collection schedule.
§ 453-107. Permit term and fees.
   A.   The term of each sidewalk sale permit shall be specified on the permit
which is issued and shall not exceed 52 events per year.
B.   Fees required under this section shall be established by City Council and
included on the City's Fee Schedule. [Amended 8-26-2013 by Ord. No. 35-2013; 9-
28-2015 by Ord. No. 50-20151]
1.   Editor's Note: This ordinance also repealed former Subsection C, regarding
prorating and rebate of the annual permit fee, which immediately followed this
subsection.
§ 453-108. Display standards.
[Amended 9-28-2015 by Ord. No. 50-2015]
The Property Maintenance Division is hereby authorized to grant revocable
permits for the use of the sidewalk for the display for sale of merchandise,
flowers, floral arrangements and ornamental shrubbery not prohibited herein
upon the following terms and conditions:
   A.   No more than 52 sidewalk sales can occur during each calendar year.
   B.   The permit and regulated activity shall be valid only during a single
calendar year.
   C.   The permitted activity shall be conducted only as an accessory to a
business establishment lawfully operating on the first floor of the premises,
on the sidewalk in front of the principal place of business of such
establishment and by the entity which operates such establishment. All sales
shall be conducted within such establishment. No cash register or other
facility for the exchange of currency or otherwise receiving payment for goods
and services shall be permitted on the sidewalk.
   D.   The applicant shall have the consent of the owner and lessee, if any,
of the premises in front of which the permitted activity is to be conducted and
shall provide notice of the permitted activity to the adjoining property owner
(s).
   E.   There shall be no less than eight feet from the curbline to the front
of the nearest structure.
   F.   No sidewalk display shall be nearer than three feet zero inches to the
curb, except that if the sidewalk is nine feet zero inches or more in width,
then the distance from the curb shall be not less than one-third of the width
of the sidewalk with a maximum of two rows.
   G.   The applicant shall at all times maintain free and clear from all
obstruction an aisle not less than three feet in width providing access to any
establishment fronting on said sidewalk.
   H.   No permanent structure may be affixed to the sidewalk or any building.
The applicant shall be responsible for any damage caused to any sidewalk or
public property.
   I.   The sidewalk use shall not interfere with access to any public service
facility, create a nuisance or fire hazard.
   J.   At least one trash receptacle shall be provided by the business or
person and the premises shall be kept litter free.
   K.   No outdoor lighting or live or mechanical music shall be permitted.
   L.   The sidewalk display shall be permitted only during the hours the
business is open to the public or between the hours of 7:30 a.m. and 9:00 p.m.
   M.   The applicant shall agree to indemnify and save harmless the City of
Reading, its officers, agents, attorneys and employees from and against any
claim of loss, liability or damage by any person arising as a result of the
applicant's operation of the sidewalk use.
   N.   The applicant shall obtain and maintain in full force and effect
throughout the term of the permit a policy of general liability insurance,
which such policy shall name the City of Reading, its officers, agents,
attorneys and employees as additional insured, have a combined single limit of
not less the $1,000,000 and contain a provision prohibiting its cancellation
except upon 20 days' notice to the City of Reading. The applicant shall file
with the Property Maintenance Division, prior to the issuance of the permit, a
certificate evidencing the requisite insurance.
   O.   Any other conditions required or prescribed by the Property Maintenance
Division shall be reasonable and necessary to protect the health, welfare and
safety of the public, including the denial of the application.
§ 453-109. Special sidewalk sales.
[Amended 9-28-2015 by Ord. No. 50-2015]
Anything in this Part to the contrary notwithstanding, the City of Reading
Property Maintenance Division may permit the selling and display for sale of
merchandise on, over or upon the sidewalk at any location within the City for a
period not to exceed seven days in conjunction with any organized sidewalk
sales days open to all retail merchants within a specific neighborhood or City
block, as long as the affected merchants comply with the other terms of this
Part and other applicable City ordinances.
§ 453-110. Application requirements.
Each applicant for a permit under this Part shall submit three copies of his
application and plans for the sidewalk sale to the Codes Enforcement Office,
who shall issue a permit upon compliance with the terms and conditions of this
Part. Application must be made within 14 business days prior to the intended
start date. Applications for sidewalk sale permits shall include the following:
   A.   The name and street address of the applicant.
   B.   The name and street address of the owner of the business and owner of
the underlying freehold and/or abutting property owner if not the same person,
and:
      (1)   A description of the owner of the abutting property, if other than
a natural person, including the legal status (corporation, partnership, etc.)
and a general description of the type(s) of business operated on the abutting
property.
      (2)   Written authority in the form of a power of attorney from the owner
to submit the application if the applicant is not the owner of the abutting
property.
   C.   The name and street address of the registered agent for the service of
process, if the applicant represents a corporation; or the names and street
addresses of the officers or partners, if the applicant represents an
association, partnership or other entity.
   D.   The name and street address of the operator, manager or other person
responsible for the operation of the sidewalk sale.
   E.   The name under which the sidewalk sale will be operated.
   F.   A copy of the current City business license and zoning permit.
   G.   A site plan drawn to a scale of 1/2 inch equals one foot, showing:
      (1)   The entirety of the sidewalk abutting the property of the owner.
      (2)   The frontage of the property proposed for the sidewalk sale.
      (3)   All abutting properties.
      (4)   All existing sidewalk features including, but not limited to,
trees, utility poles, sign poles, fire hydrants, permanent litter receptacles,
telephone booths, news vending racks and mailboxes.
      (5)   Any bus stops within 25 feet on either side of the proposed
sidewalk sale area.
      (6)   Detailed drawings of legible proportions showing the limits of the
proposed sidewalk sale site, the design dimension and proposed location of all
proposed temporary structures (i.e., canopies, umbrellas, planters,
landscaping, tables, chairs, all exterior lighting, electrical outlets, etc.),
the proposed pedestrian walkway and the side and front elevations of the
proposed sidewalk sale area.
   H.   A copy or copies of the certificate or certificates of insurance
required to be provided.
§ 453-111. Review of application.
   A.   Before any permit is issued pursuant to this Part, the plans submitted
to the Codes Enforcement Office pursuant to this Part shall be referred to and
approved by the Public Works Director, Reading Police Department and Department
of Fire and Rescue Services.
   B.   The Codes Enforcement Office shall determine if the applicant has:
      (1)   Obtained the approval of the Public Works Director and Building
Official for any railing, flooring or other support or enclosure used in the
assembly, operation or enclosure of the sidewalk sale. No such railing,
flooring or other support or enclosure shall be considered an erection of,
addition to or a structural alteration of a building or structure under
applicable City Building Code unless such railing, flooring or other support or
enclosure is permanently attached to such building or structure.
      (2)   Obtained the approval of the Historical Architectural Review Board
(HARB) if the sidewalk sale is located within any area designated as part of an
historic district and if the applicant proposes any facilities which are under
the jurisdiction of the HARB. The HARB shall use the review criteria for such
plans relating to a sidewalk sale's specific location, size and structure, for
its compatibility of scale and design. Alteration in the plans for a sidewalk
sale approved by the HARB requires reapproval from the HARB. Once approval is
granted by the HARB, the approved plans are valid and do not require annual
reapproval. The HARB shall only review applications which have the written
approval from the Public Works Director as specified herein. [Amended 8-26-2013
by Ord. No. 35-2013]
      (3)   Complied with all rules, regulations and specifications of this
Part.
   C.   The Codes Enforcement Office may impose any other restriction on the
location, size or design of the sidewalk sale that, in his sole judgment,
protects the health, safety and welfare of the public.
§ 453-112. Conditions for issuance of permit.
   A.   Upon approval by the Property Maintenance Division of the plans
submitted by the applicant and upon the applicant furnishing to the City of
Reading the following, the Property Maintenance Division shall issue a permit
valid through the end of the calendar year: [Amended 9-28-2015 by Ord. No. 50-
2015]
      (1)   A hold-harmless agreement executed by the applicant and
indemnifying the City against loss, including costs and expenses, resulting
from injury to person or property as a direct or indirect result of the
operation of the sidewalk sales. Said hold-harmless agreement shall be subject
to the approval of the City Solicitor.
      (2)   Proof of liability insurance in the amount of $100,000 per
individual and $300,000 per occurrence.
   B.   Sidewalk sales permits are not transferable. Changes in ownership/
operation require reapplication for a permit.
§ 453-113. Removal of improvements.
   A.   If the City incurs any costs in removing any equipment or improvements
from a sidewalk sale for the following reasons: the establishment failed to
remove equipment at the close of the business day, the establishment went out
of business or the establishment failed to renew its permit, within 30 days of
the close of the year, the City shall remove and store all equipment and bill
the property owner for the actual costs of labor, materials, equipment or any
other item, service or expense incurred by the City to correct such violation,
plus any additional administrative fees. The equipment removed shall remain in
the City's possession until the bill from removal and any fines or fees are
paid in full.
   B.   Any bill for such removal of equipment undertaken pursuant to this
section shall be billed to and paid by the property owner within 60 days. Upon
failure of the property owner to pay the amounts due within 60 days, the City
shall assess this uncollected debt on the property taxes of this building.
§ 453-114. Permit renewal.
A sidewalk sale permit may be renewed annually, upon review of the renewal
application and complaint history, if any, which shall be provided by the Codes
Enforcement Office, Reading Police Department, Department of Public Works, and
Department of Fire and Rescue Services. Each agency shall provide to the Codes
Enforcement Office copies of any inspection results, complaints filed and
citations issued concerning the sidewalk sale under consideration. The renewal
fee for the permit shall be as stipulated in § 
453-107 above.
§ 453-115. Written notice of violations; suspension of permit.
Upon finding by the Codes Enforcement Office that an applicant has violated any
provisions of this Part, the Codes Enforcement Office shall give written notice
to the applicant to correct said operational violation. Upon failure to correct
said operational violation within the time frame specified, the Codes
Enforcement Office may take appropriate action, as necessary, to maintain the
pedestrian walkway. The Codes Enforcement Office may suspend the applicant's
permit issued pursuant to this Part, as well as pursue prosecution in
accordance with the requirements herein. The Codes Enforcement Office shall, in
his/her sole judgment, give a violator reasonable time to repair any structural
damage or physical violation of any provision of this Part. An appeal before
City Council shall be accorded if requested.
§ 453-116. Violations and penalties; effect on eligibility for license.
   A.   Whoever violates any provision of this Part shall, upon conviction
thereof in a summary proceeding, be fined not less than $200 and not more than
$1,000 for each offense, to be collected as other fines and costs are by law
collectible, or imprisoned for not more than 90 days, or both. Each day during
which a violation occurs shall constitute a separate offense.
   B.   Any person who is convicted of a violation of any of the provisions of
this Part shall have his permit suspended for one full year and shall not be
eligible for another permit until the expiration of one full year.
   C.   Any person who fails to remove a sidewalk sales materials at the close
of each business day, as provided for in §
453-113, shall not be eligible for a permit in any following year.
   D.   Failure to observe any of the conditions set out herein is grounds for
revocation of a permit.
Prior to such revocation, the Property Maintenance Division shall give 10 days'
written notice to the permittee of his violation of or his failure to observe a
general condition as set out above. If the permittee requests a hearing prior
to the expiration of that ten-day notice period, the City Council shall hold a
hearing to determine if the license should be revoked. The permittee may
present evidence in his own behalf if he so desires. The decision in regard to
revocation may be appealed to the City Council. If the permittee fails to
request such a hearing, the revocation shall become effective upon the
expiration of the ten-day notice period. If a permit granted under this section
is revoked, all tables, chairs and other appurtenances used as a part of the
sidewalk sale shall be immediately removed from the sidewalk. [Amended 9-28-
2015 by Ord. No. 50-2015]
   E.   This Part and the foregoing penalties shall not be construed to limit
or deny the right of the City or any person to such equitable or other remedies
as may otherwise be available with or without process of law.
§ 453-117. Determination on application.
The Codes Enforcement Office shall grant or deny an application for a permit
pursuant to this Part within seven days of its complete submission.
§ 453-118. Reservation of rights.
Neither the adoption of this Part nor the granting of any permit pursuant
hereto shall be construed as a waiver of any right, privilege or immunity of
the City of Reading with respect to streets and sidewalks, whether express or
implied. 2
2.   Editor's Note: Original § 10-1619, Penalties for offenses, which
immediately followed this section, was repealed
Part 2
Sidewalk Vendors
[Adopted 8-13-2007 By Ord. No. 63-20073 (Ch. 10, Part 17, Of The 2001 Code Of
Ordinances)]
§ 453-201. Purpose. [Amended 11-9-2009 by Ord. No. 62-2009]
The purpose of this Part is to provide for the regulation of sidewalk vendors
in the City of Reading to promote an active and attractive pedestrian
environment. The City of Reading has the responsibility to provide public
safety for pedestrians and to protect residential neighborhoods and public
facilities. Whereby, reasonable regulation of sidewalk vendors is necessary to
protect the public health, safety, and welfare in the public right-of-way. It
is the finding of City Council that the regulation of sidewalk vendors on
public and private property is necessary to promote the orderly and efficient
use of sidewalks, to prevent undue interference with established businesses and
to assure the performance of essential utility, traffic control and emergency
services.
§ 453-202. Title.
This Part shall be known as the "Sidewalk Vendor Ordinance."
§ 453-203. Construal of provisions.
The provisions of this Part shall be construed to be the minimum requirements
necessary to serve the general welfare and safety of the residents of the City
of Reading. Where the provisions of any statute, other ordinance or regulation
impose greater restrictions or higher standards than those enumerated in this
Part, the provisions of such statute, ordinance or regulation shall govern.
§ 453-204. Definitions.
For the purpose of this Part, certain terms shall be defined as follows:
   CODE AND LICENSE APPEALS BOARD — Board authorized to hear, among other
things, appeals of and render decisions in matters concerning aggrieved
applicants whose sidewalk vendor permits have been denied, suspended, revoked
or are not renewed and/or whose location has been selected by the DID Board,
pursuant to §
453-206. [Added 10-26-2015 by Ord. No. 61-2015]
   DOWNTOWN IMPROVEMENT DISTRICT (DID) AUTHORITY AREA — The City's Central
Business District, in which services are provided by the Reading Downtown
Improvement District Authority as created through the enactment of Bill No. 41-
2005 on June 27, 2005, 4 which reestablished the Downtown Improvement District.
Please see the map located at www.downtownreading.com. The mapped area does not
include areas in which services are provided by the DID Authority under
contract. [Amended 1-26-2009 by Ord. No. 6-2009; 10-26-2015 by Ord. No. 61-
20155]
   DOWNTOWN IMPROVEMENT DISTRICT (DID) AUTHORITY BOARD — As defined and
established by Ord. No. 134-94, titled "An Ordinance Authorizing the City of
Reading to Organize an Authority to be Known as the 'Reading Downtown
Improvement District Authority,' Pursuant to the Provisions of the Municipality
Authorities Act of 1945, P.L. 382, As Amended, Under Certain Terms and
Conditions," as amended by subsequent enactments, including Ord. No. 11-95,
Ord. No. 66-95, Res. No. 706-95, and Ord. No. 20-2000, all of which are hereby
incorporated by reference, is hereby reestablished pursuant to the Municipality
Authorities Act 6  and the Neighborhood Improvement District Act, 7  pursuant
to the terms set forth herein. [Added 10-26-2015 by Ord. No. 61-2015]
   OFFICIAL MAP — The topographical survey of the City of Reading,
Pennsylvania, on file in the Engineering Office.
   PASSABLE — Free of any impediment or obstruction, whatsoever, that would
hinder the travel of the public.
   PRIVATE PROPERTY — Property owned by a person or jointly by a group of
persons, legal persons or business entities. [Amended 11-9-2009 by Ord. No. 62-
2009]
   PROPERTY MAINTENANCE DIVISION — A division of the City of Reading Community
Development Department charged with enforcing the City of Reading Codified
Ordinances governing issues including, but not limited to, housing property
maintenance, health and blight. [Amended 5-10-2010 by Ord. No. 24-2010; 10-26-
2015 by Ord. No. 61-2015]
   PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY — Any place of any nature which is legally open to
public use and used and/or intended for vehicular or pedestrian traffic,
including public streets, alleys, sidewalks, and roadways, but excluding any
public property of the City of Reading. The official topographic survey map of
Reading, Pennsylvania, on file in the Engineering Office, shall be the final
authoritative document should the existence of any street, dedicated or not be
disputed.
   PUBLIC OUTDOOR PAY TELEPHONE — Any outdoor publicly accessible pay telephone
any portion of which, or its enclosure, is situated on, projects over, or hangs
over a portion of the public right-of way; or is situated such that it can be
used by a person standing on the public right-of way.
   PUBLIC PROPERTY — All real and personal property, whether within or outside
the corporate City limits, belonging to the City of Reading, excluding that
which is used and/or intends for use by vehicular or pedestrian traffic and
defined herein as a public right-of-way. 8
   SIDEWALK — That portion of a public right-of-way for which paving is
required under this
Part of the Code of the City of Reading and which is used primarily for
pedestrian travel.
   SIDEWALK AREA — That portion of the public right-of-way occurring between
the curbline and the topographical building line.
   SIDEWALK VENDOR — Person or persons who exhibits, displays, or sells any
food, beverage, goods, printed materials or merchandise from any stand, cart
vending machine or trailer while on or about the sidewalk area.
   SIDEWALK VENDOR PERMIT — The written authorization, issued by the City of
Reading, to construct, install, erect, or place any obstruction within the
public right-of-way. The permit must be displayed prominently on each cart,
trailer and/or obstruction. 9
   TRAILER — Vehicle designed to be towed by a motor vehicle.
   VEHICLE — A device or structure for transporting persons or things; a
conveyance that is self- propelled and runs on tires. [Amended 1-26-2009 by
Ord. No. 6-2009]
   VENDING — The act of exhibiting, displaying or selling any food, beverage,
goods, newspapers, or other printed materials either in bulk or in package or
from a vending cart as defined herein. [Added 10-26-2015 by Ord. No. 61-2015]
   VENDING CART — A nonmotorized vehicle with at least two wheels moved by hand
for the purpose of conducting food or merchandise sales. [Amended 10-26-2015 by
Ord. No. 61-201510]
3.   Editor's Note: Ord. No. 28-2010, Adopted 6-28-2010, Repealed This Part To
The Extent Inconsistent With Or In Direct Contrast To The Property Maintenance
Rules And Regulations, Enacted And Authorized By Ord. No. 28-2010 (
Ch. 180, Part 13).
4.   Editor's Note: See
Ch. 14, Part 5, Reading Downtown Improvement District Authority.
5.   Editor's Note: This ordinance also repealed the former definitions of
“kiosk” and “mobile vendor,” amended 1-26-2009 by Ord. No. 6-2009, which
definitions immediately followed this definition.
6.   Editor's Note: See 53 Pa.C.S.A. § 5601 et seq.
7.   Editor's Note: See 73 P.S. § 831 et seq.
8.   Editor's Note: The former definition of "sandwich board," which
immediately followed this definition, was repealed 10-26-2015 by Ord. No. 61-
2015.
9.   Editor's Note: The former definitions of "stand" and "stationary vendor,"
amended 11-9-2009 by Ord. No. 62-2009, which immediately followed this
definition, were repealed 10-26-2015 by Ord. No. 61-2015.
10.   Editor's Note: This ordinance also repealed the former definitions of
"Vending License Board," amended 5-10-2010 by Ord. No. 24-2010, and "vending
machine," which immediately followed this definition.
§ 453-205. Permit required.
[Amended 1-26-2009 by Ord. No. 6-2009; 11-9-2009 by Ord. No. 62-2009; 5-10-2010
by Ord. No. 24-2010; 8-26-2013 by Ord. No. 35-2013; 10-26-2015 by Ord. No. 61-
2015]
   A.   Vending on public property is prohibited in all areas outside the
Downtown Improvement District Authority (DID) area.
   B.   Vending is prohibited on private property as per the Zoning Ordinance,
City of Reading Codified Ordinances; §
600-902, Limit of one principal use, states "No more than one principal use
shall be permitted on a lot, unless specifically permitted by this chapter. A
principal use shall not be located in an accessory building or structure."
   C.   It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in the business of
vending within the City of Reading without first obtaining a permit pursuant to
this section. Vending activities are only permitted within the DID area and
between the southern right-of-way line of Franklin Street, the northern right-
of-way line of Washington Street, the western right-of-way line of Front Street
and the eastern right-of-way line of 11th Street, as shown by the DID Area Map
contained in the latest final plan for the Downtown Improvement District.
   D.   Preexisting vendors operating inside the Downtown Improvement District
(DID) area are required to comply with all regulations contained herein and are
subject to all licensing and health/safety requirements contained in this Part.
      (1)   Location, type and number. A sidewalk vendor permit shall only be
issued for and restricted to vendor sales from an approved vending cart at
specific and fixed locations within the DID area. All sidewalk vending shall be
conducted within the public right-of-way, as defined herein. Up to a maximum of
20 sidewalk vending permits shall be issued for food, beverage, goods, printed
materials or merchandise related sales annually for the DID area as determined
by City ordinances.
      (2)   The Property Maintenance Division shall issue a temporary permit to
the potential sidewalk vendor indicating a location and notify the DID Board of
the assignment. The DID Board shall determine the final approved location of
each vendor in the DID area. The Property Maintenance Division will then issue
the permanent permit to the owner of the vending cart once approved by the DID
Board. The location selection criteria shall be as follows:
         (a)   The goods being sold or offered by the vendor;
         (b)   The goods sold, offered and/or services provided by adjacent
businesses and those within 200 feet;
         (c)   Expected impacts from the vendor which could have a detrimental
effect on existing adjacent and nearby establishments; and
         (d)   The goods being sold by sidewalk vendors in the same block, in
order to avoid oversaturation of the block with too many of the same type of
vendor (e.g., more than one ice cream vendor in the same block).
      (3)   City Officials may, if necessary, temporarily or permanently
relocate any or all vendor(s) by giving the vendor(s) 24 hours' notice due to
the DID Board's request, special events, or because of natural or man-made
phenomena which would cause vending activities to be unsafe, impractical or
incompatible with new or existing businesses within 200 feet of the vendors'
location.
   E.   The DID Board shall approve, deny and/or revoke permits for vending
machines in the DID area including vending machines for printed materials.
   F.   More than two permits prohibited. A person who holds or has an interest
in two sidewalk vendor permits as an owner, partner or shareholder shall not
have any additional interest, either directly or indirectly, as an owner,
partner or shareholder in any other sidewalk vendor permit. Each vending cart
must have an individual permit. One permit cannot apply to more than one
vending cart.
   G.   Permit nontransferable. A sidewalk vendor permit shall not be
transferable to another holder, and any prohibited transfer of the permit shall
work as an automatic forfeiture thereof. If the permit holder is not a natural
person, the transfer of any ownership interest in the holder of the permit
shall be deemed a prohibited transfer.
   H.   This section shall not apply to itinerant food operations associated
with the organized festival, carnival, fair, parade, picnic or other affair
that may be approved or sponsored by the City or its associated bureaus,
authorities or agencies, in such areas which may be designated and approved for
itinerant food operations on a temporary basis.
§ 453-206. Permit application; fee.
[Amended 1-26-2009 by Ord. No. 6-2009; 11-9-2009 by Ord. No. 62-2009; 5-10-2010
by Ord. No. 24-2010; 8-26-2013 by Ord. No. 35-2013; 10-26-2015 by Ord. No. 61-
2015]
   A.   Notice of permit availability. Applications for sidewalk vending
permits will be available beginning March 1 for each calendar year in the
Property Maintenance Division. Each calendar year will extend from April 1 to
March 31.
   B.   Application.
      (1)   Any person interested in applying for a sidewalk vendor's permit
may make application by filing such forms containing the required information
with the Property Maintenance Division with a nonrefundable processing fee as
per the City of Reading Fee Schedule,
Chapter 212. Existing permit holders completing applications shall receive
priority in the grant of a permit, however, the City does not guarantee any
particular location as DID retains the right to approve vending locations. The
application shall set forth:
         (a)   True name and address of the applicant. P.O. boxes will not be
permitted.
         (b)   Photographs and specifications, including the dimensions of the
proposed sidewalk vendor cart(s), stand(s) or trailer(s) to be used in
sufficient detail showing compliance with the design criteria, standards, and
specifications in §
453-207 herein.
         (c)   Sufficient detail about the proposed sidewalk vendor, the cart
features and a complete list of the products proposed for sale must be
submitted with the application for evaluation and compliance with applicable
City and state health codes. A complete list of products to be sold is needed
to determine the best and most suitable location for the vendor cart.
         (d)   Applicant must also submit either copies of the required City
and state health permit or, in the event that applicant has applied for but not
yet procured those permits, the applicant may submit a copy of the completed
permit application. The vending cart permit will not be issued until all health
permits have been procured.
         (e)   Utility connections to neighboring properties shall be
prohibited. The vendor cart must be one-hundred-percent self-contained.
         (f)   The locations the sidewalk vendor would like to operate.
      (2)   Applications will be initially reviewed by the Property Maintenance
Division for completeness.
   C.   Review of applications.
      (1)   Not more than 45 days following application deadline, the Director
of the Department of Community Development or his designee shall complete the
review of all applications filed and notify the applicants of the results
thereof in writing. Final approval of the location will be determined by DID.
An application shall be denied and the applicant shall be ineligible for a
sidewalk vendor license if:
         (a)   The application is incomplete in any material respect as set
forth in §
453-206B above.
         (b)   The proposed vending cart does not comply with the cart design
criteria, standards or specifications and/or applicable health or safety
requirements.
         (c)   The applicant does not have a business privilege license.
         (d)   The applicant, or any natural person having an interest in the
entity making the application, has:
            [1]   An interest in more than two sidewalk vendor permits.
            [2]   Within the past five years held or had an interest in a
sidewalk vendor license that has been revoked.
            [3]   Within the past 10 years been convicted of selling, offering
to sell or possession with intent to sell a controlled substance or convicted
of a felony.
         (e)   If an application is denied, the applicant shall be notified in
writing of the reason(s) therefor within 10 days.
      (2)   Note: In the event two or more sidewalk vendors apply to operate in
the same location, a lottery system will be used to make the determination.
   D.   Each permit shall be issued for one calendar year, April 1 through
March 31, and shall be subject to review and inspection by City officials
during the calendar year for adherence to the requirements of this Part.
§ 453-207. Design and appearance standards.
[Amended 1-26-2009 by Ord. No. 6-2009; 11-9-2009 by Ord. No. 62-2009; 5-10-2010
by Ord. No. 24-2010; 8-26-2013 by Ord. No. 35-2013; 10-26-2015 by Ord. No. 61-
2015]
   A.   General requirements. All sidewalk vendor carts, trailers or stands
shall be kept in a clean and sanitary condition, and all vendors shall comply
with state and local health and sanitation requirements on such matters as
refrigeration, cooking, utensils and appliances, materials and food storage.
Conditions such as discoloration, food and beverage stains, rust, and peeling/
cracking/faded exterior surfaces are not permitted and may cause the suspension
and/or revocation of the vending permit. A City health permit must be obtained
by all vendors selling food before operation of sales begins.
   B.   Required physical features.
      (1)   Dimensions. The dimensions of the vending cart shall not exceed
four feet by eight feet. This is the largest in operation size and states the
largest exterior dimensions permitted (including wheels, handles and similar
parts). Fold-out shelves for the display of larger merchandise are permitted,
provided there will be no interference with pedestrian movement. Fold-out
shelves shall not be used to provide space for customers to consume the
products dispensed by the vendor.
      (2)   Mobility. Vending carts must have at least two wheels. They must
permit easy movement and maneuverability in the event of emergency and required
relocation.
      (3)   Permit display. The vending permit must be clearly displayed on the
cart in such a manner and location as to be clearly visible to customers.
      (4)   Trash receptacles. Each vending cart will have provisions for
vendor and customer trash disposal. Vendors are responsible for proper disposal
of this trash whenever the container becomes full or, at a minimum, at the
conclusion of the day's operation.
      (5)   Covers. Umbrellas or canopies are desirable. The umbrella must not
conflict with public passage on the right-of-way, nor be obtrusive to vendors'
signs or neighboring business. The cover must be well maintained, so as not to
become faded, torn, cracked, or soiled.
      (6)   Carts self-contained. All sidewalk vendor carts shall be so
designed that all vending- related activities, including trash disposal, can be
conducted totally from the vending cart. Use of the sidewalk by a vendor for
product display, storage, or disposal of trash shall be prohibited.
      (7)   Utility connections. Utility connections for water, cooking,
cooling, electric, heating, etc., must be contained in the unit. Utility
connections to neighboring properties shall be prohibited.
      (8)   Fire. A five-pound ABC-type dry chemical fire extinguisher is
required for all vending carts utilizing a flame for any purpose.
      (9)   Hand-washing facilities. Each vending cart that serves unwrapped or
unbagged food must have a hand-wash sink with hot and cold water, a posted sign
indicating the exact regulations required by the Pennsylvania Department of
Agriculture.
      (10)   Refuse. All vending carts must have a refuse receptacle with a
tight-fitting lid on the unit and a separate refuse receptacle for customers as
required by the Pennsylvania Department of Agriculture. Receptacles must be
properly emptied when full or at a minimum at the close of business. All refuse
must be disposed of at the vendor's expense.
      (11)   Cold and hot holding units. Refrigeration and cold holding units
must be capable of reaching and maintaining 41° F. or below when in use. Hot
holding units must be capable of holding foods at 135° F. or above, as required
by the Pennsylvania Department of Agriculture.
      (12)   Dishwashing. Single-service articles must be used unless adequate
dishwashing facilities are available and used. Adequate facilities will include
a three-compartment sink (separate from the hand-washing sink) set up for
accomplishing a three-step method of dishwashing; wash, rinse and sanitize.
Where only spatulas, tongs, and similar devices are washed and sanitized, and
only stationary equipment must be cleaned, a two-compartment sink may be
approved in accordance with the regulations of the Pennsylvania Department of
Agriculture.
      (13)   Food and ice. All food and beverages must be clean, wholesome,
free from spoilage, free from adulteration and safe for human consumption, as
set forth in the regulations of the Pennsylvania Department of Agriculture. All
food and beverages shall be from approved sources. Food prepared in a private
home may only be sold if that facility is licensed, registered and inspected by
the Pennsylvania Department of Agriculture and the City of Reading Property
Maintenance Division.
      (14)   Sign. No sign shall be permitted except an identification of the
vendor's business name and the listing of items available to sale and the price
thereof. The sign, which may include a sandwich board sign, attached or
separate from the vending cart and in accordance with the City of Reading
Zoning Ordinance §
600-1705 must not be obtrusive to the public way or conflict with neighboring
businesses by obstructing the view of said businesses or their signage, or
blocking any entrance or exit to the building.
      (15)   Food employee certificate. All food vendors are required to obtain
and maintain a food employee certificate from the Department of Agriculture, as
required by the State Food Employee Certification Act, within three months of
the approval of their sidewalk vendor permit. New vendors will have 90 days to
comply with said requirement; existing vendors which are not in compliance due
to lack of current certification, employee turnover or other loss of certified
person shall have 90 days from the effective date of this Part or the date of
loss to comply.
   C.   Prohibited features:
      (1)   Advertising other than the name of the vendor's business or
suppliers. (Advertising must be based on Subsection B(14) above, that the sign
may include items for sale.) Advertising must not contain obscene language,
profanity or images offensive to the sensibilities of the general public.
      (2)   Propulsion systems other than manual.
      (3)   Gas cylinders larger than 20 pounds.
      (4)   Vending directly from a motor vehicle, other than a licensed food
truck, is prohibited.
      (5)   Tables, chairs, benches, stools and any other device that would
allow the consumption of the product dispensed by the vendor.
      (6)   Fold-out shelves shall not be used to provide space for customers
to consume the products dispensed by the vendor.
   D.   Waivers. Waivers will not be permitted for any requirement based on
health, safety or sanitation considerations.
   E.   Mandatory compliance. All carts shall comply with standards and
specifications described herein and adopted by the City and the state. Failure
to comply shall be sufficient grounds for rejection of a vending permit
application or suspension or revocation of any license issued.
   F.   Maintenance. All sidewalk vendor carts shall at all times be maintained
in good condition and repair. Any repairs to or replacements of sidewalk vendor
carts shall comply fully with the existing design criteria, standards and
specifications. No replacement cart may be placed into operation until approved
by the Property Maintenance Division and the DID Authority.
§ 453-208. Sidewalk vendor operation standards.
[Amended 1-26-2009 by Ord. No. 6-2009; 11-9-2009 by Ord. No. 62-2009; 5-10-2010
by Ord. No. 24-2010; 10-26-2015 by Ord. No. 61-2015]
   A.   Days and hours of operation. Sidewalk vendor sales inside the Downtown
Improvement District may be conducted between the hours of 6:00 a.m. to 9:00
p.m. during the permit year.
   B.   Daily removal. Sidewalk carts and accouterments shall be removed from
the sidewalk daily, not later than 1/2 hour after the close of business or and
not returned thereto earlier than 1/2 hour before the time permitted for
opening, unless otherwise provided by the regulations adopted by the City. Any
item not removed from the sidewalk at the close of business may be removed and
stored by the City of Reading or the Downtown Improvement District. The vendor
will be charged for costs, storage and the penalty prescribed under §
453-214 herein.
   C.   Safe and sanitary condition. Sidewalk vendor carts and vending areas
shall be maintained in a safe, broom-clean and sanitary condition at all times.
Sidewalk vendor carts permitted hereunder to sell food products shall:
      (1)   Be subject to inspection at any time by a City of Reading Property
Maintenance Inspector and shall at all times be permitted under and be in
compliance with all applicable state and local codes.
      (2)   If using portable heating or cooking facilities, subject to
inspection at all times by the City of Reading Fire Marshal and Property
Maintenance Division and shall comply with all applicable codes of the City of
Reading. A permit must be obtained from the Fire Marshal before operation of
sales begins.
   D.   Quiet operations. Sidewalk vendors shall conduct business in an orderly
fashion and shall not make loud or raucous noises or use sound-amplifying
devices to attract attention, nor verbally hawk or solicit product sales.
   E.   Use and maintenance of sidewalk. All sales and related activity shall
be conducted from the vending area during which times the vending cart shall
not be moved from the assigned vending location, unless the vending cart is
required to move by City or DID officials or for emergency response personnel.
No products shall be stored or displayed on the sidewalk or any adjacent
outside area. The sidewalk vendor shall be solely responsible to keep the
sidewalk area free of trash, litter, debris or spillage generated by the
vendor's business. The vending cart shall be placed so as not to impede the
free movement of pedestrian traffic. The use of tables, chairs, benches, etc.,
around the vending cart is strictly prohibited.
   F.   Display. The sidewalk vendor permit, the City of Reading health permit
and the state "serve safe" certificate shall be posted in plain view of the
customers at all times the vendor is operating.
   G.   Public liability insurance. Each permit holder shall maintain and
provide the City of Reading with proof of insurance for public liability and
having the City named as an interested party with minimum coverage of $100,000
per individual and $500,000 per incident. The Property Maintenance Division
shall be informed by the vendor of any change in or notice of cancellation of
coverage during the permit year.
   H.   Prohibitions. An object, device or structure as regulated under the
terms of this Part shall be expressly prohibited when its construction,
erection, installation or placement would result in any of the following
conditions:
      (1)   A passable sidewalk width less than five horizontal feet.
      (2)   A horizontal projection from the building line in excess of five
feet.
      (3)   A reduction in the street sight triangle.
§ 453-209. Suspension or revocation of permit.
[Amended 11-9-2009 by Ord. No. 62-2009; 8-26-2013 by Ord. No. 35-2013; 10-26-
2015 by Ord. No. 61-2015]
A sidewalk vendor permit shall be subject to suspension or revocation by the
City for violation of any provision of this Part or any regulations promulgated
or enacted hereunder, or violation of applicable state or local, including but
not limited to all health or safety regulations, zoning and taxation.
§ 453-210. Code and License Appeals Board.
[Amended 1-26-2009 by Ord. No. 6-2009; 11-9-2009 by Ord. No. 62-2009; 5-10-2010
by Ord. No. 24-2010; 8-26-2013 by Ord. No. 35-2013; 10-26-2015 by Ord. No. 61-
2015]
   A.   Any person aggrieved by a decision of the Property Maintenance Division
including suspension, nonrenewal, denial or revocation of a sidewalk vendor
permit may appeal to the Code and License Appeals Board as per Part I,
Chapter 23, Part 14. Any person aggrieved by a decision of the DID Board
relating to the location of a vending cart or vending machine may appeal to the
Code and License Appeals Board. Such appeal must be filed, in writing, with the
Director of the Department of Community Development, with the appropriate
filing fee, within 10 working days from the date of receipt of the decision of
the Property Maintenance Division or DID Board.
   B.   Fees and costs. The fee for filing of an appeal to the Code and License
Appeals Board shall be as per the City of Reading Fee Schedule,
Chapter 212. Failure to submit the appropriate fee with the request for an
appeal shall result in automatic denial of the appeal. In addition to said fee,
the appellant shall be responsible for all costs incurred to conduct a hearing
beyond that covered by the fee.
§ 453-211. Appeal to Court of Common Pleas.
[Added 11-9-2009 by Ord. No. 62-2009; amended 5-10-2010 by Ord. No. 24-2010;
10-26-2015 by Ord. No. 61-2015]
Any person aggrieved by any decision of the respective Board may appeal to the
Court of Common Pleas of Berks County. Such appeal shall be made by a duly
verified petition in accord with the Pennsylvania Rules of Civil Procedure and
shall set forth the factual and legal basis upon which the decision of the
Board is alleged to be illegal, in whole or in part. Such petition shall be
filed with the Court of Common Pleas and a notice thereof served upon all
parties to the appeal, including the City of Reading Code and License Appeals
Board and the DID Board.
§ 453-212. Enforcement.
[Amended 11-9-2009 by Ord. No. 62-2009; 5-10-2010 by Ord. No. 24-2010]
This Part will be enforced under the jurisdiction of the Property Maintenance
Division and the Reading Police Department.
§ 453-213. Construction and severability.
[Added 10-26-2015 by Ord. No. 61-2015 11 ]
In the event any provision, section, sentence, clause or part of this Part
shall be held to be invalid, illegal or unconstitutional, such invalidity,
illegality or unconstitutionality shall not affect or impair any remaining
provision, section, sentence, clause or part of this Part, it being the intent
of the Council of the City of Reading that such remainder shall remain in full
force.
11.   Editor's Note: Pursuant to this ordinance, former §
453-213, Violations and penalties, was redesignated as §
453-214.
§ 453-214. Violations and penalties.
[Amended 5-10-2010 by Ord. No. 24-2010]
Any person violating any provision of this Part or of the regulations
promulgated hereunder, shall, upon conviction thereof in a summary proceeding,
be sentenced to pay a fine of $75 to $1,000 for each and every offense, to be
collected as other fines and costs are by law collectible, or shall be
imprisoned for not more than 90 days or both. Each day during which the person
violated any provision of this Part shall constitute a separate offense.
Institution of a prosecution for the imposition of the foregoing penalty shall
not be construed to limit or deny the right of the City to such equitable or
other remedies as may be allowed by law.
Part 3
Mobile Vendors
Publisher's Note: This Part has been AMENDED by new legislation (Ord. 34-2022,
enacted 4-25-2022). The text of the amendment will be incorporated below when
the ordinance is codified.
[Adopted 7-26-2010 By Ord. No. 42-2010 (Ch. 10, Part 20, Of The 2001 Code Of
Ordinances)]
§ 453-301. Purpose.
The purpose of this Part is to provide for the regulation of mobile vendors in
the City of Reading. The City of Reading has the responsibility to provide
public safety for pedestrians and vehicular traffic, whereby, reasonable
regulation of mobile vendors is necessary to protect the public health, safety,
and welfare in the public right-of-way. It is the finding of City Council that
the regulation of mobile vendors on public and private property is necessary to
promote the orderly and efficient use of City streets, to prevent undue
interference with established businesses and to assure the performance of
essential utility, traffic control and emergency services.
§ 453-302. Title.
This Part shall be known as the "Mobile Vendors Ordinance."
§ 453-303. Interpretation.
The provisions of this Part shall be construed to be the minimum requirements
necessary to serve the general welfare and safety of the residents of the City
of Reading. Where the provisions of any statute, other ordinance or regulation
impose greater restrictions or higher standards than those enumerated in this
Part, the provisions of such statute, ordinance or regulation shall govern.
§ 453-304. Definitions.
[Amended 4-25-2022 by Ord. No. 34-2022]
For the purpose of this Part, certain terms shall be defined as follows:
   MOBILE VENDOR — A vendor or seller of food and/or goods from mobile vending
unit.
   MOBILE VENDOR LICENSE — The written authorization, issued by the City of
Reading, to operate a mobile vendor unit on the street. The license must be
displayed prominently on each unit.
   MOBILE VENDOR UNIT — A vehicle registered under the Vehicle Code of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania or another state which operates from site to site
with primary emphasis on transit while dispensing a product or rendering a
service on a stop-on-demand basis only and whose use is incidental to the land
use and underlying zone. This vehicle must carry insurance. The vehicle does
not typically remain stationary for more than approximately 10 minutes each
hour.
   PRIVATE PROPERTY — Property owned by a person or jointly by a group of
persons, legal persons or business entities.
   PROPERTY MAINTENANCE DIVISION — A division of the City of Reading
administration under the Managing Director charged with enforcing the City of
Reading Code governing issues including, but not limited to, housing, property
maintenance and trade.
   PUBLIC PROPERTY — All real and personal property, whether within or outside
the corporate City limits, belonging to the City of Reading, excluding that
which is used and/or intends for use by vehicular or pedestrian traffic and
defined herein as a public right-of-way.
   PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY — Any place of any nature which is legally open to
public use and used and/or intended for vehicular or pedestrian traffic,
including public streets, alleys, sidewalks, and roadways, but excluding any
public property of the City of Reading. The official topographic survey map of
Reading, Pennsylvania, on file in the Engineering Office shall be the final
authoritative document should the existence of any street, dedicated or not be
disputed.
   SIDEWALK — That portion of a public right-of-way for which paving is
required under this
Part of the Code of the City of Reading and which is used primarily for
pedestrian travel.
   STATIONARY VENDOR — An itinerant vendor who conducts business:
   A.   From a vehicle or other conveyance; or
   B.   In or about a structure that is not permanently affixed to real
property and that is located upon privately owned property and not on a public
street, sidewalk, alley or public way of the City.
   VEHICLE — Every device in, upon or by which any person or property is or may
be transported or drawn upon a highway, except devices used exclusively upon
rails or tracks. The term does not include a self-propelled wheel chair or an
electrical mobility device operated by and designed for the exclusive use of a
person with a mobility related disability.
§ 453-305. License required.
[Amended 4-25-2022 by Ord. No. 34-2022]
   A.   It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in the business of a
mobile vendor within the City of Reading without first obtaining a license
pursuant to this section. Such mobile vending activities are only permitted
throughout the City of Reading. Mobile vendor licensees may operate at the
pagoda parking area, as approved by majority vote of the Pagoda Foundation
Board of Directors on a defined schedule that allows only two mobile vendors on
site at a time, at locations selected by the Public Works Director, or his
designee.
      (1)   Vending is prohibited on private property as per §
600-902 of
Chapter 600, Zoning, which states "No more than one principal use shall be
permitted on a lot in a residential district, unless specifically permitted by
this chapter. Where more than one principal use is allowed on a lot, the most
restrictive requirement shall apply." 12
      (2)   Preexisting mobile vendors operating the City of Reading are
required to comply with all regulations contained herein and shall not be
"grandfathered."
   B.   The restrictions of this section shall not apply to itinerant food
operations associated with the organized festival, carnival, fair, parade,
picnic or other affair that may be approved or sponsored by the City or its
associated bureaus or agencies, in such areas which may be designated and
approved for itinerant food operations on a temporary basis.
      (1)   Location. A mobile vendor license shall only be issued for and
restricted to vendor sales from an approved mobile vending. All mobile vending
shall be conducted within the public right-of-way, as defined herein.
      (2)   License nontransferable. A mobile vendor license shall not be
transferable to another holder except upon the permanent disability of the
holder, and any prohibited transfer of the license shall work an automatic
forfeiture thereof. If the license holder is not a natural person, the transfer
of any ownership interest in the holder of the license shall be deemed a
prohibited transfer.
12.   Editor's Note: Amended during codification (see
Ch. 1, General Provisions, Part 2).
§ 453-306. License application.
[Amended 4-25-2022 by Ord. No. 34-2022]
   A.   Notice of license availability. Applications for mobile vending license
will be available in the Property Maintenance Division.
   B.   Application.
      (1)   Any person interested in applying for a mobile vendor's license may
make application by filing such forms containing the required information with
the Property Maintenance Division with a nonrefundable application fee as
provided in Chapter 212, Fees. The application shall at a minimum set forth:13
         (a)   True name and address of the applicant. P.O. Boxes will not be
permitted.
         (b)   Photographs and specifications of the proposed mobile vendor
unit to be used in sufficient detail showing compliance with the design
criteria, standards, and specifications in §
453-307 herein.
         (c)   Sufficient detail about the proposed mobile vendor and the
merchandise proposed for sale must be submitted with the application for
evaluation and compliance with applicable City and state health codes, along
with copies of the required City and state health permits.
         (d)   A copy of the applicant's business privilege license.
         (e)   The names, addresses and percentage of stock owned by
shareholders in a corporate applicant, and the percentage interest of each
partner in a partnership applicant.
         (f)   A copy of the permit allowing for the use of on-unit heating,
cooking, water, electrical or cooling devices, if applicable. Utility
connections to neighboring properties shall be prohibited.
         (g)   A complete listing of the items to be offered for sale or
distribution.
         (h)   The general areas the mobile vendor would like to operate.
         (i)   The dimensions of the mobile vending unit.
      (2)   Applications will be initially reviewed by the Property Maintenance
Division for completeness. Incomplete applications may be amended one time and
resubmitted.
   C.   Review of applications. The Manager of the Property Maintenance
Division or his designee shall complete the review of all applications filed
and notify the applicants of the results thereof in writing. An application
shall be denied and the applicant shall be ineligible for a mobile vendor
license if:
      (1)   The application is incomplete in any material respect.
      (2)   The proposed mobile vendor unit does not comply with the design
criteria, standards or specifications and/or applicable health requirements.
      (3)   The applicant does not have a business privilege license.
      (4)   The applicant, or any natural person having an interest in the
entity making the application, has:
         (a)   Within the past five years held or had an interest in a mobile
vendor license that has been revoked.
         (b)   Within the past 10 years been convicted of selling, offering to
sell or possession with intent to sell a controlled substance or convicted of a
felony.
      (5)   If an application is denied, the applicant shall be notified in
writing of the reason(s) therefor within 10 days.
   D.   Each license shall be issued for one calendar year and shall be subject
to review during the calendar year for adherence to the requirements of this
Part.
13.   Editor's Note: Amended during codification (see
Ch. 1, General Provisions, Part 2).
§ 453-307. Design and appearance standards.
   A.   General requirements. All mobile vendor units shall be designed to be
attractive, easily maintained in a sanitary condition, and mobile. In addition,
vending must comply with state and local health and sanitation requirements on
such matters as refrigeration, cooking, utensils and appliances, materials and
food storage. A health permit must be obtained by all vendors selling food
before operation of sales begins.
   B.   Ancillary facilities. A commissary or depot may be required when
additional storage, food preparation or cleaning facilities are needed beyond
the capacity of the mobile food facility. All commissaries or depots must be
approved and licensed by the regulatory agency having jurisdiction over the
location of the commissary or depot. A copy of the most recent inspection
report of the commissary or depot from the appropriate regulatory agency must
be provided upon request.
   C.   Required physical features.
      (1)   Physical features. Floors, walls and ceilings must be smooth and
easily cleanable with outer openings no larger than necessary to carry out the
food operation. The mobile vendor unit must be fitted with closed, tight-
fitting windows and doors. If windows or doors need to be opened for
ventilation or other reasons, such as service to the customer, then screens,
air curtains or other effective means must be present to protect the interior
of the mobile vendor unit. Foldout shelves cannot be used to provide space for
customers to consume the products dispensed by the mobile vendor. Awnings and
canopies, both attached and unattached from the mobile vendor unit, are
prohibited.
      (2)   Mobility. Mobile vendor units must be self-propelled. They must
permit easy movement and maneuverability in the event of emergency and required
relocation.
      (3)   License display. The vending license must be clearly displayed on
the mobile vendor unit in such a manner and location as to be clearly visible
to customers.
      (4)   Trash receptacles. Each mobile vendor unit will have provisions for
mobile vendor trash disposal. Mobile vendors are responsible for proper
disposal of trash.
      (5)   Self-contained. All mobile vendor units shall be so designed that
all sale activities, including trash disposal facilities, can be conducted
totally from the mobile vending unit cart. Use of the sidewalk by a mobile
vendor for product display, storage, or disposal of trash shall be prohibited.
      (6)   Covered openings. When the mobile unit is in motion, openings must
be covered with a solid material, such as doors, plastic, etc., to protect the
mobile vendor unit from windblown dust and debris during travel. The driver's
compartment and food preparation area must be protected against airborne
contaminants and vermin, if not separated from the food facility portion of the
unit.
      (7)   Equipment. All equipment must be easily cleanable, durable, free of
breaks, cracks and crevices, made of appropriate materials, well constructed
and adequate for the intended use. Such equipment shall be properly maintained
and installed according to all appropriate federal, state or local code
requirements for construction and firesafety.
      (8)   Utility connections. Utility connections for water, cooking,
cooling, electric, heating, etc., must be contained in the mobile vendor unit.
Utility connections to neighboring properties shall be prohibited. All power
equipment shall be installed to eliminate the danger of electrical shock.
      (9)   Fire. A five-pound ABC type dry chemical fire extinguisher is
required for all mobile vendor units utilizing a flame for any purpose.
      (10)   Hand-washing facilities. Each mobile food vendor unit must have a
hand-wash sink with clean, potable hot and cold water, a posted sign indicating
"Employees must wash hands," and comply with the standards as required by the
Pennsylvania Department of Agriculture. Each hand-washing station must include:
soap, single-use paper towels, a waste receptacle and a wastewater collection
container. A waste tank having a minimum of 15% greater capacity than the fresh
water supply container must be provided and all wastewater must be disposed of
in a sanitary sewage system outlet (not on the ground or into a storm drain).
      (11)   Water supply. All mobile food vendor units must be provided with
hot (110° F.) and cold running water under pressure within the mobile vendor
unit. The hot water facilities shall be functional when the vehicle is mobile
or stationary. The water system must be closed from filling outlet to discharge
outlet and separate hoses must exist for filling the water tank and flushing
the retention tank. The water-filling inlet must be designed to prevent
contamination and backflow/backsiphonage must be installed to protect water
supply. The water storage tank shall have a minimum capacity for one day's use.
      (12)   Refuse. All mobile vendor units must have a refuse receptacle with
a tight-fitting lid on the unit. Receptacles must be properly emptied when full
or at a minimum at the close of business. All refuse must be disposed of at the
vendor's expense.
      (13)   Cold and hot holding units. Refrigeration and cold holding units
must be capable of reaching and maintaining 41° F. or below when in use. Hot
holding units must be capable of holding foods at 135° F. or above, as required
by the Pennsylvania Department of Agriculture. Hot and cold storage facilities
must be capable of operation at all times. Each hot holding or cool holding
unit must be supplied with an accurate, easily readable thermometer.
      (14)   Dish-washing. Single-service articles must be used unless adequate
dish-washing facilities are available and used. Adequate facilities will
include a three-compartment sink (separate from the handwashing sink) set up
for accomplishing a three-step method of dish-washing. Where only spatulas,
tongs, and similar devices are washed and sanitized, and only stationary
equipment must be cleaned, a two-compartment sink may be approved as required
by the Pennsylvania Department of Agriculture. All food contact surfaces such
as cutting boards, work tables, utensils and food preparation equipment must be
cleaned and sanitized after each use. Appropriate sanitizer testing devices
must be available on the mobile food vendor unit at all times.
      (15)   Food. All food and beverages must be clean, wholesome, free from
spoilage, free from adulteration and safe for human consumption, as required by
the Pennsylvania Department of Agriculture. All food and beverages shall be
from approved sources. Food prepared in a private home can only be used if that
facility is licensed, registered and inspected by the Pennsylvania Department
of Agriculture and the City of Reading. All perishable, potentially hazardous
foods must be kept cold (41° F. or below) or hot (135° F. or above) at all
times. No bare hand contact is allowed on any ready to eat food; gloves or
utensils must be used. Gloves must be changed between tasks and when gloves
become soiled. All foods must be covered when not in use.
      (16)   Ice. All ice must come from a source approved by the Department of
Agriculture and must be received packaged. Packaged foods, including drinks,
whose packaging is not subject to the entry of water because of the nature of
the container or packaging, may be stored in ice. Personal food and drinks may
not be stored with merchandise. Ice must be stored in clean, easily cleanable,
nonporous, closed containers made of approved materials. Galvanized metal
coolers may not be used. All ice must be dispensed using an ice scoop having an
appropriate handle. Ice used as a coolant may not be used in drinks or as
ingredients in food as it is considered nonpotable.
      (17)   Sign. No sign shall be permitted except an identification of the
vendor's business name and the listing of items available to sale and the price
thereof. The sign must not be obtrusive to the public way or conflict with
neighboring businesses.
      (18)   Food employee certificate. All mobile food vendors are required to
obtain and maintain a food employee certificate from the Department of
Agriculture, as required by the State Food Employee Certification Act, 3
Pa.C.S.A. § 6501 et seq., within three months of the approval of their mobile
vendor permit. New vendors will have 90 days to comply with said requirement;
existing vendors which are not in compliance due to lack of current
certification, employee turnover or other loss of certified person shall have
90 days from the effective date of this Part or the date of loss to comply.
   D.   Prohibited features.
      (1)   Advertising other than the name of the vendor's business or
suppliers. (Advertising must appeal to the sensibilities of the general
public.)
      (2)   Gas cylinders larger than 20 pounds.
      (3)   Tables, chairs, benches, stools and any other device that would
allow the consumption of the product dispensed by the mobile vendor.
      (4)   Foldout shelves cannot be used to provide space for customers to
consume the products dispensed by the mobile vendor.
      (5)   Awnings and canopies, both attached and unattached from the mobile
vendor unit, are prohibited.
   E.   Prohibited conduct. No mobile vendor shall:
      (1)   Leave his or her mobile vendor unit unattended while running.
      (2)   Solicit or conduct business with persons in motor vehicles.
      (3)   Sell anything other than that for which a license to vend has been
issued.
      (4)   Vend without the insurance coverage specified in §
453-308F.
      (5)   Smoke in the mobile food unit or allow others to do so.
      (6)   Sell anything containing alcohol or controlled substances.
      (7)   Obstruct or interfere with traffic in any manner.
      (8)   Sell items from his or her vehicle in such a way that requires
customers to stand in the street while making a purchase.
   F.   Supervision. A person in charge shall be present at all times and is
responsible for overseeing food-handling practices and staff hygiene, as well
as excluding and restricting ill staff.
   G.   Waivers will not be permitted for any requirement based on health,
safety or sanitation considerations.
   H.   All mobile vendor units shall comply with standards and specifications
described herein and adopted by the City and the state. Failure to comply shall
be sufficient grounds for rejection of a vending license application or
suspension or revocation of any license issued.
   I.   Maintenance. All mobile vendor units shall at all times be maintained
in good condition and repair. Any repairs to or replacements of mobile vendor
carts shall comply fully with the existing design criteria, standards and
specification. No replacement units may be placed into operation until
approved.
§ 453-308. Mobile vendor operation standards.
[Amended 4-25-2022 by Ord. No. 34-2022]
   A.   Days and hours of operation. Mobile vendor sales may be conducted
between the hours of 9:00 a.m. to 9:00 p.m. during the permit year.
   B.   Safe and sanitary condition. Mobile vendor units shall be maintained in
a safe, broom-clean and sanitary condition at all times. Mobile vendor units
licensed hereunder to sell food products shall:
      (1)   Be subject to inspection at any time by a City of Reading Property
Maintenance Inspector and the City Fire Marshal or his designee and shall at
all times be licensed under and be in compliance with all applicable state and
local codes.
      (2)   If using portable heating or cooking facilities, the mobile vendor
unit shall be subject to inspection at all times by the City of Reading Fire
Marshal and Property Maintenance Division and shall comply with all applicable
ordinances of the City of Reading. A permit must be obtained from the Fire
Marshal before operation of sales begins.
   C.   Quiet operations. Mobile vendors shall conduct business in an orderly
fashion and shall adhere to
Chapter 387, Noise, of the Code of the City of Reading.
   D.   Use and maintenance of sidewalk.
      (1)   No products shall be stored or displayed on the City sidewalk or
any adjacent area outside the mobile vendor unit.
      (2)   The mobile vendor unit shall be operated so as not to impede the
free movement of pedestrian or vehicular traffic.
   E.   Display. The mobile vendor license, the City of Reading health permit
and any applicable state food employee certificate shall be posted in plain
view of the customers at all times the mobile vendor is operating.
   F.   Public liability insurance. Each license holder shall maintain and
provide the City of Reading with proof thereof, insurance for public liability,
with minimum coverage of $100,000 per individual and $500,000 per incident.
§ 453-309. Suspension or revocation of license. 14
A mobile vendor license shall be subject to suspension or revocation by the
City for violation of any provision of this Part or any regulations promulgated
or enacted hereunder, or violation of applicable state or local law, including
but not limited to all health or safety regulations, zoning and taxation.
14.   Editor's Note: Amended during codification (see
Ch. 1, General Provisions, Part 2).
§ 453-310. Code and License Appeals Board.
[Amended 4-25-2022 by Ord. No. 34-2022]
   A.   Any person aggrieved by a decision of the Property Maintenance
Division, including suspension, nonrenewal, denial or revocation of a mobile
vendor license, may appeal to the Code and License Appeals Board. Such appeal
must be filed, in writing, with the Administrator of the Property Maintenance
Division, with the appropriate filing fee, within 10 working days from the date
of receipt of the decision of the Property Maintenance Division.
      (1)   Oaths and subpoenas. The Board shall have power to administer oaths
and issue subpoenas to compel the attendance of witnesses and the production of
relevant documents and papers, including witnesses and documents requested by
the parties.
      (2)   Quorum and majority vote. Four members shall constitute a quorum of
the Board. A majority of the members of the quorum of the Board shall prevail.
A tie vote shall be deemed as a denial of the appeal.
   B.   Powers. The Board shall have the following powers:
      (1)   Hear and decide appeals. To hear and decide appeals where it is
alleged there is error in any decision of the Property Maintenance Division in
the enforcement of this Part.
      (2)   Grant modification or variance. To modify any notice of violation
or order and to authorize a variance from the terms of this Part when because
of special circumstances, undue hardship would result from literal enforcement,
and where such variance substantially complies with the spirit and intent of
the Part.
      (3)   Grant extension of time. To grant a reasonable extension of time
for the compliance, as described in the City's Property Maintenance Code15 and
other applicable sections of the City of Reading Code of any order where there
is a demonstrated case of hardship and evidence of bona fide intent to comply
within a reasonable time period.
      (4)   Timeliness. In exercising the above-mentioned powers, the Board
shall act with reasonable promptness and seek to prevent unwarranted delays
prejudicial to the party involved and to the public interest; provided,
however, that the Board shall file its decision within 10 working days after
the appeal hearing.
      (5)   Recommend amendments to this Part to the Council of the City of
Reading.
   C.   The Property Maintenance Division decision and all records of final
disposition of the matter outlined in the appeal shall be public and available
for inspection; provided, however, that the Property Maintenance Division may
prescribe reasonable regulation regarding the time and manner of inspection.
   D.   Affect of appeals. Any decision issued under, per, and in accord with
this Part, shall be held in abeyance upon the timely filing of an appeal
thereof with the Vending License Board of Appeals.
   E.   Fee and costs. The fee for filing of an appeal to the Code and License
Appeals Board shall be as provided in
Chapter 212, Fees. Failure to submit the appropriate fee with the request for
an appeal shall result in automatic denial of the appeal. In addition to said
fee, the appellant shall be responsible for all costs incurred to conduct a
hearing beyond that covered by the fee.16
15. Editor's Note: See
Ch. 180, Construction Codes, Part 14, International Property Maintenance Code.
16. Editor's Note: Amended during codification (see
Ch. 1, General Provisions, Part 2).
§ 453-311. Appeal to Court of Common Pleas.
[Amended 4-25-2022 by Ord. No. 34-2022]
Any person aggrieved by any decision of the respective Board may appeal to the
Court of Common Pleas of Berks County. Such appeal shall be made by a duly
verified petition in accord with the Pennsylvania Rules of Civil Procedure and
shall set forth the factual and legal basis upon which the decision of the
Board is alleged to be illegal, in whole or in part. Such petition shall be
filed with the Court of Common Pleas and a notice thereof served upon all
parties to the appeal, including the Code and License Appeals Board and City of
Reading.
§ 453-312. Enforcement.
[Amended 4-25-2022 by Ord. No. 34-2022]
This Part will be enforced under the jurisdiction of the Property Maintenance
Division, the Fire Marshal and the Reading Police Department.
§ 453-313. Violations and penalties.
Any person violating any provision of this Part or of the regulations
promulgated hereunder, shall, upon conviction thereof in a summary proceeding,
be sentenced to pay a fine of $75 to $1,000 for each and every offense, to be
collected as other fines and costs are by law collectible, or shall be
imprisoned for not more than 90 days or both. Each day during which the person
violated any provision of this Part shall constitute a separate offense.
Institution of a prosecution for the imposition of the foregoing penalty shall
not be construed to limit or deny the right of the City to such equitable or
other remedies as may be allowed by law.
Chapter 460
SCRAP METAL DEALERS
§
460-101.   Short title.
§
460-102.   Definitions.
§
460-103.   License requirement; expiration.
§
460-104.   Application for scrap metal facility licenses; fee.
§
460-105.   Issuance and display of license.
§
460-106.   Transfer of license.
§
460-107.   License suspension or revocation.
§
460-108.   Records of transactions; daily reports to police.
§
460-109.   Additional requirements for motor vehicles and parts; exemption.
§
460-110.   Retention of articles; permission of police for disposition;
recovery of stolen goods by true owner.
§
460-111.   Purchase of certain articles restricted.
§
460-112.   Purchases prohibited.
§
460-113.   Authority to conduct inspections.
§
460-114.   Appeals.
§
460-115.   Violations and penalties.
[HISTORY: Adopted by the City Council of the City of Reading 1-25-2008 by Ord.
No. 7-2008 (Ch. 13, Part 15, of the 2001 Code of Ordinances). Amendments noted
where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Construction codes — See
Ch. 180.
Fire prevention and protection — See
Ch. 237.
Health and safety — See
Ch. 288.
Zoning — See
Ch. 600.
§ 460-101. Short title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "City of Reading Scrap
Metal Dealer Ordinance."
§ 460-102. Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have
the meaning ascribed to them in this section except where the context clearly
indicates a different meaning:
   GOVERNMENT ACCOUNT — Any political subdivision as defined in Pennsylvania
Consolidated Statutes that sells scrap metal to a scrap metal facility pursuant
to a written agreement or written account certification.
   INDUSTRIAL OR COMMERCIAL ACCOUNT — Any person operating from a fixed
location that sells scrap metal to a scrap metal facility pursuant to a written
agreement or written account certification. The term may include other scrap
metal facilities.
   MOTOR VEHICLE—The same meaning as set forth in the Pennsylvania Consolidated
Statutes Title 75, Motor Vehicles.
   NONPROFIT ACCOUNT — Any nonprofit organization that is exempt from federal
income taxation under Subsection 501(a) of the Internal Revenue Code, 26
U.S.C.A. § 501(a) and that sells scrap metal to a scrap metal facility pursuant
to a written agreement or written account certification.
   RETAIL TRANSACTION — Any transaction involving any person other than an
industrial or commercial account, a nonprofit account or a government account
in which a scrap metal facility purchases or receives scrap metal.
   SCRAP METAL — Any scrap article or material composed of iron, steel, or
nonferrous metal or metal alloy including, but not limited to, copper, brass,
bronze, aluminum or stainless steel.
   SCRAP METAL FACILITY — Any facility, establishment or place of business that
is maintained or operated for the primary purpose of receiving, storing,
processing, buying or selling scrap metal for remelting or recycling purposes.
   SCRAP METAL FACILITY LICENSE OR LICENSEE — Any person holding a scrap metal
facility license issued pursuant to this chapter and includes any person acting
as the license holder's authorized agent or employee.
   VEHICLE IDENTIFICATION NUMBER OR DERIVATIVE THEREOF — Any number or
derivative of such a number that is embossed, engraved, etched or otherwise
marked on any motor vehicle or motor vehicle part by the manufacturer and can
also include a duplicate motor vehicle identification number replaced upon a
motor vehicle under the authority of the registrar of motor vehicles.
§ 460-103. License requirement; expiration.
No person shall operate a scrap metal facility in the City of Reading except
under authority of a valid scrap metal facility license issued by the Codes
Enforcement Office, in the name of the person operating the facility and for
the specific site of the facility. Every license shall expire on December 31 of
each calendar year following its date of issuance, subject to suspension or
revocation pursuant to §
460-107 of this chapter. An application for the renewal of a license must be
submitted prior to the annual expiration date of the existing license, and
operation under authority of the existing license may continue until issuance
or denial of the renewal of the license, provided submission of the renewal
application is timely.
§ 460-104. Application for scrap metal facility licenses; fee.
   A.   Application for a scrap metal license as required by §
460-103 herein, including the renewal of the license, shall be made in writing
and sworn to on a form provided by the Codes Enforcement Office and pursuant to
the terms of this chapter.
   B.   The application for a license to operate a scrap metal facility shall
include the following information:
      (1)   A list identifying every individual who will be directly engaged in
managing or supervising the daily operations of the facility, and for each
individual so identified the following information shall be provided by the
applicant:
         (a)   The individual's name, address and social security number.
(Note: Providing Social Security number is optional.)
         (b)   A photocopy of a current and valid driver's license, military
identification, or other government-issued photo identification card issued to
individuals.
         (c)   A set of fingerprints and a certified copy of the individual's
criminal history information, including date, time, and place of convictions
for all violations except traffic offenses as obtained from any local or state
enforcement agency.
      (2)   The applicant's history of any government issued licenses or
permits related to the operation of any scrap metal facility, including any
currently held by the applicant and any previously issued licenses or permits
that were revoked or suspended within the past the 10 years and the reasons
therefor.
      (3)   If the applicant is a business entity that is required to register
with the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, Secretary of the State, a copy of a
current certificate of good standing issued by that office.
   C.   No person shall knowingly make a false license application or procure
or seek to procure a license for another.
§ 460-105. Issuance and display of license.
   A.   Subject to the terms of this chapter, the Codes Enforcement Office
shall issue a license to an applicant to operate a scrap metal facility at a
specified location, unless the service safety director finds any of the
following:
      (1)   That the application does not contain all the required information,
or that the application contains a material misrepresentation.
      (2)   That the facility which is to be licensed fails to conform to the
City of Reading Code including, but not limited to, zoning, building, health,
property maintenance and fire.
   B.   The Codes Enforcement Office may refuse to issue a license to an
applicant if it finds any of the following:
      (1)   That the applicant, or any person having a direct or indirect
interest in that which is to be licensed, has been convicted of a felony or
theft offense within the past 10 years or is on probation or parole for a
felony or theft offense.
      (2)   That criminal conduct as defined in the Pennsylvania Crimes Code
has or is occurring on the premises of the facility on a repeated basis by
customers, patrons, employees, operators or licensees. "Repeated basis" shall
mean two or more offenses within the previous 12 months.
   C.   The issued license shall be displayed in a conspicuous place within the
public area of the facility.
§ 460-106. Transfer of license.
   A.   A scrap metal facility license is not transferable to another location.
No person so licensed shall transfer or solicit business at any location other
than at the address stated in the license. Any change in location of the scrap
metal facility licensed pursuant to this chapter shall require the submission
of a new application and the issuance of a new license.
   B.   Any change in ownership or location of the scrap metal facility
licensed pursuant to this chapter shall require the submission of a new
application and the issuance of a new license. For purposes of this section,
whenever the person to which a license has been issued is a corporation or
limited liability company and there is a transfer of the corporation's stock or
that limited liability company's membership interests such that, following the
transfer, the owner of the majority or plurality of the limited liability
company's membership's interests would change, the transfer of stock or
membership interests shall be considered a change of ownership.
§ 460-107. License suspension or revocation.
   A.   The Codes Enforcement Office may revoke or suspend a scrap metal
facility license where it finds:
      (1)   A section of this chapter was violated upon facility premises.
      (2)   A violation of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania statute,
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania Code or the City of Reading Code was committed
upon the facility premises, and was reasonably related to the management,
condition or operation of the facility.
      (3)   A material misrepresentation was made upon application for a
license.
      (4)   An operator of the facility, or employee or agent of the operator,
hindered, obstructed or prevented any inspection of the facility authorized by
this chapter.
   B.   Unless a stay order has been issued by a court of competent
jurisdiction, a licensee is prohibited from purchasing, receiving or selling
any scrap metal articles or material during the time that the licensee's scrap
metal facility is revoked or suspended.
§ 460-108. Records of transactions; daily reports to police.
   A.   All scrap metal facility licensees shall maintain a separate record
book or electronic file in which the licensee shall keep an accurate, legible
and complete record of all the following specified information for each retail
transaction on a form approved by the Chief of Police:
      (1)   A complete and accurate description of any scrap metal article or
material that has been purchased or received by the licensee, including, where
available, the name and maker of the article or material, and the serial number
or other identification number, letters or marks written or inscribed on the
article or material.
      (2)   The seller's name and current address.
      (3)   The identification number from a current and valid driver's
license, military identification, or other government-issued photo
identification card issued to the seller.
      (4)   The identification number and state issuing the license plate of
the motor vehicle being used by the seller to transport the articles or
material to the facility.
      (5)   An impression of the right or left thumb of the seller.
         (a)   If the licensee uses the electronic reporting method, any of the
following procedures will comply with the requirement for a thumb impression:
            [1]   A fingerprint scanner impression of the thumbprint provided
in an electronic file with the daily reporting titled by name and date.
            [2]   A thumbprint impression on a receipt signed by the seller,
filed by date, and retained for three years, and kept in such a manner as it
may be retrieved by law enforcement upon request.
      (6)   The date and time that the licensee purchased or received the
article or material and the name of the individual employee or operator of the
facility who conducted the transaction.
      (7)   A declaration of whether the total amount paid by the licensee for
the articles or material purchased was more or less than $500.
   B.   Every retail transaction shall be numbered consecutively.
   C.   Every retail transaction shall have a digital image taken with the date
and time stamp of such quality as approved by the Chief of Police. The tapes or
pictures must be maintained for a ninety-day period.
   D.   The licensee shall prepare a daily report listing all retail
transactions occurring during the preceding day and containing all information
described in this section for each retail transaction. Before 12:00 noon each
day, the licensee shall deliver a copy of the licensee's daily report to the
Chief of Police or his designee. Delivery of the daily report shall be by means
of a secured electronic transmission, a legible facsimile transmission, or the
delivery of a paper copy or a physical electronic medium containing the report.
Licensees submitting a physical electronic or data from a computerized tracking
system must submit data in a format approved by the Chief of Police.
   E.   The records described in this section shall be retained by the licensee
for three years following the date of the retail transaction.
   F.   Aluminum cans are exempt from reporting.
§ 460-109. Additional requirements for motor vehicles and parts; exemption.
   A.   In addition to all the other requirements of this chapter, a scrap
metal facility that purchases or receives in a retail transaction as scrap a
motor vehicle shall also comply with all the following requirements:
      (1)   No motor vehicle shall be purchased or received unless at the time
of the transaction the seller has provided both a valid driver's license,
military identification, or other government-issued identification card issued
to the seller bearing a photograph of the seller.
      (2)   A scrap metal facility that purchases or receives a motor vehicle
from the owner described on the certificate of title, etc., shall immediately
attach the certificate of title, etc., to an appropriate DMV form, keep a
record/copy of the transaction, and forward the certificate of title, etc., and
DMV form to the PA DMV. The scrap metal facility shall keep record of the
transaction for three years after creating the record. The record shall include
a copy of the certificate of title, etc., and other relevant information.
   B.   In addition to all other requirements of this chapter, a scrap metal
facility that purchases or receives in a retail transaction as scrap a motor
vehicle part bearing a vehicle identification number or derivative thereof
shall also record, as a part of the retail transaction, that part's vehicle
identification number or derivative thereof.
   C.   This chapter shall not apply to any operations person licensed by the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania as a motor vehicle salvage dealer under the
Chapter 73 of the Pennsylvania Vehicle Code. Non-auto-salvage-derived scrap
operations shall be subject to regulation as a scrap metal facility.
§ 460-110. Retention of articles; permission of police for disposition;
recovery of stolen goods by true owner.
   A.   Except as otherwise provided in this section, a scrap metal facility
licensee shall retain and all scrap metal articles or material composed of
copper, brass, aluminum or stainless steel that have been purchased or received
by the licensee in a retail transaction, in the condition the article or
material was received, until the expiration of at least seven days after the
date of purchase or receipt. This required seven-day retention period does not
apply to aluminum cans, motor vehicles, scrap metal articles or material other
than copper, brass, aluminum or stainless steel, for which the licensee has
received written permission for disposition from the Chief of Police or his
designee.
   B.   For any article or material received for which a retention period is
required under this section, the licensee shall attach a tag to the article or
material in some visible and convenient place that identifies the date and
transaction number applicable to that article or material, which tag shall
remain attached until disposition of the article or material.
   C.   If the Chief of Police or his designee has probable cause to believe
that an article or material is stolen property, he shall notify the licensee in
writing. Upon receipt of such notice, the licensee shall retain the article or
material until the expiration of 30 days after receipt of the notice, unless
the Chief of Police or his designee notifies the licensee in writing that the
retention of the article or material is no longer required. Upon expiration of
the thirty-day period, absent renewal thereof by the Chief of Police or his
designee, or the failure of the true owner to pick up the allegedly stolen
property, the scrap article or material may be immediately recycled.
   D.   If the Chief of Police or his designee receives a report that property
has been stolen and determines the identity of the true owner of the allegedly
stolen property that it is in possession of the licensee, and informs the
licensee of the true owner's identity, the licensee shall hold the allegedly
stolen property for at least 30 days from the date of notification by the
Police Chief or his designee to enable the true owner to pick up that property
from the licensee. If the licensee fails or refuses to return the allegedly
stolen property that has been held as required by this chapter, the true owner
may recover the property from the licensee through appropriate legal action.
Upon expiration of the thirty-day period, absent renewal thereof by the Police
Chief or his designee, or the failure of the true owner to pick up the
allegedly stolen property, the scrap article or material may be immediately
recycled.
   E.   If the Chief of Police or his designee determines that there is a need
for the investigative purposes to tag and retain certain articles or materials
received from a specified person, the Chief or his designee shall notify the
licensee in writing of such need and the licensee shall tag and retain said
material for three days. Upon expiration of the three-day period, absent
renewal thereof by the Police Chief or his designee, the scrap article or
material may be immediately recycled. This tagging shall occur regardless of
whether or not the licensee reported electronically.
   F.   A scrap metal facility licensee shall be exempt from the retention
requirements contained in this chapter, provided:
      (1)   The licensee utilizes the automated electronic reporting system
approved by the Chief of Police for all retail transactions involving scrap
metal for which a retention period would otherwise be required under this
section.
      (2)   All required data fields in the transaction report, as determined
by the Chief of Police or his designee, are completed and transmitted by the
licensee to the approved reporting system.
      (3)   The licensee takes a digital image with the date and time of such
quality as is approved by the Chief of Police. The tapes or pictures must be
maintained for a ninety-day period showing date and time.
§ 460-111. Purchase of certain articles restricted.
   A.   No scrap metal facility licensee shall purchase or receive any
restricted article in a retail transaction unless at the time of the
transaction the seller has received reasonable, reliable, written documentation
verifying that the seller is the owner of the article, or is an employee,
agent, or other person authorized to sell the article on behalf of the owner.
   B.   For purposes of this section, "restricted article" means all of the
following: beer kegs; shopping carts; electric or communication cable or wire
and their electronic components owned by a public utility, electric or
communication company; grave markers, sculptures, plaques and vases, the
appearance of which suggest that the articles have been obtained from a
cemetery; guard rails for bridges, highways and roads; highway and street
signs; streetlight poles and fixtures; manhole covers, water meter covers and
other similar types of utility access covers; traffic directional and control
sign and light signals; metal marked with the name of a political subdivision
of the state and other articles that are purchased and installed for use upon
authorization of the state or any political subdivision of the state;
historical markers.
   C.   No scrap metal facility licensee shall purchase or receive any consumer
appliance in a retail transaction unless:
      (1)   At the time of the transaction the seller has received reasonable,
reliable, written documentation verifying that the seller is the owner of the
consumer appliance, or is an employee, agent or other person authorized to sell
the consumer appliance on behalf of the owner.
      (2)   No more than two consumer appliances are purchased or received per
seller per day.
   D.   For purposes of this chapter, "consumer appliance" means all of the
following: air conditioners, hot water heaters, furnaces, refrigerators,
freezers, stoves, clothes washers or dryers.
   E.   No scrap metal facility licensee shall purchase or receive any
catalytic converter in a retail transaction unless:
      (1)   At the time of the transaction the seller has received reasonable,
reliable, written documentation verifying that the seller is the owner of the
catalytic converter, or is an employee, agent, or other person authorized to
sell the catalytic converter on behalf of the owner.
      (2)   No more than one catalytic converter is purchased or received per
seller per day.
§ 460-112. Purchases prohibited.
No licensee shall purchase or receive any scrap metal article or material from
any person under the age of 18, or from any person identified in writing to the
licensee by the Chief of Police as a known or suspected thief or receiver of
stolen property, or from any person failing or refusing to provide to the
licensee all the identifying information required from the seller under this
chapter. Aluminum cans may be purchased from a minor without identification or
reporting.
§ 460-113. Authority to conduct inspections.
   A.   Upon display of the proper credentials, any law enforcement officer or
the designee of the Codes Enforcement Office shall be granted entry to a scrap
metal facility at any time the facility is open for business for the purpose of
conducting an inspection to ensure compliance with this chapter. For purposes
of such inspection, the inspection official shall be granted full access by the
licensee to the buildings, grounds, storage areas, vehicles and records of the
licensee.
   B.   No person shall deny access to, or in any way impede an inspection of a
licensed scrap metal facility, or any portion thereof or fail to cooperate with
any party authorized to enforce this chapter and any party authorized to
inspect scrap metal facilities as noted herein.
§ 460-114. Appeals.
The refusal to issue or renew, and the suspension or revocation of, a scrap
metal facility license pursuant to the provisions of this chapter may be
appealed to the Berks County Court of Common Pleas.
§ 460-115. Violations and penalties.
Any person violating any section or component of this chapter is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree and subject to the cost of prosecution and
restitution. Each day that a person continues to violate this chapter shall
constitute a separate and complete offense.
Chapter 467
SEWERS AND SEWAGE DISPOSAL
Part 1
Sewer Service Rental
§
467-101.   Imposition of sewer service rental; effective date.
§
467-102.   Disposition of funds collected.
§
467-103.   Sewer service rental.
§
467-104.   Sewer service rental; due date and interest penalty.
§
467-105.   Commercial and industrial properties requiring meters.
§
467-106.   Unpaid bills as liens.
Part 2
Sewer Use
§
467-201.   General provisions.
§
467-202.   General sewer use requirements.
§
467-203.   Pretreatment of wastewater.
§
467-204.   Wastewater discharge permit application.
§
467-205.   Wastewater discharge permit issuance process.
§
467-206.   Wastewater monitoring and reporting requirements.
§
467-207.   Inspection powers and compliance monitoring.
§
467-208.   Confidential information.
§
467-209.   Publication of users in significant noncompliance.
§
467-210.   Administrative enforcement remedies.
§
467-211.   Judicial enforcement remedies.
§
467-212.   Supplemental enforcement action.
§
467-213.   Affirmative defenses to discharge violations.
§
467-214.   Wastewater treatment rates.
§
467-215.   Fees.
§
467-216.   Septage discharge permit system.
§
467-217.   Interference with City property.
[HISTORY: Adopted by the City Council of the City of Reading as indicated in
part histories. Amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Construction codes — See
Ch. 180.
Subdivision and land development — See
Ch. 515.
STATE LAW REFERENCES
Sewage Facilities Act - See 53 P.S. § 750.1 et seq.
Sewage facilities program - See 25 Pa. Code § 71.1 et seq. Septic tanks - See
25 Pa. Code § 73.31 et seq.
Tapping fees - See Third Class City Code, 11 Pa.C.S. § 13201.1.
Power to charge rental - See Third Class City Code, 11 Pa.C.S. § 13213.1.
Collection of sewer rental - See Third Class City Code, 11 Pa.C.S. § 13213.1.
Sewer connections - See Third Class City Code, 11 Pa.C.S. §§ 13201 et seq.
Power to furnish sewerage facilities outside City - See Third Class City Code,
11 Pa.C.S. § 13250.
Wastewater treatment - See 25 Pa. Code Ch. 95.
Sewage pollution - See 35 P.S. § 691.201 et seq.
Industrial wastes - See 35 P.S. § 691.301 et seq.
Sewage disposal facilities standards - See 25 Pa. Code Ch. 73.
Part 1
Sewer Service Rental
[Adopted 12-30-1970 By Ord. No. 55-1970 (Ch. 18, Part 3, Of The 2001 Code Of
Ordinances)]
§ 467-101. Imposition of sewer service rental; effective date.
[Amended 12-22-2014 by Ord. No. 101-2014 1 ]
A sewer service rental shall be imposed upon the owners of all properties
within the City which are drained directly by the sanitary sewage system or
from which sewage is transported to and treated at the sewage treatment works
of the City. The sewer service rental shall be comprised of two components, a
sanitary sewer rental and stormwater sewer rental. The total amount of the
sewer service rental is calculated in accordance with §
467-103A through D and then allocated as a sanitary sewer rental and stormwater
sewer rental as set forth in §
467-103E and F.
1.   Editor's Note: This ordinance provided an effective date of 1-1-2015.
§ 467-102. Disposition of funds collected.
[Amended 12-27-2011 by Ord. No. 73-2011; 12-22-2014 by Ord. No. 101-2014 2 ]
The funds received from the collection of sewer service rental shall be
deposited in the Fund 55. The sanitary sewer rental shall be transferred to the
Sewer Enterprise Fund, as necessary, and used solely for the purpose of
defraying the expenses of the City in the administration, operation,
maintenance, repair, alteration, inspection, improvement, depreciation,
amortization of indebtedness and interest thereon, arising out of or connected
with the sanitary sewage and sanitary sewage disposal system of the City, in
accordance with the provisions of the Act of 1935, P.L. 1286, its amendments
and supplements, 53 P.S. § 2231 et seq. The stormwater sewer rental shall be
used for the purpose of defraying the expenses of the City in the
administration, operation, maintenance, repair, alteration, inspection,
improvement, depreciation, amortization of indebtedness and interest thereon,
arising out of or connected with dams and the stormwater sewer system of the
City.
2.   Editor's Note: This ordinance provided an effective date of 1-1-2015.
§ 467-103. Sewer service rental.
[Amended 12-31-1975 by Ord. No. 50-1975; 9-29-1976 by Ord. No. 29-1976; 4-25-
1979 by Ord. No. 10-1979; 4-1-1982 by Ord. No. 13-1982; 12-31-1986 by Ord. No.
113-1986; 3-1-1995 by Ord. No. 26-1995; 9-27-1995 by Ord. No. 98-1995; 12-13-
2004 by Ord. No. 53-2004; 12-15-2006 by Ord. No. 102-2006; 12-27-2011 by Ord.
No. 73-2011; 12-9-2013 by Ord. No. 81-2013]
   A.   The sewer service rental is divided into a meter service charge and a
volumetric service charge for properties with a water meter. To the extent a
property does not have a water meter and is subject to a gross fixed or flat
water rate, the monthly sewer service rental for such property shall equal 150%
of the fixed or flat water rates assessed to such property by the Reading Area
Water Authority or its successor.
   B.   Monthly meter service charge. For properties with water meters, the
meter service charge will be assessed as a fixed monthly charge based on the
size of a property's water meter, with a maximum monthly volumetric allowance
for water consumption set by meter size, as identified in Table 1, below:
Table 1: Monthly Meter Service Charge Schedule
                 Monthly    2014 Monthly                     Monthly Meter
Water Meter Size Volumetric Meter Service 2015 Monthly Meter Service Charge
                 Allowance  Charge        Service Charge     After 2015
                 (Gallons)
                 Monthly    2014 Monthly                     Monthly Meter
Water Meter Size Volumetric Meter Service 2015 Monthly Meter Service Charge
                 Allowance  Charge        Service Charge     After 2015
                 (Gallons)
5/8-inch         2,000      $27.82        $28.93             4% annual increase
3/4-inch         3,000      $37.99        $39.51             4% annual increase
1-inch           5,000      $56.09        $58.33             4% annual increase
1.25-inch        6,660      $71.11        $73.96             4% annual increase
1.5-inch         10,000     $101.34       $105.39            4% annual increase
2-inch           16,000     $155.64       $161.86            4% annual increase
3-inch           30,000     $282.34       $293.63            4% annual increase
4-inch           50,000     $463.34       $481.87            4% annual increase
6-inch           100,000    $915.84       $952.47            4% annual increase
8-inch           160,000    $1,458.84     $1,517.19          4% annual increase
10-inch          230,000    $2,092.34     $2,176.03          4% annual increase
 
   C.   Monthly volumetric service charge. In the event water is consumed on a
property with a water meter in excess of the applicable monthly volumetric
allowance, as identified in Table 1, a monthly volumetric service charge, as
calculated in Table 2, shall be included in such property's sewer service
rental in addition to the meter service charge. No volumetric service charge
shall apply in any month that a property's water consumption does not exceed
the applicable monthly volumetric allowance.
      (1)   For properties with a water meter equal to five-eighths-inch, a
uniform volumetric rate per 1,000 gallons of water consumed shall be charged as
the volumetric service charge.
      (2)   For properties with water meter larger than five-eighths-inch, a
tiered rate structure per 1,000 gallons of water consumed shall be charged as
the volumetric service charge.
Table 2: Volumetric Service Charge Schedule
 
Volumetric Rates  2014 Monthly       2015 Monthly       Monthly Volumetric
Based on Customer Volumetric Service Volumetric Service Service Charge After
Meter Size        Charge (Per 1,000  Charge (Per 1,000  2015
                  gallons)           gallons)
5/8-inch uniform  $8.49              $8.83              4% annual increase
rate
For meters larger
than 5/8-inch
First 750,000     $9.05              $9.41              4% annual increase
gallons
Next 3,000,000    $7.24              $7.53              4% annual increase
gallons
Over 3,750,000    $6.83              $7.10              4% annual increase
gallons
 
   D.   The meter service charge and volumetric service charge shall be
increased on January 1 of each calendar year in accordance with schedules set
forth in Tables 1 and 2. Pursuant to Ordinance 106-2017, the annual increase in
rates is frozen to allow for a rate study to be completed to determine the
rates necessary to pay capital improvement bonds for the wastewater plant,
sanitary sewer, and MS4 projects. Pursuant to Ordinance 89-2018, the annual
increase in rates for 2019 is frozen in accordance with the recommendations of
the Sewer Rate Study. Pursuant to Ordinance 63-2019, the annual increase in
rates is frozen to allow for a rate study to be completed to determine the
rates necessary to pay capital improvement bonds for the wastewater plant,
sanitary sewer, and MS4 projects. [Added 11-27-2017 by Ord. No. 106-2017;
amended 12-17-2018 by Ord. No. 89-2018; 12-9-2019 by Ord. No. 63-2019]
   E.   Allocation of sanitary sewer rental. The sanitary sewer rental shall
equal 93% of the total sewer service rental. [Added 12-22-2014 by Ord. No. 101-
20143]
   F.   Allocation of stormwater sewer rental. The stormwater sewer rental
shall equal 7% of the total sewer service rental. [Added 12-22-2014 by Ord. No.
101-20144]
3.   Editor's Note: This ordinance provided an effective date of 1-1-2015.
4.   Editor's Note: This ordinance provided an effective date of 1-1-2015.
§ 467-104. Sewer service rental; due date and interest penalty.
[Amended 9-29-1976 by Ord. No. 29-1976; 4-25-1979 by Ord. No. 10-1979; 4-1-1982
by Ord. No. 13-1982; 12-31-1986 by Ord. No. 113-1986; 12-13-2004 by Ord. No.
53-2004; 12-15-2006 by Ord. No. 102-2006; 12-27-2011 by Ord. No. 73-2011; 12-9-
2013 by Ord. No. 81-2013]
   A.   Bills for sewer service rentals shall be rendered on a monthly. All
sewer service rentals shall be due and payable to the City within 30 days of
the issuance of a bill.
   B.   A penalty of 10% shall be added to bills not paid by the due date
printed on the bills, which date shall be 30 days after date of issuance of
such bills.
   C.   Reductions or rebates may be provided to customers who do not discharge
a significant portion of their metered water to the sewage system. Such
adjustments shall be determined pursuant to rules and procedures adopted by
resolution of Council.
§ 467-105. Commercial and industrial properties requiring meters.
[Added 1-27-1971 by Ord. No. 4-1971; amended 12-31-1975 by Ord. No. 50-1975]
   A.   Where commercial and industrial properties using City water do not
discharge all or part of such water into the City sewage disposal system, the
amount of such water may be excluded in determining the sewage service rental,
providing the minimum sewage service rental is not reduced thereby. To
determine the amount of such exclusion, the consumer shall, at his own expense,
install a meter or measuring device satisfactory to the City, provided that if,
in the opinion of the City, it is not feasible to install a meter or measuring
device, some other satisfactory method of measuring may be designated by the
City.
   B.   For commercial and industrial properties which use other than City
supplied water, the rental for sewage disposal service shall be based upon the
quantity of water discharged into the sewer system. A meter or other measuring
device satisfactory to the City shall be installed by the consumer, at his own
expense, and the charge for such service shall be comparable to that charged
for sewage disposal service for City water having a meter of equal size.
   C.   A penalty of 10% shall be added to bills not paid within 30 days from
the presentation thereof. Sixty days after receipt, all unpaid bills, exempting
cases where a repayment schedule has been approved by the City, will be subject
to civil and/or criminal action(s) with all applicable charges and fees
incurred by the City being applied to the debt. [Amended 8-26-2013 by Ord. No.
35-2013]
§ 467-106. Unpaid bills as liens.
The sewer service rental, if not paid to the City Treasurer one year after the
gross bill shall be due and payable, shall be certified by the City Treasurer
to the City Solicitor for collection and lien.
Part 2
Sewer Use
[Adopted 5-26-1998 By Ord. No. 17-1998 (Ch. 18, Part 1, Of The 2001 Code Of
Ordinances)]
§ 467-201. General provisions.
   A.   Purpose and policy.
      (1)   This Part sets forth uniform requirements for users of the publicly
owned treatment works for the City of Reading, Pennsylvania, and enables the
City to comply with all applicable state and federal laws, including the Clean
Water Act, 33 U.S.C. § 1251 et seq., and the General Pretreatment Regulations,
40 CFR Part 403, and amendments, thereto. The objectives of this Part are:
         (a)   To prevent the introduction of pollutants into the publicly
owned treatment works that will interfere with its operation.
         (b)   To prevent the introduction of pollutants into publicly owned
treatment works that will prevent or restrict the beneficial reuse of the
resulting sludge from the wastewater treatment process.
         (c)   To prevent the introduction of pollutants into the publicly
owned treatment works that will pass through the publicly owned treatment
works, inadequately treated, into receiving waters, or otherwise be
incompatible with the publicly owned treatment works.
         (d)   To protect both publicly owned treatment works personnel who may
be affected by wastewater and sludge in the course of their employment and the
general public.
         (e)   To promote reuse and recycling of industrial wastewater and
sludge from the publicly owned treatment works.
         (f)   To provide for fees for the equitable distribution of the cost
of operation, maintenance, and improvement of the publicly owned treatment
works.
         (g)   To enable the City of Reading to comply with its National
Pollutant Discharge Elimination System permit conditions, sludge use and
disposal requirements, and any other federal or state laws to which the
publicly owned treatment works is subject.
      (2)   This Part shall apply to all users of the City of Reading publicly
owned treatment works and to persons outside the City who are, by contract or
agreement with the City, users of the City publicly owned treatment works. The
Part authorizes the issuance of wastewater discharge permits; provides for
monitoring, compliance, and enforcement activities; establishes administrative
review procedures; requires user reporting; and provides for the setting of
fees for the equitable distribution of costs resulting from the program
established herein. This Part supersedes Ordinance Nos. 61-84, 1-87, 104-89, 7-
94, and 48-86, as amended, and provisions of those ordinances are null and void
where they conflict with specifics contained herein.
   B.   Administration.
      (1)   This Part provides for the regulation of contributors to the POTW
and wastewater system through the issuance of permits to certain nondomestic
users and through enforcement of general requirements for users, authorizes
monitoring, compliance, and enforcement activities; requires user reporting;
assumes that existing customer's capacity will not be preempted; and provides
for the setting of fees for their equitable distribution of costs resulting
from the program established herein.
      (2)   This Part shall apply to all users of the POTW. Except as otherwise
provided herein, the Industrial Waste Administrator shall administer,
implement, and enforce the provisions of this Part. Any powers granted to or
duties imposed upon the Industrial Waste Administrator may be delegated by the
Industrial Waste Administrator to other City personnel or to the City's
authorized agent.
   C.   Abbreviations and acronyms. The following abbreviations or acronyms
shall have the designated meanings:
   APR — Average percentage rate
   ASTM — American standard testing materials
   BAT — Best available treatment
   BATEA — Best available technology economically achievable
   BCT — Best control technology
   BMP — Best management practices
   BMR — Baseline monitoring report
B/N — Base/neutral
   BOD — Biochemical oxygen demand
   BPJ — Best professional judgment
   BPT — Best professional technology
   CERCLA — Comprehensive Environmental Response, Compensation and Liability
Act
   CFR — Code of Federal Regulations
   CIU — Categorical industrial user
   COD — Chemical oxygen demand
   CSO — Combined sewer overflow
   CWA — Clean Water Act
   CWF — Combined waste stream formula
   DMR — Discharge monitoring report
   DSS — Domestic sewage study
   EMS — Enforcement management system
   EP — Extraction procedure
   EPA — Environmental Protection Agency of the United States
   ERP — Enforcement response plan
   FDF — Fundamentally different factor
   FOV — Finding of violation
   FOG — Fats, oil and grease
   FR — Federal Register
   FTE — Full-time equivalent
   FWA — Flow-weighted averaging
   FWPCA — Federal Water Pollution Control Act
   GC/MS — Gas chromatograph mass spectrophotometry gpd — Gallons per day
I + I — Infiltration and inflow
   IU — Industrial user
   IWA — Industrial Waste Administrator
   IWS — Industrial waste survey
   MAHL — Maximum allowable headworks loading
   MGD — Million gallons per day mg/l — Milligrams per liter
   MOU — Memorandum of understanding
   MSDS — Material safety data sheet
   NH3-N — Ammonia (NH3) expressed as nitrogen (N)
   NIOSH — National Institute of Occupational Safety and Health
   NMP — National municipal policy
   NPDES — National pollutant discharge elimination system
   NON — Notice of noncompliance
   NOV — Notice of violation
   OCPSF — Organic chemicals, plastics and synthetic fibers
O&G — Oil and grease
O&M — Operations and maintenance
   OSHA — Occupational Safety and Health Administration
   OWEC — Office of Water Enforcement and Compliance
   PAD — Proportioned actual domestic flow
PaDEP — Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection
   PAH — Polynuclear aromatic hydrocarbons
   PAI — Proportioned actual industrial flow
   PASS — Pretreatment audit summary system
   PCB — Polychlorinated biphenols
   PCI — Pretreatment compliance inspection
   PCME — Pretreatment compliance monitoring enforcement
   PCS — Permit compliance system
   PIRT — Pretreatment Implementation Review Task Force
   POTW — Publicly owned treatment works
ppd — Pounds per day
ppm — Parts per million
ppb — Parts per billion
   PPETS — Pretreatment permits enforcement tracking system
   PQR — Permit quality review
   PSNS — Pretreatment standards for new sources
   PSES — Pretreatment standards for existing sources
   QAQC — Quality assurance quality control
   QNCR — Quarterly noncompliance report
   RCRA — Resource Conservation and Recovery Act
   RNC — Reportable noncompliance
   SARA — Superfund Amendments and Reauthorization Act
   SIC — Standard industrial classification
   SIU — Significant industrial user
   SMP — Solvent management plan
   SNC — Significant noncompliance
   SPCC — Spill prevention control and countermeasures
   SPMS — Strategic planning and management system
   STP — Sewage treatment plant
   STLC — Soluble threshold limit concentration
   SU — Standard units
   SUO — Sewer Use Ordinance [this Part]
   SWDA — Solid Waste Disposal Act
   TCLP — Toxicity characteristic leachate procedure
   TDS — Total dissolved solids
   TICH — Total identifiable chlorinated hydrocarbons
   TOMP — Toxic organic management plan
   TRC — Technical review criteria
   TRE — Toxicity reduction evaluation
   TSS — Total suspended solids
   TTO — Total toxic organics
   TTLC — Total threshold limit concentration
   USC — United States Code ug/1 — micrograms per liter
   VOA — Volatile organic analysis
   VOC — Volatile organic compounds
   VSS — Volatile suspended solids
   WENDB — Water enforcement national data base
   WEF — Water Environment Federation
   WQA — Water Quality Act
   WQS — Water quality standard
   WWTP — Wastewater treatment plant
   D.   Definitions. Unless a provision explicitly states otherwise, the
following terms and phrases, as used in this Part, shall have the meanings
hereinafter designated:
   ACT or THE ACT — The Federal Water Pollution Control Act, also known as the
Clean Water Act, as amended, 33 U.S.C. § 1251 et seq.
   APPROVAL AUTHORITY — The EPA Regional III Administrator.
   APPURTENANCE — Auxiliary structures attached to a sewer which shall include,
but not be limited to, pump stations, slots, regulators, outfalls, force mains,
manholes, catch basins, tide gates, monitoring devices and metering chambers.
   AUTHORIZED EMPLOYEES OR AGENTS OF THE CITY — A person who by reason of his
or her general position or job description with the City has specific duties
and responsibilities to perform on behalf of the City. Also included are agents
of the City who are authorized by the IWA to act on behalf of the City through
an authorization letter.
   AUTHORIZED REPRESENTATIVE OF THE USER —
      (1)   If the user is a corporation:
         (a)   The president, secretary, treasurer or a vice president of the
corporation in charge of a principal business function, or any other person who
performs similar policy or decisionmaking functions for the corporation.
         (b)   The manager of one or more manufacturing, production, or
operation facilities employing more than 250 persons or having gross annual
sales or expenditures exceeding $25,000,000 (in second-quarter 1980 dollars),
if authority to sign documents has been assigned or delegated to the manager in
accordance with corporate procedures.
      (2)   If the user is a partnership or sole proprietorship; a general
partner or proprietor, respectively.
      (3)   If the user is representing federal, state or local governments, or
an agent thereof, an authorized representative shall mean a director or highest
official appointed or designated to oversee the operation and performance of
the activities of the government facility.
      (4)   The individuals described in Subsections (1) through (3) above may
designate another authorized representative if said authorization is submitted
to the City in writing and specifies the individual or position responsible for
the overall operation of the facility from which the discharge originates or
having overall responsibility for environmental matters of the company.
   BATCH DISCHARGE — The discharge of all or part of the contents of a tank
that occurs intermittently or over a short period of time.
   BIOCHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND or BOD — The quantity of oxygen utilized in the
biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory procedures
for five days at 20° C., usually expressed as a concentration (e.g., mg/l).
   BIOLOGICALS — Preparations made from living organisms and their products,
including vaccines, cultures, etc., intended for use in diagnosing, immunizing
or treating humans or animals or in research pertaining thereto.
   BLOOD PRODUCTS — Any products derived from human blood, including but not
limited to whole blood, blood plasma, platelets, red or white blood corpuscles,
and other derived licensed products, such as interferon, etc.
   BODY FLUIDS — Liquids emanating or derived from humans including blood
products, cerebrospinal, pleural, peritoneal and pericardial fluids and
amniotic fluids and semen and vaginal secretions but excluding feces, urine,
nasal secretions, sputum, sweat, tears, saliva and breast milk, unless any such
excluded substance contains visible blood or is isolation waste.
   BUILDING DRAIN — That part of the lowest horizontal piping within a building
that carries water, wastewater or stormwater to a building sewer.
   BUILDING SEWER — The extension from the building drain to the public sewer,
or other place of disposal. Also referred to as "house connection."
   BYPASS — The intentional or unintentional diversion of waste streams from
any portion of a user's treatment facility.
   CHAIN OF CUSTODY — Written documentation such as receipts and record book
entries to show the history of possession, custody and/or control of a sample
from collection through analysis.
   CHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND (COD) — A measure of the amount of oxygen required to
oxidize organic and oxidizable inorganic compounds in water.
   CHLORINE DEMAND — The quantity of chlorine absorbed in water, sewage or
other liquids, allowing a residual of 0.1 mg/l, after 15 minutes of contact.
   CITY — The City of Reading, Pennsylvania. The agent of the City who is
authorized by this Part to implement the City's industrial pretreatment program
shall be the Industrial Waste Administrator.
   COLLECTION FACILITIES — The sewers, lift stations, and other City facilities
used to collect wastewaters from individual users within specific tributary
districts and transport them to conveyance facilities for transmission to the
treatment plant for processing.
   COLOR — As analyzed by methods specified by 40 CFR, Part 136.
   COMMERCIAL USER — A source of discharge of wastewater to the City sewer
system from premises used partially or entirely for commercial purposes.
   COMPOSITE SAMPLE — The sample collection technique resulting from the
combination of individual wastewater grab samples taken at selected intervals
based on either an increment of flow or time.
   CONTACT COOLING WATER — Any water used for cooling purposes which comes into
direct contact with the object being cooled such as any raw material,
intermediate product, waste product or finished products.
   CONTROL AUTHORITY — Shall refer to the City or the City of Reading POTW.
   CONVENTIONAL WASTEWATER POLLUTANTS — Pollutants so designated in accordance
with § 304(a)(4) of the Act as being effectively managed by secondary treatment
as defined by 40 CFR, Part 133.
   DAILY MAXIMUM — The maximum allowable discharge of a pollutant during a
calendar day. Where maximum limitations are expressed in units of mass, the
daily discharge is the total mass discharged over the course of a day. Where
daily maximum limitations are expressed in terms of concentration, the daily
discharge is the arithmetic average measurement of the pollutant derived from
all measurements taken that day.
   DIRECT CONNECTION — The connection of a building sewer directly to a sewer
owned by the City.
   DIRECT DISCHARGE — The discharge of treated or untreated wastewater directly
to the waters of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
   DISCHARGE — The introduction of wastewater, water, and/or pollutants into
the City's facilities from any source.
   DOMESTIC WASTE — The normal water-carried household and toilet wastes from
residences, business buildings, institutions and industrial establishments.
Also known as "sewage."
   EASEMENT — The acquired legal right to use land owned by others for a
specific purpose.
   ENFORCEMENT RESPONSE PLAN — A plan which sets forth the City's enforcement
response to violations of this Part, as required by 40 CFR, Part 403.
   ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AGENCY or EPA — Shall refer to the U.S.
Environmental Protection Agency or, where appropriate, the term may also be
used as a designation for the Regional Water Management Division Director, or
other duly authorized official of said agency.
   EXISTING SOURCE — Any source of discharge, the construction or operation of
which commenced prior to the publication by EPA of proposed categorical
pretreatment standards, which will be applicable to such source if the standard
is thereafter promulgated in accordance with § 307 of the Act.
   FACILITY OR FACILITIES — See "wastewater facilities."
   FLASHPOINT — The temperature at which a liquid or volatile solid gives off
vapor sufficient to form an ignitable mixture with the air near the surface of
the liquid or within the test vessel. Flashpoint is determined by the test
methods set out in 40 CFR 261.21.
   GARBAGE — Shall include, but not be limited to, the wastes resulting from
the handling, preparation, cooking and serving of food, and from the handling,
storage and sale of product.
   GARBAGE DISPOSAL UNIT or GARBAGE GRINDER — A mechanical device used for
grinding, shredding or macerating garbage to a small particle size before
discharge to the sewer.
   GRAB SAMPLE — A sample which is taken from a waste stream without regard to
the flow in the waste stream and over a period of time not to exceed 15
minutes.
   GREASE — A substance which tests positive in the standard analytical method
used for this parameter. Grease may be composed of volatile and nonvolatile
residual fats, oils, fatty acids, soaps, waxes, mineral oils and other
materials of similar composition.
   GREASE REMOVAL DEVICE — A device for removal of grease and/or oil from a
wastewater discharge.
   HOLDING TANK WASTE — Any waste from holding tanks such as vessels, chemical
toilets, campers, trailers, septic tanks and vacuum-pump tank trucks.
   INDIRECT CONNECTION — A building sewer connection that is not a direct
connection; and whose wastewater discharge shall, notwithstanding the passage
in its normal course through other sewers or conduits, ultimately discharge in
whole or in part through City sewers.
   INDIRECT DISCHARGE or DISCHARGE — The discharge or the introduction of
pollution from any nondomestic source regulated under § 307(b), (c) or (d) of
the Act, 33 U.S.C. § 1317, into the POTW (including holding tank waste
discharge into the system).
   INDUSTRIAL ESTABLISHMENT — Any improved property used, in whole or in part,
for manufacturing, processing, cleaning, laundering, or assembling any product,
commodity or article; or from which any process waste, as distinct from sewage,
shall be discharged.
   INDUSTRIAL USER — A source of indirect discharge which does not constitute a
discharge of pollutants under regulations issued pursuant to § 402 of the Act.
In addition, "industrial user" shall also be defined as an establishment which
discharges or introduces industrial waste into the POTW.
   INDUSTRIAL WASTE — Shall have the meaning ascribed to it in the Act of June
22, 1937, P.L. 1987, No. 394, known as the "Clean Streams Law," 5  and the
regulations adopted thereunder.
   INDUSTRIAL WASTE ADMINISTRATOR (IWA) — The person designated by the City to
administer its industrial waste program and who is charged with certain duties
and responsibilities by this Part or his/her duly authorized representative.
   INFECTIOUS WASTES — Wastewater contaminated by or containing any agent or
organism, such as a virus or a bacteria, capable of being communicated by
invasion and multiplication in body tissues and capable of causing disease or
adverse health impacts in humans.
   INSTANTANEOUS MAXIMUM ALLOWABLE DISCHARGE LIMIT — The maximum concentration
of a pollutant allowed to be discharged at any time, determined from the
analysis of any discrete or composited sample collected, independent of the
industrial flow rate and the duration of the sampling event.
   INTERFERENCE — A discharge, which alone or in conjunction with a discharge
or discharges from other sources, both: (1) inhibits or disrupts the POTW, its
treatment processes or operations or its sludge processes, use or disposal; and
(2) therefore, is a cause of a violation of the City's NPDES permit (including
an increase in the magnitude or duration of a violation) or of the prevention
of sewage sludge use or disposal in compliance with any of the following
statutory regulatory provisions or permits issued thereunder, or any more
stringent state or local regulations; § 405 of the Act, the Solid Waste
Disposal Act, including Title II, commonly referred to as the "Resource
Conservation and Recovery Act" (RCRA); any state regulations contained in any
state sludge management plan prepared pursuant to Subtitle D of the Solid Waste
Disposal Act; the Clean Air Act; the Toxic Substances Control Act; and the
Marine Protection, Research, and Sanctuaries Act.
   ISOLATION WASTE — Biological waste and discarded materials contaminated with
blood, excretion, exudates, or secretions from humans who are isolated to
protect others from certain highly communicable diseases, or isolated animals
known to be infected with highly communicable diseases and specified by the
Center for Disease Controls (CDC) as classification 4.
   MANHOLE — A shaft or chamber leading from the surface of the ground to a
sewer; large enough to enable a person to gain access to the sewer.
   MAY — Is permissive; "shall' is mandatory.
   MEDICAL WASTE — Any solid waste which is generated in the diagnosis,
treatment (e.g., provisions of medical services), or immunization of human
beings or animals in research pertaining thereto, or in the production or
testing of biologicals.
   MONTHLY AVERAGE — The arithmetic mean of the values for effluent samples
collected over a calendar month.
   MUNICIPALITY — Any City, borough, township, municipal authority, county,
county authority, state authority or sewer district that discharges wastewater
into the sewers owned by the City.
   NATIONAL CATEGORICAL PRETREATMENT STANDARD or CATEGORICAL STANDARD — Any
regulation containing pollutant discharge limits promulgated by EPA in
accordance with §§ 307(b) and (c) of the Act, 33 U.S.C. § 1317, which apply to
a specific category of users and which appear in 40 CFR,
Chapter 1, Subchapter N, Parts 405 through 471.
   NATIONAL POLLUTION DISCHARGE ELIMINATION SYSTEM (NPDES) PERMIT — A permit
issued pursuant to § 402 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act, 33 U.S.C.
§ 1342.
   NATIONAL PROHIBITIVE DISCHARGE STANDARD or PROHIBITIVE DISCHARGE STANDARD —
Any regulation developed under the Authority of § 301(b) of the Act and 40 CFR
403.5.
   NONSIGNIFICANT INDUSTRIAL USER — A user designated as such by the IWA based
on the user's discharge quantity and quality. Such users may include but are
not limited to commercial users, medical officers (doctor, dentist, etc.),
garages and auto repair facilities, funeral parlors, and laboratories. The
ultimate determination of the status of nonsignificant industrial user is
within the discretion of the IWA pursuant to the terms and conditions of this
Part.
   NEW SOURCE —
      (1)   Any building, structure, facility, or installation from which there
is (or may be) a discharge of pollutants, the construction of which commenced
after the publication of proposed pretreatment standards under § 307(c) of the
Act which will be applicable to such source if such standards are thereafter
promulgated in accordance with that section, provided that:
         (a)   The building, structure, facility, or installation is
constructed at a site at which no other source is located;
         (b)   The building, structure, facility, or installation totally
replaces the process or production equipment that causes the discharge of
pollutants at an existing source; or
         (c)   The production or wastewater generating processes of the
building, structure, facility, or installation are substantially independent of
an existing source at the same site. In determining whether these are
substantially independent, factors such as the extent to which the new facility
is integrated with the existing plant, and the extent to which the new facility
is engaged in the same general type of activity as the existing source, should
be considered.
      (2)   Construction on a site at which an existing source is located
results in a modification rather than a new source if the construction does not
create a new building, structure, facility, or installation meeting the
criteria of Subsection (1)(b) or (c) above but otherwise alters, replaces, or
adds to existing process or production equipment.
      (3)   Construction of a new source as defined under this subsection has
commenced if the owner or operator has:
         (a)   Begun, or caused to begin, as part of a continuous on site
construction program:
            [1]   Any placement, assembly, or installation of facilities or
equipment;
            [2]   Significant site preparation work including clearing,
excavation, or removal of existing buildings, structures, or facilities which
is necessary for the placement, assembly, or installation of new source
facilities or equipment; or
         (b)   Entered into a binding contractual obligation for the purchase
of facilities or equipment which are intended to be used in its operation
within a reasonable time. Options to purchase or contracts which can be
terminated or modified without substantial loss, and contracts for feasibility,
engineering, and design studies to not constitute a contractual obligation
under this subsection.
   NONCONTACT COOLING WATER — Water used for cooling which does not come into
direct contact with any raw material, intermediate product, waste product, or
finished product.
   OUTFALL — The mouth of a sewer, drain or conduit where an effluent is
discharged into the receiving waters, or discharged into the POTW collection
system.
   OWNER or OPERATOR — Any person who owns, leases, operates, or controls or
supervises a source.
   PASS-THROUGH — A discharge which exits the POTW into waters of the United
States in quantities or concentrations which, alone or in conjunction with a
discharge or discharges from other sources, is a cause of a violation of any
requirement of the City's NPDES permit, including an increase in the magnitude
or duration of a violation.
   PERMITTEE — The City of Reading POTW.
   PERSON — Any individual, partnership, copartnership, firm, company,
corporation, association, joint stock company, trust, estate, governmental
entity, or any other legal entity; or their legal representatives, agents or
assigns. This definition includes all federal, state, and local governmental
entities. The masculine gender shall include the feminine, the singular shall
include the plural where indicated by the context.
pH — A measure of the acidity or alkalinity of a solution, expressed in
standard units.
   POLLUTANT — Dredged spoil, solid waste, incinerator residue, filter
backwash, sewage, garbage, sewage sludge, munitions, medical wastes, chemical
wastes, biological materials, radioactive materials, heat, wrecked or discarded
equipment, rock, sand, cellar dirt, municipal, agricultural and industrial
wastes, and certain characteristics of wastewater (e.g., pH, temperature, TSS,
turbidity, color, BOD, COD, toxicity or odor).
   POLLUTION — The man-made, or man induced alteration of the chemical,
physical, biological or radiological integrity of water.
   PRETREATMENT or TREATMENT — The reduction of the amount of pollutants, the
elimination of pollutants, or the alteration of the nature of pollutant
properties in wastewater prior to, or in lieu of, introducing such pollutants
into the POTW. This reduction or alteration can be obtained by physical,
chemical, or biological processes; by process changes; or by other means,
except by diluting the concentration of the pollutants unless allowed by an
applicable pretreatment standard.
   PRETREATMENT REQUIREMENTS — Any substantive or procedural requirement
related to pretreatment imposed on a user, including a pretreatment standard or
procedural provision of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act (62 Stat. 115,
33 U.S.C. § 1251 et seq.) or the Act of June 22, 1937, P.L. 1987, No. 394,
known as the "Clean Streams Law," or any rule or regulation, ordinance or term
or condition of a permit or order adopted or issued by the commonwealth or a
POTW for the implementation or enforcement of an industrial waste pretreatment
program established under the Federal Water Pollution Control Act or the Clean
Streams Law.
   PRETREATMENT STANDARDS or STANDARDS — Pretreatment standards shall mean
prohibited discharge standards, categorical pretreatment standards, and local
limits.
   PROHIBITED DISCHARGE STANDARDS or PROHIBITED DISCHARGES — The absolute or
conditional prohibition from discharge of a substance, group of substances or
type of substance as defined in §
467-202A of this Part.
   PUBLICLY OWNED TREATMENT WORKS or POTW — A treatment works as defined by §
212 of the Act, 33 U.S.C. §
   POTW TREATMENT PLANT — That portion of the POTW designed to provide
treatment to wastewater.
   REGULATED MEDICAL WASTE — A special category of solid waste that includes
specific types of medical waste that includes solid, semisolid, or liquid
materials, but does not include domestic sewage materials. This waste is
subject to the handling and tracking requirements of Pennsylvania Department of
Environmental Protection. Categories of regulated medical waste are defined as
blood, blood products, body fluids, contaminated sharps, discarded cultures and
stocks of infectious agents and associated biologicals, isolation wastes,
pathological waste and oncological waste.
   RESIDENTIAL USERS — Persons only contributing sanitary wastewater to the
municipal wastewater system.
   SANITARY SEWER — A sewer that is designed to carry liquid and water-carried
wastes from residences, commercial buildings, industrial plants and
institutions together with minor quantities of ground, storm and surface wastes
that are not discharged intentionally.
   SEPTIC TANK WASTE — Any sewage from holding tanks such as vessels, chemical
toilets, campers, trailers and septic tanks.
   SEWAGE — Human excrement and gray water (household showers, dish-washing
operations, etc.).
   SEWER — A pipe or conduit, and other appurtenance provided to carry
wastewater or stormwater.
   SHALL — Is mandatory; "may" is permissive.
   SIGNIFICANT INDUSTRIAL USER —
      (1)   A user subject to categorical pretreatment standards; or
      (2)   A user that:
         (a)   Discharges an average of 25,000 gpd or more of process
wastewater to the POTW (excluding sanitary, noncontact cooling, and boiler
blowdown wastewater);
         (b)   Contributes a process waste stream which makes up 5% or more of
the average dry weather hydraulic or organic capacity of the POTW treatment
plant; or
         (c)   Is designated as such by the City on the basis that it has a
reasonable potential for adversely affecting the POTW's operation or for
violating any pretreatment standard or requirement.
      (3)   Upon a finding that a user meeting the criteria in Subsection (2)
has no reasonable potential for adversely affecting the POTW's operation or for
violating any pretreatment standard or requirement, the City may, at any time,
on its own initiative or in response to a petition received from a user, and in
accordance with procedures in 40 CFR 403.8(f)(6), determine that such user
should not be considered a significant industrial user.
   SIGNIFICANT NONCOMPLIANCE — An industrial user is in significant
noncompliance if its violation meets one or more of the specific criteria set
forth in 40 CFR 403.8(f)(2)(vii). For purposes of this definition, an
industrial user is in significant noncompliance if its violation meets one or
more of the following criteria:
      (1)   Chronic violations of wastewater discharge limits, defined here as
those in which 66% or more of wastewater measurements taken during a six-month
period exceed the daily maximum limit or average limit for the same pollutant
parameter by any amount;
      (2)   Technical review criteria (TRC) violations, defined here as those
in which 33% or more of wastewater measurements taken for each pollutant
parameter during a six- month period equals or exceeds the product of the daily
maximum limit or the average limit multiplied by the applicable criteria (1.4
for BOD, TSS, fats, oils and grease, and 1.2 for all other pollutants except
pH);
      (3)   Any other discharge violation that has caused, alone or in
combination with other discharges, interference or pass-through, including
endangering the health of POTW personnel or the general public;
      (4)   Any discharge or pollutants that has caused imminent endangerment
to the public or to the environment, or has resulted in the City's exercise of
its emergency authority to halt or prevent such a discharge.
      (5)   Failure to meet, within 90 days of the scheduled date, a compliance
schedule milestone contained in a wastewater discharge permit or enforcement
order for starting construction, completing construction, or attaining final
compliance;
      (6)   Failure to provide within 30 days after the due date, any required
reports, including baseline monitoring reports, reports on compliance with
categorical pretreatment standard deadlines, periodic self-monitoring reports,
and reports on compliance with compliance schedules;
      (7)   Failure to accurately report noncompliance, including failure to
report and resample in accordance with §
467-206H; or
      (8)   Any other violation(s) which the City determines will adversely
affect the operation or implementation of the local pretreatment program.
   SLUDGE — The solids, residues, and precipitate separated from wastewater by
the unit processes of a publicly owned treatment works or industrial
pretreatment systems.
   SLUG LEAD or SLUG — Any discharge of a nonroutine, episodic nature, or at a
flow rate or concentration which would cause a violation of the prohibited
discharge standards in §
467-202 of this Part.
   SOURCE — Any building, structure, facility or installation from which there
is or may be the discharge of pollutants.
   STANDARD INDUSTRIAL CLASSIFICATION (SIC) CODE — A classification pursuant to
the Standard Industrial Classification Manual issued by the United States
Office of Management and Budget.
   STANDARD METHODS — Methods for the examination of water and wastewater
published jointly by the American Public Health Association, the American Water
Works Association, and the Water Pollution Control Federation.
   STATE — Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
   STORM SEWER — A sewer that carries stormwater and other wash waters or
drainage, but excludes domestic, sanitary, commercial, and industrial wastes.
Also called a "storm drain."
   STORMWATER — Any flow occurring during or following any form of natural
precipitation, and resulting from such precipitation, including snowmelt.
   SURFACE WATER POLLUTANT — Stormwater or other wash water or drainage
carrying any pollutants which affect the characteristics of wastewater.
   SUSPENDED SOLIDS — The total suspended matter that floats on the surface of,
or is suspended in, water, wastewater, or other liquid, and which is removable
by laboratory filtering in accordance with EPA laboratory procedures (40 CFR,
Part 136).
   SUPERINTENDENT — The person designated by the City to supervise the
operation of the POTW or his/her duly authorized representative.
   TOXIC POLLUTANT — Any pollutant or combination of pollutants listed as toxic
in regulations promulgated by the Administrator of the Environmental Protection
Agency under the provisions of CWA § 307(a) or other Acts.
   TREATMENT PLANT EFFLUENT — Any discharge of pollutants from the City's
facilities into wastes of the state.
   TURBIDITY — A condition in water or wastewater caused by the presence of
suspended matter, resulting in the scattering and absorption of light rays and
determined by measurements of light diffraction, usually reported in arbitrary
turbidity units.
   USER or INDUSTRIAL USER — Any person who contributes, causes or permits the
contribution of wastewater into the City's POTW.
   WASTEWATER — The spent water of the community. Liquid and water-carried
industrial wastes and sewage from residential dwellings, commercial buildings,
industrial and manufacturing facilities, institutions and governmental
facilities whether treated or untreated, which are contributed to the POTW.
   WASTEWATER FACILITIES (FACILITIES) — The structures, equipment, and
processes required for the collection, treatment, and disposal of wastewater
and sewage sludge which are owned and operated by the City.
   WASTEWATER TREATMENT PLANT or TREATMENT PLANT — That portion of the POTW
which is designed to provide treatment of wastewater and sewage sludge
sometimes used as synonymous with waste treatment plant, sewage treatment
plant, or wastewater treatment works.
   WATERS OF THE STATE or WATERS OF THE COMMONWEALTH — All streams, lakes,
ponds, marshes, watercourses, waterways, wells, springs, reservoirs, aquifers,
irrigation systems, drainage systems and all other bodies or accumulations of
water, surface or underground, natural or artificial, public or private, which
are contained within, flow through, or border upon the state or any portion
thereof.
   ZERO DISCHARGE WASTEWATER PRETREATMENT SYSTEM — A wastewater pretreatment
system with no discharge to the sewer system.
5.   Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 691.1 et seq.
§ 467-202. General sewer use requirements.
[Amended 10-28-2002 by Ord. No. 55-2002; and 11-12-2019 by Ord. No. 53-2019]
   A.   Prohibited discharge standards.
      (1)   General prohibitions. No user shall introduce or cause to be
introduced into the POTW any pollutant or wastewater which causes pass-through
or interference. These general prohibitions apply to all users of the POTW
whether or not they are subject to categorical pretreatment standards or any
other national, state or local pretreatment standards or requirements.
      (2)   Specific prohibitions. No user shall introduce or cause to be
introduced into the POTW the following pollutants, substances, or wastewater:
         (a)   Pollutants which create a fire or explosive hazard in the POTW,
including but not limited to waste streams with a closed-cup flashpoint of less
than 140° F. (60° C.) using the test methods specified in 40 CFR 261.21.
         (b)   Wastewater having a pH less than 5.0 or more than 11.0, or
otherwise causing corrosive structural damage to the POTW or equipment.
         (c)   Solid or viscous substances which may cause obstruction to the
flow in a sewer or other interference with the operation of the wastewater
treatment facilities such as, but not limited to: grease, garbage with
particles greater than 1/2 inch in any dimension, animal guts or tissues,
paunch manure, bones, hair, hides or flushings, entrails, whole blood, medical
waste, feathers, ashes, cinders, sand, stone or marble dust, metal, glass,
straw, shavings grass clippings, rags, spent grains, spent hops, wastepaper,
paper dishes, cups, milk containers, lime slurries, wood, plastics, gas, tar,
asphalt residues, residues from refining or processing of fuel or lubricating
oil, mud, or glass grinding or polishing wastes.
         (d)   Pollutants, including oxygen-demanding pollutants (BOD etc.),
released in a discharge at a flow rate and/or pollutant concentration which,
either singly or by interaction with other pollutants, will cause interference
with the POTW.
         (e)   Any wastewater having a temperature which will inhibit
biological activity in the treatment plant resulting in interference, but in no
case wastewater which causes the temperature at the introduction into the
treatment plant to exceed 104° F. (40° C.).
         (f)   Pollutants which result in the presence of toxic gases, vapors,
or fumes within the POTW in a quantity that may cause acute worker health and
safety problems.
         (g)   Petroleum oil, nonbiodegradable cutting oil, or products of
mineral oil origin, in amounts that will cause interference or pass-through.
         (h)   Trucked or hauled pollutants, except at discharge points
designated by the City in accordance with §
467-216 of this Part.
         (i)   Noxious or malodorous liquids, gases, solids, or other
wastewater which, either singly or by interaction with other wastes, are
sufficient to create a public nuisance, odor problem, or a hazard to life, or
to prevent entry into the sewers for maintenance or repair.
         (j)   Wastewater with a true color in excess of 100 platinum cobalt
units, except by dischargers with a higher limit specified in their permit.
         (k)   Wastewater containing any radioactive wastes or isotopes except
in compliance with applicable state or federal regulations or any radioactive
wastes or isotopes of such half-life or concentration as may exceed limits
established by state or federal laws or regulations.
         (l)   Stormwater, surface water, ground water, artisan well water,
roof runoff, subsurface drainage, swimming pool drainage, and noncontact
cooling water, unless specifically authorized by the City.
         (m)   Wastewater causing, alone or in conjunction with other sources,
the treatment plant's effluent to fail a toxicity test.
         (n)   Detergents, surface-active agents, or other substances which may
cause excessive foaming in the POTW.
         (o)   Any garbage that has not been properly shredded to at least
particles less than 1/2 inch in any dimension. Garbage grinders may be
connected to public sewers from homes, hotels, institutions, restaurants,
hospitals, catering establishments or similar places where garbage originates
from the preparation of food in kitchens for the purpose of consumption on the
premises or when served by caterers, providing that all requirements of
applicable City ordinances are satisfied.
         (p)   Chlorine demand in such quantities as to constitute a
significant load on the wastewater facilities or which may cause the effluent
from the City's wastewater treatment facilities to violate any state or federal
rules, regulations, or permit requirements including, but not limited to,
National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) permits.
         (q)   Concentrations of BOD or TSS or NH3-N which exceed specific
threshold values without payment of a surcharge to cover the additional costs
of treatment. The current threshold value for BOD is 300 mg/L and for TSS is
325 mg/ l and for NH3-N is 20 mg/l. Payment of a surcharge does not prevent the
City from initiating any actions available under §
467-202G below, when the City determines that any other general discharge
limitations are violated. Furthermore, payment of a surcharge shall not
constitute an affirmative defense to any action taken pursuant to §
467-202G below.
         (r)   Any substance which may cause the POTW's residues, sludges, or
scums, to be unsuitable for reclamation and reuse or to interfere with the
reclamation process. In no case shall a substance discharged to the POTW cause
the POTW to be in noncompliance with sludge use or disposal criteria,
guidelines or regulations developed under § 405 of the Act; any criteria,
guidelines, or regulations developed under § 405 of the Act; any criteria,
guidelines, or regulations affecting sludge use or disposal developed pursuant
to the Solid Waste Disposal Act, the Clean Air Act, the Toxic Substances
Control Act, or other federal or state criteria applicable to the sludge
management method being used.
         (s)   Slugs as defined in §
467-201D.
         (t)   Isolation wastes or regulated medical waste (see definitions
under §
467-201D).
         (u)   Wastewater causing two readings on an explosion hazard meter at
the point of discharge into the POTW, or at any point in the POTW, of more than
5% or any single reading over 10% of the lower explosive limit of the meter.
Materials include but are not limited to: gasoline, benzene, naphtha, fuel oil,
paint products, kerosene, toluene, xylene, ethers, ketones, aldehydes,
peroxides, chlorates, perchlorates, bromates, carbides, hydrides, sulfides, or
any other flammable or explosive substances which the City, the Pennsylvania
Department of Environmental Protection, or the Environmental Protection Agency
has notified the user is a fire hazard or a hazard to the City POTW.
         (v)   Discharges prohibited by state or federal regulations.
         (w)   When the City determines that a user(s) is contributing to the
POTW any of the above-enumerated substances in such amounts as to interfere
with the operation of the POTW, the City may:
            [1]   Advise the user(s) of the impact of the contribution on the
POTW;
            [2]   Develop effluent limitation(s) for such user to correct the
interference with the POTW; or
            [3]   Proceed with enforcement pursuant to the provisions of this
Part.
         (x)   Pollutants, substances or wastewater prohibited by this section
shall not be processed or stored in a manner that they could be discharged to
the POTW.
         (y)   Wastewater in excess of 100 mg/l total oil and grease of animal
or vegetable origin, except by discharges with a lower limit specified in their
permit. The City reserves the right to require testing by the EPA Method 1664,
N-Hexane Extractable Material (HEM).
         (z)   Wastewater in excess of 25 mg/l of oil and grease of petroleum
or mineral oil origin except by dischargers with a higher or lower limit
specified in their permit. The City reserves the right to require oil and
grease testing for nonpolar constituents by EPA methods employing silica gel
treated n-hexane extractable material (EPA Method 1664, SGT-HEM; nonpolar
material).
   B.   National categorical pretreatment standards. The categorical
pretreatment standards found at 40 CFR,
Chapter 1, Subchapter N, Parts 405 through 471, are hereby incorporated.
      (1)   Where a categorical pretreatment standard is expressed only in
terms of either the mass or the concentration of a pollutant in wastewater, the
City may impose equivalent concentration or mass limits in accordance with 40
CFR 403.6(c).
      (2)   When wastewater subject to a categorical pretreatment standard is
mixed with wastewater not regulated by the same standard, the City shall impose
an alternate limit using the combined waste stream formula in 40 CFR 403.6(e).
      (3)   A user may obtain a variance from a categorical pretreatment
standard if the user can prove, pursuant to the procedural and substantive
provisions in 40 CFR 403.13, that factors relating to its discharge are
fundamentally different from the factors considered by EPA when developing the
categorical pretreatment standard.
      (4)   A user may obtain a net gross adjustment to a categorical standard
in accordance with 40 CFR 403.15.
   C.   Local limits.
      (1)   Limits for discharging pollutants which are of concern to the POTW
will be made using headworks loading analyses which have been reviewed and
approved by the EPA. Limits may be in the form of monthly average
concentration, daily maximum concentration, or instantaneous maximum
concentration. Limits will be contained in the wastewater discharge permits
issued. The limits apply at the point where the wastewater is discharged to the
POTW. All concentrations for metallic substances are for total metal unless
indicated otherwise. The City may impose mass limitations in addition to, or in
place of, the concentration-based limitations above.
      (2)   The City's objective in setting the limits is to restrict
industrial waste discharges to the above described concentrations which will
not harm either the sewer system or the treatment plant, will not have an
adverse effect on the receiving stream, or will not otherwise endanger life,
limb, or public property or constitute a nuisance. The City may set lower or
higher limitations in specific cases if, in the opinion of the City, said
actions will be consistent with the above stated objective. In the setting of
such lower or higher limitations, the City will give consideration to such
factors as the volume of wastewater flow in relation to flows and velocities in
the sewers, degree of treatability of the waste, and other pertinent factors.
The City reserves the right to reevaluate and revise the limitations as needed.
All local limit changes will be submitted to the approval authority for
approval. The more stringent of EPA or Commonwealth of Pennsylvania
requirements and limitations shall apply in any case where either is more
stringent than those presently in force.
      (3)   An industrial user classified as a categorical industrial user
shall be required to meet the EPA categorical standards, if such standards are
more stringent than the local discharge limitations.
      (4)   Maximum Allowable Industrial Loadings (MAILs) for the specified
pollutants of concern, as approved by the United States Environmental
Protection Agency (EPA), are hereby established as set forth below. These MAILs
are developed to protect against pass through and interference, and to protect
sludge quality. Individual limitations may be allocated to the Industrial Users
as needed through Wastewater Discharge Permits issued to the Industrial Users
in accordance with §§
467-204 and
467-205 of the City Sewer Code.
Parameter Daily Maximum MAIL1, Lbs/Day
Parameter        Daily Maximum MAIL1, Lbs/Day
Arsenic          6.82
Cadmium          1.16
Chromium         15.28
Copper           8.19
Cyanide, Free    2.46
Cyanide, Total   14.50
Lead             4.35
Mercury          0.008
Molybdenum       6.67
Nickel           49.45
Phenolics, Total 9.51
Selenium         2.37
Silver           8.93
Zinc             30.29
1 MAIL is defined as Maximum Allowable Industrial Loadings
 
   D.   State requirements. State requirements and limitations on discharges
shall apply in any case where they are more stringent than federal requirements
and limitations or those in this Part.
   E.   Right of revision. The City reserves the right to establish by
ordinance limitations or requirements on discharges to the wastewater disposal
system if deemed necessary to comply with the objectives presented in §
467-201A of this Part.
   F.   Dilution. No user shall ever increase the use of process water, or in
any way attempt to dilute a discharge, as a partial or complete substitute for
adequate treatment to achieve compliance with a discharge limitation unless
expressly authorized by an applicable pretreatment standard or requirement. The
City may impose mass limitations on users who are using dilution to meet
applicable pretreatment standards or requirements, or in other cases when the
imposition of mass limitations is appropriate.
   G.   Remedies. If any wastewater is discharged or is proposed to be
discharged to the wastewater facilities in violation of the limitations or
prohibitions described in §
467-202, the City may:
      (1)   Reject the wastes.
      (2)   Require surcharge payments to be made to the City to cover its
added cost of handling, monitoring, and treating the wastes which exceed
threshold values in accordance with rates set and approved by the City.
      (3)   Revoke a discharger's permit.
      (4)   Recover any and all actual costs expended by the City in correcting
any problems caused by discharges in violation of this Part.
      (5)   As authorized by this Part, take any other administrative
sanctions, enforcement actions, and remedial actions as may be desirable,
necessary, or permitted to achieve the purpose of this Part.
   H.   Accidental discharges.
      (1)   Each user shall provide protection from accidental discharge of
prohibited or other substances regulated by this Part. Facilities to prevent
accidental discharge of prohibited materials shall be provided and maintained
at the owner or user's own cost and expense. Detailed plans showing facilities
and operating procedures to provide this protection shall be submitted to the
City for review, and shall be approved by the City before construction of the
facility. No user shall be permitted to introduce pollutants into the system
until accidental discharge procedures have been approved by the City. Review
and approval of such plans and operating procedures shall not relieve the
industrial user from the responsibility to modify the user's facility as
necessary to meet the requirements of this Part. In the case of an accidental
discharge, it is the responsibility of the user to immediately notify the City
of the incident. The notification shall include location of discharge, type of
waste, concentration and volume, and corrective actions.
      (2)   Written notice. Within five days following an accidental discharge;
the user shall submit to the City a detailed written report describing the
cause of the discharge and the measures to be taken by the user to prevent
similar future occurrences. Such notification shall not relieve the user of any
expense, loss, damage, or other liability which may be incurred as a result of
damage to the POTW, fish kills, or any other damage to person or property; nor
shall such notification relieve the user of any fines, civil penalties, or
other liability which may be imposed by this article or other applicable law.
      (3)   Notice to employees. A notice shall be permanently posted on the
user's bulletin board or other prominent place advising employees whom to call
in the event of an accidental discharge. Employers shall insure that all
employees who may cause or suffer such an accidental discharge to occur are
advised of the emergency notification procedures.
§ 467-203. Pretreatment of wastewater.
   A.   Pretreatment facilities. Users shall provide wastewater treatment as
necessary to comply with this Part and shall achieve compliance with all
categorical pretreatment standards, local limits, and the prohibitions set out
in §
467-202A of this Part within the time limitations specified by EPA, the state,
or the City, whichever is more stringent. Any facilities necessary for
compliance shall be provided, operated, and maintained at the user's expense.
Detailed plans describing such facilities and operating procedures shall be
submitted to the City for review, and shall be acceptable to the City before
such facilities are constructed. The review of such plans and operating
procedures shall in no way relieve the user from the responsibility of
modifying such facilities as necessary to produce a discharge acceptable to the
City under the provisions of this Part. The issuance of any permit by the City
for pretreatment facilities pursuant to this Part does not constitute an
approval of the design of any such pretreatment system. The user remains
responsible for the design, construction, operation and maintenance of an
acceptable pretreatment facility. The City shall have no responsibility or
liability to any user whose system fails for any reason whatsoever to produce a
discharge acceptable to the City.
   B.   Additional pretreatment measures.
      (1)   Whenever deemed necessary and with reasonable justification, the
City may require users to restrict their discharge during peak flow periods,
designate that certain wastewater be discharged only into specific sewers,
relocate and/or consolidate points of discharge, separate sewage waste streams
from industrial waste streams, and such other conditions as may be necessary to
protect the POTW and determine the user's compliance with the requirements of
this Part.
      (2)   Grease, oil, and sand interceptors shall be provided when they are
necessary for the proper handling of wastewater containing excessive amounts of
grease and oil, or sand; except that such interceptors shall not be required
for residential users. All interception units shall be of type and capacity
approved by the City and shall be so located to be easily accessible for
cleaning and inspection. Such interceptors shall be inspected, cleaned, and
repaired regularly, as needed, by the user at their expense. Maintenance
records shall be made available to the City upon request.
      (3)   Users with the potential to discharge flammable substances may be
required to install and maintain an approved combustible gas detection meter.
   C.   Accidental discharge/slug control plans. At least once every two years,
the City shall evaluate whether each significant industrial user needs an
accidental discharge/slug control plan. The City may require any user to
develop, submit for approval, and implement such a plan. Alternatively, the
City may develop such a plan for any user. An accidental discharge/ slug
control plan shall address, at a minimum, the following:
      (1)   Description of discharge practices, including nonroutine batch
discharges.
      (2)   Description of stored chemicals that have the reasonable potential
to discharge to the POTW.
      (3)   Procedures for immediately notifying the City of any accidental or
slug discharge, as required by §
467-206F of this Part.
      (4)   Procedures to prevent adverse impact from any accidental or slug
discharge. Such procedures include, but are not limited to, inspection and
maintenance of storage areas, handling and transfer of materials, loading and
unloading operations, control of plant site runoff, worker training, building
of containment structures or equipment, measures for containing toxic organic
pollutants, including solvents, and/or measures and equipment for emergency
response.
   D.   Installation of zero-discharge pretreatment system. Prior to
installation of a zero-discharge pretreatment system, the user must submit a
zero-discharge pretreatment system design plan for City acceptance. In order to
obtain City acceptance, the user must demonstrate that he or she will provide
full pretreatment of all wastewater and will cease to discharge process
wastewater to the facilities by an effective date prescribed by the City and
the user must obtain a zero-discharge permit from the City.
§ 467-204. Wastewater discharge permit application.
   A.   Wastewater discharges. It shall be unlawful to discharge to the POTW
any wastewater except as authorized by the City in accordance with the
provisions of this Part, subject to state and federal laws and regulations.
   B.   Wastewater analysis. When requested by the City, a user must submit
information on the nature and characteristics of its wastewater within 90 days
of the request. The City is authorized to prepare a form for this purpose and
may periodically require users to update this information.
   C.   Wastewater discharge permit requirement.
      (1)   No significant industrial user shall discharge wastewater into the
POTW without first obtaining a wastewater discharge permit from the City,
except that a significant industrial user that has filed a timely application
pursuant to §
467-204D of this Part or the previous Ord. No. 61-1984 may continue to
discharge for the time period specified therein.
      (2)   The City may require other users to obtain wastewater discharge
permits as necessary to carry out the purposes of this Part.
      (3)   Any violation of the terms and conditions of a wastewater discharge
permit shall be deemed a violation of this Part and subjects the wastewater
discharge permittee to the sanctions set out in §§
467-210 through 467-212 of this Part. Obtaining a wastewater discharge permit
does not relieve a permittee of its obligation to comply with all federal and
state pretreatment standards or requirements or with any other requirements of
federal, state, and local law.
      (4)   No permit holder shall discharge industrial wastewater in excess of
the quantity, rate of discharge, concentrations or any other limits specified
in the permit. Any person desiring to modify his or her permit must first apply
for an amended permit.
   D.   Wastewater discharge permitting: existing connections. Any user
required to obtain a wastewater discharge permit who was discharging wastewater
into the POTW prior to the effective date of this Part, and does not have a
permit currently, and who wishes to continue such discharges in the future,
shall, within 90 days after said date, apply to the City, for a wastewater
discharge permit in accordance with §
467-204F of this Part, and shall not cause or allow discharges to the POTW to
continue after 180 days of the effective date of this Part except in accordance
with a wastewater discharge permit issued by the City.
   E.   Wastewater discharge permitting: new connections. Any user required to
obtain a wastewater discharge permit who proposes to begin or recommence
discharging into the POTW must obtain such permit prior to the beginning or
recommencing of such discharge. An application for this wastewater discharge
permit, in accordance with §
467-204F of this Part, must be filed at least 90 days prior to the date upon
which any discharge will begin or recommence.
   F.   Wastewater discharge permit application contents. All users required to
obtain a wastewater discharge permit must submit a permit application. The City
may require all users to submit as part of an application the following
information:
      (1)   All information required by §
467-206A(1) of this Part.
      (2)   Description of activities, facilities, and plant processes on the
premises, including a list of all raw materials and chemicals used or stored at
the facility which are, or could accidentally or intentionally be, discharged
to the POTW.
      (3)   Number of employees, hours of operation, and proposed or actual
hours of operation.
      (4)   Each product produced by type, amount, process or processes, and
rate of production.
      (5)   Type and amount of raw materials processed (average and maximum per
day).
      (6)   Site plans, floor plans, mechanical and plumbing plans, and details
to show all sewers, floor drains, and appurtenances by size, location, and
elevation, and all points of discharge and pretreatment system plans.
      (7)   Time and duration of discharges.
      (8)   Wastewater constituents and characteristics. Sampling and analysis
shall be performed in accordance with § 304(g) of the Act and 40 CFR, Part 136,
as amended.
      (9)   The name and concentration of any pollutants in the discharge, the
number of sampling events shall be determined by the City; and a written
statement as to whether or not applicable pretreatment standards are being met,
and if not, whether additional in-plant modification and additional
pretreatment is required for the user to meet such applicable pretreatment
standards.
      (10)   If additional pretreatment or in-plant modification will be
required to meet the pretreatment standards, the user will provide a schedule
by which to achieve the standards in a timely manner. The schedule will be
reported as the pretreatment compliance schedule. The following conditions
shall apply to this schedule:
         (a)   The schedule shall contain increments of progress in the form of
dates for the commencement and completion of major events leading to the
construction and operation of additional pretreatment required for the user to
meet the applicable pretreatment standards (e.g., hiring an engineer,
completing preliminary plans, executing contracts for major components,
commencing construction, completing construction). No increment shall exceed
nine months.
         (b)   Not later than 14 days following each completion date in the
schedule, the user shall submit a progress report to the City including, at a
minimum, whether or not he or she complied with the increments of progress. If
such increment of progress was not completed on time, the user shall also
report the date on which he or she expects to complete the increment of
progress, the reason for the delay, and the steps being taken by the user to
return to the schedule established. In no event shall completion dates be more
than nine months apart.
      (11)   Information on the disposal of substances to the POTW which are
considered hazardous under 40 CFR, Part 261.
      (12)   Signatory requirements.
      (13)   Applicable fees.
      (14)   Any other information as may be deemed necessary by the City to
evaluate the wastewater discharge permit application. Incomplete or inaccurate
applications will not be processed and will be returned to the user for
revision.
   G.   Application signatories and certification. All wastewater discharge
permit applications, user reports and inspection reports must be signed by an
authorized representative of the user and contain the following certification
statement:
"I certify under penalty of law that this document and all attachments were
prepared under my direction or supervision in accordance with a system designed
to assure that qualified personnel properly gather and evaluate the information
submitted. Based on my inquiry of the person or persons who manage the system,
or those persons directly responsible for gathering the information, the
information submitted is, to the best of my knowledge and belief, true,
accurate, and complete. I am aware that there are significant penalties for
submitting false information, including the possibility of fine and
imprisonment for knowing violations."
   H.   Wastewater discharge permit decisions.
      (1)   The City shall evaluate the data furnished by the user and may
require additional information. Based on the application, the City may issue a
wastewater discharge permit subject to the terms and conditions enumerated in
the permit.
      (2)   The City may deny a request for a permit when the information
supplied indicates the user will be unable to reasonably meet the City's
standards. Any person denied a permit may request a hearing in accordance with
the provisions of §
467-212G.
§ 467-205. Wastewater discharge permit issuance process.
   A.   Wastewater discharge permit duration. A wastewater discharge permit
shall be issued for a specified time period, not to exceed five years from the
effective date of the permit. A wastewater discharge permit may be issued for a
period less than five years at the discretion of the City. Each wastewater
discharge permit will indicate a specific date upon which it will expire. The
permit may be administratively extended by the City as long as the duration of
the permit does not exceed five years.
   B.   Wastewater discharge permit contents. Wastewater discharge permits
shall be expressly subject to specific permit provisions contained therein as
well as to provisions of this Part and all other regulations, user charges and
fees established by the City. Wastewater discharge permits may include such
conditions as are reasonably deemed necessary by the City to prevent pass-
through or interference, protect the quality of the water body receiving the
treatment plant's effluent, protect worker health and safety, facilitate sludge
management and disposal, protect ambient air quality, and protect against
damage to the City's collection system and POTW. Such conditions may include,
but are not limited to, the following:
      (1)   Wastewater discharge permits must contain:
         (a)   A statement that indicates wastewater discharge permit duration,
which in no event shall exceed five years.
         (b)   A statement that the wastewater discharge permit is
nontransferable without prior notification to the City in accordance with §
467-205E of this Part, and provisions for furnishing the new owner or operator
with a copy of the existing wastewater discharge permit.
         (c)   Effluent limits based on applicable pretreatment standards; the
average and or maximum wastewater constituents permitted in the wastewater
discharge.
         (d)   Self-monitoring, sampling, reporting, notification, and
recordkeeping requirements. These requirements shall include an identification
of pollutants to be monitored, sampling location, sampling frequency, and
sample type based on federal, state, and local law, and reporting frequency.
         (e)   A statement of applicable civil and criminal penalties for
violation of pretreatment standards and requirements, and any applicable
compliance schedule. Such schedule may not extend the time for compliance
beyond that required by applicable federal, state or local law.
      (2)   Wastewater discharge permits may contain, but need not be limited
to, the following conditions:
         (a)   Limits on the average and/or maximum volume or rate of
discharge, time of discharge, and/or requirements for flow regulation and
equalization.
         (b)   Requirements for the installation of pretreatment technology,
pollution control, or construction of appropriate containment devices, designed
to reduce, eliminate, or prevent the introduction of pollutants into the
treatment works.
         (c)   Requirements for the development and implementation of spill and
slug prevention, control plans, solvent management plans, toxic organic
management plans or other special conditions including management practices
necessary to adequately prevent accidental, unanticipated, or nonroutine
discharges.
         (d)   Development and implementation of waste minimization plans to
reduce the amount of pollutants discharged to the POTW.
         (e)   The unit charge or schedule of user charges and fees for the
management of the wastewater discharged to the POTW.
         (f)   Requirements for installation and maintenance of inspection and
sampling facilities and equipment.
         (g)   A statement that compliance with the wastewater discharge permit
does not relieve the permittee of responsibility for compliance with all
applicable federal and state pretreatment standards, including those which
become effective during the term of the wastewater discharge permit.
         (h)   Requirements for maintaining and submitting technical reports
and plant records relating to wastewater discharges.
         (i)   Compliance schedules.
         (j)   Provisions for authorized City employees and agents to enter and
inspect the premises, including provisions for copying records, inspecting
monitoring equipment and sampling effluent.
         (k)   Compliance with federal, state and other government laws, rules
and regulations.
         (l)   Signatory requirements.
         (m)   Other conditions as deemed appropriate by the City to ensure
compliance with this Part, and state and federal laws, rules and regulations.
      (3)   The zero-discharge permit may require, among other things, that:
         (a)   The zero discharge system be installed as proposed and be fully
operational.
         (b)   All sewer drain lines in the facility be capped off and sealed.
         (c)   The user notify the City in writing, and obtain a revised
wastewater discharge permit from the City before resuming discharge if he/she
wishes to reconnect to the sewer.
         (d)   City personnel be authorized to enter such premises without
delay and at reasonable times for the purpose of inspection and as otherwise
authorized by this Part.
      (4)   The nonsignificant user permit may include the items listed in
Subsection B(1) and (2).
   C.   Wastewater discharge permit reconsideration. The City may provide
public notice of the issuance of a wastewater discharge permit. Any person,
including the user, may petition the City to reconsider the terms of a
wastewater discharge permit within 30 days of notice of its issuance.
      (1)   Failure to submit a timely written request for review shall be
deemed to be a waiver of the administrative appeal.
      (2)   The petitioner, in its written request, must indicate the
wastewater discharge permit provisions objected to, the reasons for this
objection, and the alternative condition, if any, it seeks to place in the
wastewater discharge permit.
      (3)   Written request.
         (a)   During the pendency of a written request for a reconsideration
and/or an appeal, the effective date of the wastewater discharge permit shall
be stayed; provided, however, that the City shall have the right to take any
and all steps necessary to cause a cessation of any discharge which would cause
an immediate threat to the health and safety of any person and/or would
constitute a threat to the integrity of the sanitary sewer system or the POTW.
         (b)   This section shall only be operative to stay the effective date
of the wastewater discharge permit where the City has affirmatively responded
to the application and granted a stay for such reasonable time as the City
deems necessary to consider the requests for reconsideration and/or appeal and,
furthermore, said stay of the permit shall only be effective for the specific
provisions of the permit which have either been appealed and/or a request for
reconsideration has been submitted by the applicant. The request for
reconsideration and/or appeal shall not be considered a stay of the entire
permit, but only for those specific sections of the permit from which the
applicant is seeking relief.
      (4)   The City shall act on the written request within a reasonable time
period, not to exceed 90 days. The City's decision not to consider a wastewater
discharge permit, not to issue a wastewater discharge permit, or not to modify
a wastewater discharge permit shall be considered a final administrative action
provided that the petitioner may file an appeal pursuant to §
467-212G hereunder.
   D.   Wastewater discharge permit modification.
      (1)   The City may modify a wastewater discharge permit for good cause,
including, but not limited to, the following reasons:
         (a)   To incorporate any new or revised federal, state or local
pretreatment standards or requirements.
         (b)   To address significant alterations or additions to the user's
operation, processes, or wastewater volume or character since the time of
wastewater discharge permit issuance.
         (c)   A change in the POTW that requires either a temporary or
permanent reduction or elimination of the authorized discharge.
         (d)   Information indicating that the permitted discharge poses a
threat to the City's POTW, City personnel or the receiving waters.
         (e)   Violation of any terms or conditions of the wastewater discharge
permit.
         (f)   Misrepresentations or failure to fully disclose all relevant
facts in the wastewater discharge permit application or in any required
reporting.
         (g)   Revision of or a grant of variance from categorical pretreatment
standards pursuant to 40 CFR 403.13.
         (h)   To correct typographical or other errors in the wastewater
discharge permit.
         (i)   To reflect a transfer of the facility ownership or operation to
a new owner or operator.
      (2)   A user may apply for modification of a discharge permit by filing a
new application form showing substantial significant and material changes that
have been proposed since filing the original application. No application for
modification will be considered unless it demonstrates such changes.
      (3)   After a review of the application and inspection of the facility,
the City may, at its discretion, modify the original permit. If such
application is rejected, the existing permit shall remain in full force and
effect.
      (4)   The user shall be informed of any proposed changes in his or her
permit at least 30 days prior to the effective date of change. Any changes or
new conditions in the permit shall include a hearing on modifications to his or
her permit in accordance with the provisions of §
467-212.
   E.   Wastewater discharge permit transfer.
      (1)   Wastewater discharge permits may be transferred to a new owner or
operator only if the permittee gives at least 30 days' advance notice to the
City and the City approves the wastewater discharge permit transfer. The notice
to the City must include a written certification by the new owner or operator
which:
         (a)   States that the new owner and/or operator has no immediate
intent to change the facility's operations and processes.
         (b)   Identifies the specific date on which the transfer is to occur.
         (c)   Acknowledges full responsibility for complying with the existing
wastewater discharge permit.
      (2)   Failure to provide advance notice of a transfer renders the
wastewater discharge permit void as of the date of facility transfer.
   F.   Wastewater discharge permit revocation.
      (1)   The City may revoke a wastewater discharge permit for good cause,
including, but not limited to, the following reasons:
         (a)   Failure to provide prior notification to the City of changed
conditions pursuant to §
467-206E of this Part.
         (b)   Misrepresentation or failure to fully disclose all relevant
facts in the wastewater discharge permit application.
         (c)   Falsifying self-monitoring reports.
         (d)   Tampering with monitoring equipment.
         (e)   Refusing to allow the City timely access to the facility
premises and records.
         (f)   Failure of the user to meet the effluent limitations contained
in the wastewater discharge permit.
         (g)   Failure to pay fines after the appeal process has been
exhausted.
         (h)   Failure to pay sewer charges.
         (i)   Failure to meet compliance schedules.
         (j)   Failure to complete a wastewater survey or the wastewater
discharge permit application.
         (k)   Failure to provide advance notice of the transfer of business
ownership of a permitted facility.
         (l)   Violation of any pretreatment standard or requirement, or any
terms of the wastewater discharge permit or this Part.
      (2)   Wastewater discharge permits shall be voidable upon cessation of
operations or transfer of business ownership. All wastewater discharge permits
issued to a particular user are void upon the issuance of a new wastewater
discharge permit to that user.
   G.   Wastewater discharge permit reissuance. A user with an expiring
wastewater discharge permit shall apply for wastewater discharge permit
reissuance by submitting a complete permit application, in accordance with §
467-204F of this Part, a minimum of 90 days prior to the expiration of the
user's existing wastewater discharge permit. Having met this requirement, the
user's existing permit shall remain in effect until a new permit is issued.
   H.   Reinstatement of permit. Before any further discharge of industrial
wastewater may be made by a user whose permit has been revoked, the user must
apply for, and be granted, a reinstatement of the terminated permit, or a new
permit, as the City may require, and pay any delinquent fees and all fines,
charges, and other costs occasioned by the violation. Costs shall include, but
not be limited to, inspection, monitoring, sampling and related expenses;
restitution to other affected parties; reasonable attorney's fees incurred by
the City in enforcing the permit; disconnecting and reconnecting the user to
the facility; and other actual damages incurred due to the violation; provided
that where there is a bona fide dispute between the user and any other affected
party, the user shall not be required to pay restitution so long as the user
shall show evidence of insurance or other security that the user can pay said
restitution to the affected party if it is ultimately determined that the user
is liable to said third parties. Any such fines, fees, charges and costs shall
be paid for by the user before any new permit will be issued, except for the
provision for disputed restitution set forth above. When all costs cannot be
readily determined, the City may require and accept a bond or irrevocable
letter of credit which it considers sufficient and which will be subject to
appropriate adjustment after all costs have been determined.
   I.   Regulation of waste received from other jurisdictions.
      (1)   If another municipality, or user located within another
municipality, contributes wastewater to the POTW, the City shall enter into an
intermunicipal agreement with the contributing municipality.
      (2)   Prior to entering into an agreement required by Subsection I(1)
above, the City shall request the following information from the contributing
municipality:
         (a)   A description of the quality and volume of wastewater discharged
to the POTW by the contributing municipality.
         (b)   An inventory of all users located within the contributing
municipality that are discharging to the POTW.
         (c)   Such other information as the City may deem necessary.
      (3)   An intermunicipal agreement, as required by Subsection I(1) above,
shall contain the following conditions:
         (a)   A requirement for the contributing municipality to adopt a sewer
use ordinance which is at least as stringent as this Part and local limits
which are at least as stringent as those set out in §
467-202C of this Part. The requirement shall specify that such ordinance and
limits must be revised as necessary to reflect changes made to the City's
ordinance or local limits.
         (b)   A requirement for the contributing municipality to submit a
revised user inventory on at least an annual basis.
         (c)   A provision specifying which pretreatment implementation
activities, including wastewater discharge permit issuance, inspection and
sampling, and enforcement, will be conducted by the contributing municipality;
which of these activities will be conducted by the City; and which of these
activities will be conducted jointly by the contributing municipality and the
City.
         (d)   A requirement for the contributing municipality to provide the
City with access to all information that the contributing municipality obtains
as part of its pretreatment activities.
         (e)   Limits on the nature, quality, and volume of the contributing
municipality's wastewater at the point where it discharges to the POTW.
         (f)   Requirements for monitoring the contributing municipality's
discharge.
         (g)   A provision ensuring the City access to the facilities of users
located within the contributing municipality's jurisdictional boundaries for
the purpose of inspection, sampling, and any other duties deemed necessary by
the City.
         (h)   A provision specifying remedies available for breach of the
terms of the intermunicipal agreement.
§ 467-206. Wastewater monitoring and reporting requirements.
   A.   Baseline monitoring reports.
      (1)   Within either 180 days after the effective date of a categorical
pretreatment standard, or the final administrative decision on a category
determination under 40 CFR 403.6(a)(4), whichever is later, existing
categorical users currently discharging to or scheduled to discharge to the
POTW shall submit to the City a report which contains the information listed
below. At least 90 days prior to commencement of their discharge, new sources,
and sources that become categorical users subsequent to the promulgation of an
applicable categorical standard, shall submit to the City a report which
contains the information listedbelow. A new source shall report the method of
pretreatment it intends to use to meet applicable categorical standards. A new
source also shall give estimates of its anticipated flow and quantity of
pollutants to be discharged.
         (a)   Identifying information. The name and address of the facility,
including the name of the operator and owner.
         (b)   Environmental permits. A list of any environmental control
permits held by or for the facility.
         (c)   Description of operations. A brief description of the nature,
average rate of production, and standard industrial classifications of the
operation(s) carried out by such user. This description should include a
schematic process diagram which indicates points of discharge to the POTW from
the regulated processes.
         (d)   Flow measurement. Information showing the measured average daily
and maximum daily flow, in gallons per day, to the POTW from regulated process
streams and other streams, as necessary, to allow use of the combined waste
stream formula set out in 40 CFR 403.6(e).
         (e)   Measurement of pollutants.
            [1]   The categorical pretreatment standards applicable to each
regulated process.
            [2]   The results of sampling and analysis identifying the nature
and concentration, and/or mass, where required by the standard or by the City,
of regulated pollutants in the discharge from each regulated process.
Instantaneous, daily maximum, and long-term average concentrations, or mass,
where required, shall be reported. The sample shall be representative of daily
operations and shall be analyzed in accordance with procedures set out in
Subsection I of this section.
            [3]   Sampling must be performed in accordance with procedures set
out in Subsection J of this section.
         (f)   Certification. A statement, reviewed by the user's authorized
representative and certified by a qualified professional, indicating whether
pretreatment standards are being met on a consistent basis, and, if not,
whether additional operation and maintenance (O&M) and/or additional
pretreatment is required to meet the pretreatment standards and requirements.
(Note: For certain users, the authorized user and the qualified professional
may be the same individual.)
         (g)   Compliance schedule. If additional pretreatment and/or O&M will
be required to meet the pretreatment standards, the shortest schedule by which
the user will provide such additional pretreatment and/or O&M. The completion
date in this schedule shall not be later than the compliance date established
for the applicable pretreatment standard. A compliance schedule pursuant to
this section must meet the requirements set out in Subsection B of this
section.
         (h)   Signature and certification. All baseline monitoring reports
must be signed and certified in accordance with §
467-204G of this Part.
   B.   Compliance schedule progress reports. The following conditions shall
apply to the compliance schedule required by Subsection A(1)(g) of this
section:
      (1)   The schedule shall contain progress increments in the form of dates
for the commencement and completion of major events leading to the construction
and operation of additional pretreatment required for the user to meet the
applicable pretreatment standards (such events include, but are not limited to,
hiring an engineer, completing preliminary and final plans, executing contracts
for major components, commencing and completing construction, and beginning and
conducting routine operation).
      (2)   No increment referred to above shall exceed nine months.
      (3)   The user shall submit a progress report to the City no later than
14 days following each date in the schedule and the final date of compliance
including, as a minimum, whether or not it complied with the increment of
progress, the reason for any delay, and, if appropriate, the steps being taken
by the user to return to the established schedule.
      (4)   In no event shall more than nine months elapse between such
progress reports to the City.
   C.   Reports on compliance with categorical pretreatment standard deadline.
Within 90 days following the date for final compliance with applicable
categorical pretreatment standards, or in the case of a new source following
commencement of the introduction of wastewater into the POTW, any user subject
to such pretreatment standards and requirements shall submit to the City a
report containing the information described in Subsection A(1)(d) through (f)
and (h) of this section. For users subject to equivalent mass or concentration
limits established in accordance with the procedures in 40 CFR 403.6(c), this
report shall contain a reasonable measure of the user's long-term production
rate. For all other users subject to categorical pretreatment standards
expressed in terms of allowable pollutant discharge per unit of production (or
other measure of operation), this report shall include the user's actual
production during the appropriate sampling period. All compliance reports must
be signed and certified in accordance with §
467-204F of this Part.
   D.   Monitoring and periodic self-monitoring compliance reports.
      (1)   Sampling and analysis of industrial wastewater for the purpose of
compliance determinations with respect to §
467-202 prohibitions and limitations shall be done through industry self-
monitoring and through monitoring done by the City. All analyses, including
sampling results submitted in support of any application reports, evidence or
required by any permit or order shall be performed in accordance with the
techniques prescribed in 40 CFR, Part 136, and amendments thereto or, if 40
CFR, Part 136, does not contain sampling or analytical techniques for the
pollutant in question, in accordance with procedures approved by EPA. The City
may require an independent laboratory to conduct the sampling and analysis at
the user's own cost if the user does not monitor and analyze in accordance with
EPA procedures, specifically, 40 CFR, Part 136.
      (2)   All significant industrial users shall, at a frequency determined
by the City in the user's permit, but in no case less than twice per year,
submit a report indicating the nature and concentration of pollutants in the
discharge which are limited by pretreatment standards and the measured or
estimated average and maximum daily flows for the reporting period. All
periodic self-monitoring reports must be signed and certified in accordance
with §
467-204G of this Part. The user must also submit a self- monitoring report with
the results on a form prescribed by the City, if so requested by the City.
      (3)   All wastewater samples must be representative of the user's
discharge. Wastewater monitoring and flow measurement facilities shall be
properly operated, kept clean, and maintained in good working order at all
times. The failure of a user to keep its monitoring facility in good working
order shall not be grounds for the user to claim that sample results are
unrepresentative of its discharge.
      (4)   If a user subject to the reporting requirement in this section
monitors any pollutant more frequently than required by the City, using the
procedures prescribed in §
467-206I of this Part, the results of this monitoring shall be included in the
report.
      (5)   The user shall ensure compliance with the recordkeeping
requirements of Subsection L of this section.
   E.   Reports of changed conditions. Each user must notify the City of any
planned significant changes to the user's operations or system which might
alter the nature, quality or volume of its wastewater at least 30 days before
the change.
      (1)   The City may require the user to submit such information as may be
deemed necessary to evaluate the changed condition, including the submission of
a wastewater discharge permit application under §
467-204F of this Part.
      (2)   The City may issue a wastewater discharge permit under §
467-204H of this Part or modify an existing wastewater discharge permit under §
467-205D of this Part in response to changed conditions or anticipated changed
conditions.
      (3)   For purposes of this requirement, significant changes include, but
are not limited to, flow variations as stated in the user's permit and the
discharge of any previously unreported pollutants.
   F.   Reports of potential problems/notifications of accidental spills.
      (1)   In the case of any discharge, including, but not limited to,
accidental discharges, discharges of a nonroutine, episodic nature, a
noncustomary batch discharge, or a slug load, that may cause potential problems
for the POTW, the user shall immediately telephone and notify the City of the
incident. This notification shall include the location of the discharge, type
of waste, concentration and volume, if known, and corrective actions taken by
the user.
      (2)   Within five days following such discharge, the user shall, unless
waived by the City, submit a detailed written report describing the cause(s) of
the discharge and the measures to be taken by the user to prevent similar
future occurrences. Such notification shall not relieve the user of any
expense, loss, damage, or other liability which may be incurred as a result of
damage to the POTW, natural resources, or any other damage to person or
property; nor shall such notification relieve the user of any fines, penalties,
or other liability which may be imposed pursuant to this Part.
      (3)   A notice shall be permanently posted on the user's bulletin board
or other prominent place advising employees whom to call in the event of a
discharge described in Subsection F(1), above. Employers shall ensure that all
employees, who may cause such a discharge to occur, are advised of the
emergency notification procedure.
   G.   Reports from unpermitted users. All users not required to obtain a
wastewater discharge permit shall provide appropriate reports to the City as
the City may require.
   H.   Notice of violation/repeat sampling and reporting. If sampling
performed by a user indicates a violation, the user must notify the City within
24 hours of becoming aware of the violation. The user shall also repeat the
sampling and analysis and submit the results of the repeat analysis to the City
within 30 days after becoming aware of the violation. The user is not required
to resample if the City monitors at the user's facility at least once a month,
or if the City samples between the user's initial sampling and when the user
receives the results of this sampling.
   I.   Analytical requirements. All pollutant analyses, including sampling
techniques, to be submitted as part of a wastewater discharge permit
application or report, for the purpose of compliance with this Part; or in
fulfillment of the user's permit self-monitoring requirements, shall be
performed in accordance with the techniques prescribed in 40 CFR, Part 136,
unless otherwise specified in an applicable categorical pretreatment standard.
If 40 CFR, Part 136, does not contain sampling or analytical techniques for the
pollutant in question, sampling and analyses must be performed in accordance
with procedures approved by the EPA.
   J.   Sample collection.
      (1)   Except as indicated in Subsection J(2)below, the City reserves the
right to require flow proportional composite samples whenever the user is
required to collect wastewater samples. When flow proportional sampling is
infeasible or derives no benefit, the City may authorize the use of time
proportional sampling or a minimum of four grab samples where the user
demonstrates that this will provide a representative sample of the effluent
being discharged. In addition, grab samples may be required to show compliance
with instantaneous discharge limits. The City will review the appropriate
method of sampling with the user.
      (2)   Samples for oil and grease, temperature, pH, cyanide, phenols,
sulfides, and volatile organic compounds must be obtained using grab collection
techniques.
      (3)   For automatic samplers, the intake line hose must be at least 1/
4 inch (0.6 cm) internal diameter and the velocity in the intake line must be
maintained at least at two feet per second.
   K.   Timing. Written reports will be deemed to have been submitted on the
date postmarked. For reports which are not mailed, postage prepaid, into a mail
facility serviced by the United States Postal Service, the date of receipt of
the report shall govern.
   L.   Recordkeeping.
      (1)   Users subject to the reporting requirements of this Part shall
retain, and make available for inspection and copying, all records of
information obtained pursuant to any monitoring activities required by this
Part and any additional records of information obtained pursuant to monitoring
activities undertaken by the user independent of such requirements. Records
shall include the date, exact place, method, and time of sampling, and the name
of the person(s) taking the samples; the dates analyses were performed; who
performed the analyses; the analytical techniques or methods used; and the
results of such analyses. These records shall remain available for a period of
at least three years unless there is pending a dispute of litigation involving
the subject of these records, in which case these records are to be kept for a
period of three years following resolution of such litigation or dispute.
      (2)   All users who discharge or propose to discharge wastewater directly
or indirectly to the facilities shall maintain records which substantiate any
information supplied in permit applications. Such records shall include, but
not be limited to, pH measurements or pH tapes, chemical usage data, log
sheets, hazardous waste compliance reports and any other informational
requirements of this Part or required by a user's wastewater discharge permit
or any applicable state and federal laws and regulations. These records are to
be kept for a period of three years unless there is pending a dispute of
litigation involving the subject of these records, in which case these records
are to be kept for a period of three years following resolution of such
litigation or dispute.
   M.   Selling, closing or moving a business.
      (1)   Any user who will be selling, closing or moving a business from its
present location must notify the City in writing 30 days before disposing of
any process waste, associated with the move or the cessation of business, into
the sewer system if said waste is not currently permitted to be discharged. The
City has a shutdown facility procedure for the discharge of wastes not
previously permitted into the sewer system which must be adhered to upon
selling; closing or moving a business or operation. Failure to notify the City
prior to discharging such waste into the facilities may subject the user to
civil or criminal penalties in accordance with this Part. The facility shutdown
procedure includes, but is not limited to, the following:
         (a)   A written plan detailing how each chemical and solution is to be
discharged to the sewer system, with or without treatment.
         (b)   The information required in Subsection M(1)(a) above must be
reviewed and approved by the City prior to any solutions or chemicals being
disposed of into the sewer system. Only those solutions approved by the City
may be discharged to the sewer system. The City must be informed at least 48
hours in advance of when chemicals are to be discharged to the sewer.
         (c)   The City reserves the right to request information on the final
disposition of any material that the City prohibits to be discharged to the
sewer.
   N.   Temporary business closings.
      (1)   A permitted user shall give City personnel written notice within
five working days prior to ceasing operations which will be of 90 days or
greater in duration.
      (2)   A permitted user shall give City personnel notice five working days
prior to reactivating operations. The user shall not reactivate operations if
the permit is suspended until after receiving written approval from the City
following a City inspection.
   O.   Notification of the discharge of hazardous waste.
      (1)   Any user who commences the discharge of hazardous waste shall
notify the POTW, the EPA Regional Waste Management Division Director, and state
hazardous waste authorities, in writing, of any discharge into the POTW of a
substance which, if otherwise disposed of, would be a hazardous waste under 40
CFR, Part 261. Such notification must include the name of the hazardous waste
as set forth in 40 CFR, Part 261, the EPA hazardous waste number, and the type
of discharge (continuous, batch, 261, the EPA hazardous waste number, and the
type of discharge (continuous, batch, or other). If the user discharges more
than 100 kilograms of such waste per calendar month to the POTW, the
notification also shall contain the following information to the extent such
information is known and readily available to the user; an identification of
the hazardous constituents in the waste stream discharged during that calendar
month, and an estimation of the mass of constituents in the waste stream
expected to be discharged during the following 12 months. All notifications
must take place no later than 180 days after the discharge commences. Any
notification under this subsection need be submitted only once for each
hazardous waste discharged. However, notifications or changed conditions must
be submitted under Subsection E of this section. The notification requirement
in this section does not apply to pollutants already reported by users subject
to categorical pretreatment standards under the self-monitoring requirements of
Subsections A, C, and D of this section.
      (2)   Dischargers are exempt from the requirements of Subsection O(1)
above, during a calendar month in which they discharge no more than 15
kilograms of hazardous wastes, unless the wastes are acute hazardous wastes as
specified in 40 CFR 261.30(d) and 261.33(e). Discharge of more than 15
kilograms of nonacute hazardous wastes in a calendar month, or of any quantity
of acute hazardous wastes as specified in 40 CFR 261.30(d) and 261.33(e),
requires a one-time notification. Subsequent months during which the user
discharges more than such quantities of any hazardous waste do not require
additional notification.
      (3)   In the case of any new regulations under § 3001 of RCRA identifying
additional characteristics of hazardous waste or listing any additional
substance as a hazardous waste, the user must notify the City, the EPA Regional
Waste Management Waste Division Director, and state hazardous waste authorities
of the discharge of such substance within 90 days of the effective date of such
regulations.
      (4)   In the case of any notification made under this section, the user
shall certify that it has a program in place to reduce the volume and toxicity
of hazardous wastes generated to the degree it has determined to be
economically practical.
      (5)   This provision does not create a right to discharge any substance
not otherwise permitted to be discharged by this Part, a permit issued
thereunder, or any applicable federal or state law.
§ 467-207. Inspection powers and compliance monitoring.
   A.   Right of entry; inspection and sampling. The City and its agents shall
have the right to enter the premises of any user to determine whether the user
is complying with all requirements of this Part and any wastewater discharge
permit or order issued hereunder. Users shall allow the City ready access to
all parts of the premises for the purposes of inspection, sampling, records
examination and copying, and the performance of any additional duties.
      (1)   Powers. Inspections shall be conducted at the discretion of the
City. Duly authorized employees and agents of the City, upon presenting
identification and appropriate credentials, are authorized:
         (a)   To enter without unreasonable delay and at reasonable times
those premises (public or private) of any person of class of user either
receiving services from the City or applying for services from the City in
which a discharge source or treatment system is located or which records
required to be maintained pursuant to this Part.
         (b)   During regular working hours and at other reasonable times, and
within reasonable limits and in a reasonable manner, to have access to and to
copy records pertaining to this Part, the pretreatment program, RCRA, and waste
disposal, inspect any monitoring equipment or method required pursuant to this
Part and sample and/or analyze any effluent which the owner or operator of such
discharge source is required to sample and/or analyze under this Part and any
Part adopted pursuant thereto.
         (c)   During such on site inspections, to carry out all inspections,
surveillance, and monitoring procedures necessary to determine, independent of
information supplied by any person discharging into the facilities, compliance
or noncompliance with City pretreatment requirements.
      (2)   Where a user has security measures in force which require proper
identification and clearance before entry into its premises, the user shall
make necessary arrangements with its security guards so that, upon presentation
of suitable identification, the City will be permitted to enter without delay
for the purposes of performing specific responsibilities. The user may provide
an escort for the City at his or her discretion.
      (3)   The City shall have the right to set up on the user's property, or
require installation of, such devices as are necessary to conduct sampling and/
or metering of the user's operations.
      (4)   Monitoring and metering equipment.
         (a)   The City may require the user to install at his or her own cost
monitoring or metering equipment as necessary to facilitate the accurate
observation, sampling, and measurements of the wastewater discharge. The
facility's sampling and monitoring equipment shall be maintained at all times
in a safe and proper operating condition by the user at its own expense. All
devices used to measure wastewater flow and quality shall be calibrated
semiannually or at a frequency recommended by the manufacturer to ensure their
accuracy.
         (b)   The monitoring and metering equipment shall be located and
maintained on the user's premises. When such a location would be impractical or
cause undue hardship to the user, the City may allow such facility to be
constructed in the public street or sidewalk area, with the approval of the
public agency having jurisdiction over such street or sidewalk, and located so
the discharge will not be obstructed by public utilities, landscaping, or
parked vehicles.
      (5)   When more than one user discharges into a common sewer, the City
may require installation of separating monitoring and metering equipment for
each user. When there is a significant difference in wastewater constituents
and characteristics produced by different operations of a single user, the City
may require that separate monitoring and metering facilities be installed for
each separate discharge.
      (6)   Whether constructed on public or private property, the monitoring
facilities shall be constructed in accordance with City ordinances and any
applicable construction standards required by the City or by local, state or
federal law.
      (7)   Any temporary or permanent obstruction to safe and easy access to
the facility to be inspected and/or sampled shall be promptly removed by the
user at the written or verbal request of the City and shall not be replaced.
The costs of clearing such access shall be borne by the user.
      (8)   Unreasonable delays in allowing the City to the user's premises
shall be a violation of this Part.
      (9)   The City shall comply with the user's reasonable health and safety
policies, including the use of personal protective equipment.
   B.   Search warrants. If the City has been refused access to a building,
structure or property, or any part thereof, and is able to demonstrate probable
cause to believe that there may be a violation of this Part, or that there is a
need to inspect and/or sample as part of a routine inspection and sampling
program of the City designed to verify compliance with this Part or any permit
or order issued hereunder, or to protect the overall public health, safety and
welfare of the community, then the City may seek issuance of a search warrant
from the Court of Common Pleas of Berks County, Pennsylvania.
   C.   User documentation. The City may, by ordinance, order, permit or
letter, require any person who discharges into the facilities to:
      (1)   Establish and maintain records.
      (2)   Make reports.
      (3)   Install, calibrate, use and maintain monitoring equipment or
methods (including where appropriate, biological monitoring methods).
      (4)   Sample and/or analyze discharges and effluent (in accordance with
the method, at the locations, at the intervals, and in the manner as the City
shall prescribe).
      (5)   Provide other information relating to discharges into the
facilities of the project as the City may reasonably require to ensure
compliance with prescribed pretreatment. Such information shall include, but
not be limited to, those records, reports and procedures required by applicable
state and federal law.
§ 467-208. Confidential information.
   A.   The EPA regulations, 40 CFR 2.201 through 2.302 addressing confidential
business information, are hereby incorporated by reference. All City employees
and City agents are bound by these requirements.
   B.   Information and data on a user obtained from reports, surveys,
wastewater discharge permit applications, wastewater discharge permits, and
monitoring programs, and from the City's inspection and sampling activities,
shall be available to the public without restriction, unless the user
specifically requests, and is able to demonstrate to the satisfaction of the
City, that the release of such information would divulge information,
processes, or methods of production entitled to protection as trade secrets
under applicable state law. Any such request must be asserted at the time of
submission of the information or data. When requested and demonstrated by the
user furnishing a report that such information would be held confidential, the
portions of a report which might disclose trade secrets or secret processes
shall not be made available for inspection by the public, but shall be the
NPDES program or pretreatment program, and in enforcement proceedings involving
the person furnishing the report. Wastewater constituents and characteristics
and other "effluent data" as defined by 40 CFR 2.302 will not be reorganized as
confidential information and will be available to the public without
restriction.
§ 467-209. Publication of users in significant noncompliance.
The City shall publish at least annually, in the largest daily newspaper
published in the municipality where the POTW is located, a list of the users
which, during the previous 12 months, were in significant noncompliance with
applicable pretreatment standards and requirements. The term "significant
noncompliance" shall mean:
   A.   Chronic violations of wastewater discharge limits, defined here as
those in which 66% or more of wastewater measurements taken during a six-month
period exceed the daily maximum limit or average limit for the same pollutant
parameter by any amount.
   B.   Technical review criteria (TRC) violations, defined here as those in
which 33% or more of wastewater measurements taken for each pollutant parameter
during a six-month period equals or exceeds the product of the daily maximum
limit or the average limit multiplied by the applicable criteria (1.4 for BOD,
TSS, fats, oils and grease, and 1.2 for all other pollutants except pH).
   C.   Any other discharge violation that has caused, alone or in combination
with other discharges, interference or pass-through, including endangering the
health of POTW personnel or the general public.
   D.   Any discharge of pollutants that has caused imminent endangerment to
the public or to the environment, or has resulted in the City's exercise of its
emergency authority to halt or prevent such a discharge.
   E.   Failure to meet, within 90 days of the scheduled date, a compliance
schedule milestone contained in a wastewater discharge permit or enforcement
order for starting construction, completing construction or attaining final
compliance.
   F.   Failure to provide within 30 days after the due date, any required
reports, including baseline monitoring reports, reports on compliance with
categorical pretreatment standard deadlines, periodic self-monitoring reports,
and reports on compliance with compliance schedules.
   G.   Failure to accurately report noncompliance, including failure to report
and resample in accordance with §
467-206H.
   H.   Any other violation(s) which the City determines will adversely affect
the operation or implementation of the local pretreatment program.
§ 467-210. Administrative enforcement remedies.
   A.   Notification of violation. When the City finds that a user has
violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this Part, a wastewater
discharge permit or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard
or requirement, the City may serve upon that user a written notice of
violation. Within 30 days of the receipt of this notice, an explanation of the
violation and a plan for the satisfactory correction and prevention thereof, to
include specific required actions, shall be submitted by the user to the City.
Submission of this plan in no way relieves the user of liability for any
violations occurring before or after receipt of the notice of violation.
Nothing in this section shall limit the authority of the City to take any
action, including emergency actions or any other enforcement action, without
first issuing a notice of violation.
   B.   Consent orders. The City may enter into consent orders, assurances of
voluntary compliance, or other similar documents establishing an agreement with
any user responsible for noncompliance. Such documents will include specific
action to be taken by the user to correct the noncompliance within a time
period specified by the document. Such documents shall have the same force and
effect as the administrative orders issued pursuant to §
467-210D and E of this Part and shall be judicially enforceable.
   C.   Show cause hearing. The City may order a user which has violated, or
continues to violate, any provision of this Part, a wastewater discharge permit
or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement,
to appear before the City and show cause why the proposed enforcement action
should not be taken. Notice shall be served on the user specifying the time and
place for the meeting, the proposed enforcement action, the reasons for such
action, and a request that the user show cause why the proposed enforcement
action should not be taken. The notice of the meeting shall be served
personally or by registered or certified mail (return receipt requested) at
least 10 days prior to the hearing. Such notice may be served on any authorized
representative of the user. A show cause hearing shall not be a bar against, or
prerequisite for, taking any other action against the user.
   D.   Compliance orders. When the City finds that a user has violated, or
continues to violate, any provision of this Part, a wastewater discharge permit
or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement,
the City may issue an order to the user responsible for the discharge directing
that the user come into compliance within a specified time. If the user does
not come into compliance within the time provided, sewer service may be
discontinued unless adequate treatment facilities, devices, or other related
appurtenances are installed and properly operated. Compliance orders also may
contain other requirements to address the noncompliance, including additional
self-monitoring and management practices designed to minimize the amount of
pollutants discharged to the sewer. A compliance order may not extend the
deadline for compliance established for a pretreatment standard or requirement,
nor does a compliance order relieve the user of liability for any violation,
including any continuing violation. Issuance of a compliance order shall not be
a bar against, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action against the user.
   E.   Cease-and-desist orders.
      (1)   When the City finds that a user has violated, or continues to
violate, any provision of this Part, a wastewater discharge permit or order
issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, or that
the user's past violations are likely to recur, the City may issue an order to
the user directing it to cease and desist all such violations and directing the
user to:
         (a)   Immediately comply with all requirements.
         (b)   Take such appropriate remedial or preventive action as may be
needed to properly address a continuing or threatened violation, including
halting operations and/or terminating the discharge.
      (2)   Issuance of a cease-and-desist order shall not be a bar against, or
a prerequisite for, taking any other action against the user.
   F.   Administrative civil penalties.
      (1)   When the City finds that a user has violated, or continues to
violate, any provisions of this Part, a wastewater discharge permit or order
issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, the City
may fine such user in an amount not to exceed $25,000 per day for each
violation regardless of jurisdictional boundaries. Such fines shall be assessed
on a per-violation, per-day basis. In the case of monthly or other long-term
average discharge limits, fines may be assessed for each day during the period
of violation. The foregoing administrative civil penalties shall be enforced in
accordance with the provisions of §§
467-211B and 467-212F of this Part.
      (2)   Unpaid charges, fines, and penalties shall, after 60 calendar days,
be assessed a late charge of 10% APR. A lien against the user's property will
be sought for unpaid charges, fines and penalties.
      (3)   Users desiring to dispute such fines must file a written request
for the City to reconsider the fine along with full payment of the fine amount
within 30 days of being notified of the fine. Where a request has merit, the
City may convene a hearing on the matter. In the event the user's appeal is
successful, the payment, together with any interest accruing thereto, shall be
returned to the user. The City may add the costs of preparing administrative
enforcement actions, such as notices and orders, to the fine.
      (4)   Issuance of an administrative fine shall not be a bar against, or a
prerequisite for, taking any other action against the user.
   G.   Emergency suspensions.
      (1)   The City may immediately suspend a user's discharge, whenever such
suspension is necessary to stop an actual or threatened discharge which
reasonably appears to present or cause an imminent or substantial endangerment
to the health or welfare of persons. The City may also immediately suspend a
user's discharge, after notice and opportunity to respond, that threatens to
interfere with the operation of the POTW, or which presents, or may present, an
endangerment to the environment.
         (a)   Any user notified of a suspension of its discharge shall
immediately stop or eliminate its contribution. In the event of a user's
failure to immediately comply voluntarily with the suspension order, the City
may take such steps as deemed necessary, including immediate severance of the
sewer connection, to prevent or minimize damage to the POTW, its receiving
stream, or endangerment to any individuals. The City may allow the user to
recommence its discharge when the user has demonstrated to the satisfaction of
the City that the period of endangerment has passed, unless the termination
proceedings in Subsection H of this section are initiated against the user.
         (b)   A user that is responsible, in whole or in part, for any
discharge presenting imminent endangerment shall submit a detailed written
statement, describing the causes of the harmful contribution and the measures
taken to prevent any future occurrence, to the City prior to the date of any
show cause or termination hearing under Subsection C or H of this section.
      (2)   Nothing in this section shall be interpreted as requiring a hearing
prior to any emergency suspension under this section.
   H.   Termination of discharge.
      (1)   In addition to the provisions in §
467-205F of this Part, any user who violates the following conditions is
subject to discharge termination:
         (a)   Violation of wastewater discharge permit conditions.
         (b)   Failure to accurately report the wastewater constituents and
characteristics of its discharge.
         (c)   Failure to report significant changes in operations or
wastewater volume, constituents, and characteristics prior to discharge.
         (d)   Refusal of reasonable access to the user's premises for the
purpose of inspection, monitoring or sampling.
         (e)   Violation of the pretreatment standards in §
467-202 of this Part.
      (2)   Such user will be notified of the proposed termination of its
discharge and be offered an opportunity to show cause under Subsection C of
this Part why the proposed action should not be taken. Exercise of this option
by the City shall not be a bar to, or a prerequisite for, taking any other
action against the user.
§ 467-211. Judicial enforcement remedies.
   A.   Injunctive relief. When the City finds a user has violated, or
continues to violate, any provision of this Part, a wastewater discharge
permit, or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or
requirement, the City may petition the Court of Common Pleas of Berks County,
Pennsylvania, through the City's Attorney for appropriate legal and equitable
relief for the issuance of a temporary or permanent injunction, as appropriate,
which restrains or compels the specific performance of the wastewater discharge
permit, order, or other requirement imposed by this Part on activities of the
user. The City may also seek such other action as is appropriate for legal and
or equitable relief, including a requirement for the user to conduct
environmental remediation. A petition for injunctive relief shall not be a bar
against, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action against a user.
   B.   Civil penalties.
      (1)   A user who has violated, or continues to violate, any provisions of
this Part, a wastewater discharge permit, or order issued hereunder, or any
other pretreatment standard or requirement, shall be liable to the City for a
maximum civil penalty of $25,000 per violation, per day. In the case of a
monthly or other long-term average discharge limit, penalties shall accrue for
each day during the period of the violation.
      (2)   The City may recover reasonable attorneys' fees, court costs, and
other expenses associated with enforcement activities, including sampling and
monitoring expenses, and the cost of any actual damages incurred by the City.
      (3)   In determining the amount of civil liability, there shall be taken
into account all relevant circumstances, including, but not limited to, the
extent of harm caused by the violation, the magnitude and duration of the
violation, any economic benefit gained through the user's violation, corrective
actions by the user, the compliance history of the user, and any other factor
as justice requires.
      (4)   Filing a suit for civil penalties shall not be a bar against, or a
prerequisite for, taking any other action against a user.
   C.   Criminal prosecution. A user who willfully or negligently violates any
provision of this Part, a wastewater discharge permit, or order issued
hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, or who willfully
or negligently introduces any substance into the POTW which causes personal
injury or property damage, or any user who knowingly makes any false
statements, representations or certifications in any application, record,
report, plan, or other document filed, or required to be maintained pursuant to
this Part, a wastewater discharge permit or order issued under this Part or who
falsifies, tampers with or knowingly renders inaccurate any monitoring device
of method required under the Part, may be subject to criminal prosecution in
accordance with the applicable provisions of the Pennsylvania Crimes Code, 18
Pa.C.S.A. § 101 et seq.
   D.   Remedies nonexclusive. The remedies provided for in this Part are not
exclusive. The City may take any, all, or any combination of these actions
against a noncompliant user. Enforcement of pretreatment violations will
generally be in accordance with the City's enforcement response plan. However,
the City may take other action against any user when the circumstances warrant.
Further, the City is empowered to take more than one enforcement action against
any noncompliant user.
§ 467-212. Supplemental enforcement action. [Amended 5-29-2001 by Ord. No. 14-
2001]
   A.   Performance bonds. The City may decline to issue or reissue a
wastewater discharge permit to any user who has failed to comply with any
provision of this Part, a previous wastewater discharge permit, or order issued
hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, unless such user
first files a satisfactory bond, payable to the City, in a sum not to exceed a
value determined by the City to be necessary to achieve consistent compliance.
   B.   Liability insurance. The City may decline to issue or reissue a
wastewater discharge permit to any user who has failed to comply with any
provision of this Part, a previous wastewater discharge permit, or order issued
hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, unless the user
first submits proof that it has obtained financial assurances sufficient to
restore or repair damage to the POTW caused by its discharge.
   C.   Public nuisances. A violation of any provision of this Part, a
wastewater discharge permit, or order issued hereunder, or any other
pretreatment standard or requirement is hereby declared a public nuisance and
shall be corrected or abated as directed by the City. Any person(s) creating a
public nuisance shall be subject to the provisions of the City removing,
abating, or remedying said nuisance.
   D.   Falsifying information. Any person who knowingly makes any false
statements, representation or certification in any application, record, report,
plan or other document filed or required to be maintained pursuant to this
Part, or wastewater discharge permit, or who falsifies, tampers with, or
knowingly renders inaccurate any monitoring device or method required under
this Part, is subject to prosecution in accordance with the provisions of the
Pennsylvania Crimes Code pertaining to perjury and falsification in official
matters pursuant to 18 Pa.C.S.A. § 4901 et seq.
   E.   Contractor listing. Users which have not achieved compliance with
applicable pretreatment standards and requirements are not eligible to receive
a contractual award for the sale of goods or services to the City. Existing
contracts for the sale of goods or services to the City held by a user found to
be in significant noncompliance with pretreatment standards or requirements may
be terminated at the discretion of the City.
   F.   Assessment of civil penalties.
      (1)   Pursuant to provision of the Pennsylvania Penalty Bill (Act 9 of
1992), 6  providing for enhanced penalty authority for publicly owned treatment
works' which are authorized to enforce industrial pretreatment standards for
industrial waste discharges, and in addition to proceeding under any other
remedy available at law or equity for violation of pretreatment standards and/
or requirements, the City, as the operator of a publicly owned treatment works,
may assess a civil penalty upon an industrial user for violation of any of the
terms and provisions of this Part. The penalty may be assessed whether or not
the violation was willful or negligent. The civil penalty shall not exceed
$25,000 per day for each violation, regardless of jurisdictional boundaries.
Each violation for each separate day shall constitute a separate and distinct
offense under this section.
      (2)   As part of any notice of assessment of civil penalties issued by
the City to an industrial user, there shall also be included a description of
the applicable appeals process to be followed, including the name, address and
telephone number of the person responsible for accepting such appeal, on behalf
of the City.
      (3)   For purposes of this section, a single operational upset which
leads to simultaneous violations of more than one pretreatment standard or
requirement shall be treated as a single violation as required by Federal Water
Pollution Control Act. The City may, however, recover its costs for
reestablishing the operation of the treatment works in addition to any civil
penalty imposed under this section.
      (4)   The City shall publicly adopt a formal, written civil penalty
assessment policy (in its environment response plan) and make it publicly
available. Each industrial discharger participating in the pretreatment program
shall be given written notice of the policy. The penalty assessment policy
shall consider:
         (a)   Damage to air, water, land or other natural resources of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania and their uses.
         (b)   Costs of restoration and abatement.
         (c)   Savings resulting to the person in consequence of the violation;
         (d)   History of past violations.
         (e)   Deterrence of future violations.
         (f)   Other relevant factors.
      (5)   Uses of penalties. All civil penalties collected pursuant to this
section shall be placed by the City in a restricted account and shall only be
used by the City and the publicly owned treatment works for the following uses:
         (a)   The repair of damage and any additional maintenance needed or
any additional costs imposed as a result of the violation for which the penalty
was imposed.
         (b)   Pay any penalty imposed on the City or the publicly owned
treatment works by the federal or state government for violation of
pretreatment standards.
         (c)   For the costs incurred by the City or publicly owned treatment
works to investigate and take the enforcement action that resulted in a penalty
being imposed.
         (d)   For the monitoring of discharges in the pretreatment program and
for capital improvements to the treatment works, including sewage collection
lines, which may be required by the pretreatment program.
         (e)   Any remaining funds may be used for capital improvements to the
treatment works, including collection lines.
      (6)   Injunctive relief.
         (a)   The City shall have the power to obtain injunctive relief to
enforce compliance with or restrain any violation of any pretreatment
requirement or standard pursuant to and in accordance with the provisions of
Pennsylvania Penalty Bill (Act 9 of 1992), 40 CFR 403.8(f)(1)(vi)(A) and any
other applicable statute and/ or common law. Injunctive relief shall be
available upon the showing of one or more of the following:
            [1]   A discharge from an industrial user presents an imminent
danger or substantial harm to the POTW or the public.
            [2]   A discharge from an industrial user presents an imminent or
substantial endangerment to the environment.
            [3]   A discharge from an industrial user causes the POTW to
violate any condition of its discharge permit.
            [4]   The industrial user has shown a lack of ability or intention
to comply with a pretreatment standard.
         (b)   Notwithstanding the preceding subsection, an injunction
affecting an industrial operation not directly related to the condition or
violation in question, may be issued if the Court determines that other
enforcement procedures would not be adequate to affect prompt correction of the
condition or violation. In addition to an injunction, the Court in any such
proceedings may levy civil penalties in accordance with Act 9 of 1992 and this
Part.
      (7)   Appeal. An industrial user assessed with a civil penalty under the
terms of this section shall have 30 days to pay the proposed penalty in full,
or, if the industrial user wishes to contest either the amount of the penalty
or the fact of the violation, the industrial user must file an appeal of the
action within 30 days pursuant to 2 Pa.C.S. §§101 et seq. (relating to
administrative law and procedure). Failure to appeal within this period shall
result in a waiver of all legal rights to contest the violation or the amount
of the penalty.
      (8)   The penalty authorized in this section is intended to be concurrent
and cumulative, and the provisions of this section shall not abridge or alter
any right of action or remedy, now or hereafter existing in equity, or under
the common law or statutory law, criminal or civil, available to a person, the
City, authority, or the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
      (9)   Such penalty assessments may be added to the user's next scheduled
sewer service or sewer surcharge bill.
   G.   Administrative hearings/appeals.
      (1)   Right to appeal. Any person or user aggrieved by any order,
assessment of penalty, issuance of permit or denial of permit may appeal said
order, assessment, issuance of permit or denial of permit after service of the
same by the City.
      (2)   Right to hearing. Any order, assessment of penalty, issuance of
permit or denial of permit shall inform the user that a written request for an
appeal on the alleged violations, order, issuance of permit or denial of
permit, and/or penalty must be filed within 30 days after service of the notice
to preserve the user's right to hearing. The notice will be deemed properly
served upon the user if a copy is served upon him or her personally, or sent by
registered or certified mail to his or her last known address, or if he or she
is served with notice by an other method of service now or hereafter authorized
in civil actions under the laws of the state. In an emergency situation, if
written request for an appeal/hearing is not made by the user within 30 days of
the service of notice, the user will be foreclosed from hearing regarding any
penalty assessed. In a nonemergency situation, if written request for a hearing
is not made by the user within 30 days of the service of notice, the user will
be foreclosed from hearing regarding any order, assessment of penalty, issuance
of permit or denial of permit.
      (3)   Appeal process, hearing request and conference option.
         (a)   As stated immediately above, written request for appeal/hearing
must be filed with the Director of Public Works within 30 days from the date
that the City took the action which is the subject of the manner of the appeal
to preserve the user's rights.
         (b)   All appeals shall contain the following information:
            [1]   The name, address and telephone number of the applicant.
            [2]   The date on which the City took the action which is the
subject matter of the appeal.
            [3]   The reason(s) for such appeal, and a specification of
objections setting forth the manner in which the appellant is aggrieved and the
relevant issues to be resolved by the Hearing Board.
            [4]   A statement detailing the relief demanded by the appellant.
         (c)   A true and correct copy of the written appeal shall be served on
a City Solicitor personally or by registered or certified mail within 48 hours
after the appeal is filed.
         (d)   Conference option. At the time an appeal is requested, the user
may also request a conference with the City prior to the scheduling of an
administrative hearing. Said conference will include appropriate members of the
City staff and its agents. Violations and penalties will be explained and
discussed. Electing this option does not foreclose and/or affect the user's
right to hearing, provided that the written request for hearing was filed
within 30 days of service as noted above. The purpose of this option is to
provide the user with an informal forum within which to discuss the alleged
violations and to expedite conclusion and/ or resolution of outstanding
enforcement actions. If resolution is not reached within 90 days from the date
of the scheduled conference the City shall schedule the matter for formal
hearing. In any event, either party may request a formal hearing at any point
during the conference proceedings.
         (e)   Hearing protocol.
            [1]   Upon receipt of the appeal, the Hearing Board shall schedule
a hearing for the appellant and give the latter written notice of the time,
date and place of such hearing. A hearing will not be held if waived by the
appellant or if the parties stipulate all of the essential facts or agree to
submit direct or rebuttal testimony or documentary evidence in affidavit form,
sworn or affirmed on personal knowledge, or by deposition.
            [2]   Written briefs of the parties or their counsel may be filed
with the Hearing Board and served on the opposing party, within five days after
the hearing and prior to any adjudication.
            [3]   At any hearing, parties shall have the right of presentation
of evidence, cross-examination, objection, motion and argument. The Hearing
Board shall not be bound by technical rules of evidence, but all relevant and
material evidence of reasonable probative value shall be admissible. All
witnesses shall be sworn or shall affirm.
            [4]   The Hearing Board shall not be required to maintain a
verbatim transcript of the hearings.
            [5]   At the conclusion of the proceedings, and after consideration
of the evidence and briefs of the parties, if any, the Hearing Board shall
issue an adjudication which shall contain findings of facts and conclusions of
law, and, if appropriate, an order. A written copy of such adjudication shall
be mailed to each party.
            [6]   The decision and adjudication of the Hearing Board shall be
final and binding upon the parties subject to any further right of appeal which
may be provided by law.
            [7]   Failure to perfect an appeal in the manner and form required
by this section shall be sufficient for dismissing the appeal.
            [8]   The action of the City shall be final as to any person who
fails to file an appeal or to perfect an appeal pursuant to this section.
      (4)   Hearing Board.
         (a)   Industrial Hearing Board.
            [1]   An Industrial Hearing Board shall be appointed by the Mayor
with the advice and consent of Council for resolution of differences between
the City and any aggrieved party of any improved property on matters concerning
interpretation and execution of the provisions of this Part by the City and to
hear any appeals filed by such aggrieved parties.
            [2]   No one appointed to the Industrial Hearing Board herein,
either as a representative at large, legal representative, industrial
representative, or registered professional engineer, shall have any right or
power to sit, vote, act or in any way participate with regard to any appeal of
any industry with which it is in any way connected. Board members shall refrain
from taking any such action on any such matter and shall avoid any conflict of
interest or appearance of impropriety.
         (b)   One member of the Board shall be a member of the Department of
Pubic Works; one member shall be a professional engineer skilled in practice of
sanitary engineering; one member shall be a representative of industry or
manufacturing enterprise; one member shall be a lawyer; and one member shall be
selected at large for his interest in accomplishing the objectives of this
Part.
         (c)   Terms.
            [1]   The initial appointments to the Board shall be for the
following terms:
               [a]   Department of Public Works representative: five years.
               [b]   Registered professional engineer (sanitary/environmental/
civil/ chemical engineer): four years.
               [c]   Industrial representative: three years.
               [d]   Legal representative: two years.
               [e]   Representative at large: one year.
            [2]   All succeeding terms shall be for a period of five years. The
Mayor, with the consent of Council, shall appoint representatives to fill
vacancies on the Board to complete unexpired terms. Interim appointments may be
permitted to serve an additional full term on the Board.
         (d)   The powers of the Hearing Board shall include but not be limited
to the following:
            [1]   To hear appeals from any person aggrieved by the application
of this Part including, but not limited to, any order or decision made or
issued by the City.
            [2]   To make rules with regard to conducting its hearings, such
rules to be submitted to Council for their advice and consent.
            [3]   To make such findings of fact as may be required by the
application of this Part.
            [4]   To decide questions presented.
         (e)   Any party aggrieved by any decision of said Hearing Board shall
have the right to file an appeal under the Local Agency Law to the Court of
Common Pleas of the County of Berks within 30 days of said decision; however,
said appeal shall not act as a supersession of any final order.
   H.   Petitions for declaratory rulings. Any person affected by any statutory
provision administered by the City or affected by any rule or order of the City
may, in accordance with state law and this Part, petition the City for a
declaratory ruling as to the applicability of such statute, rule or order. This
petition shall clearly and concisely identify:
      (1)   The precise statute, rule or order under which a declaratory ruling
is sought.
      (2)   How the petitioner is affected by the statute, rule or order.
      (3)   The petitioner's position on how the applicable statute, rule or
order should be interpreted, including citations to any applicable documents or
law that support the petitioner's position.
   I.   Costs. In addition to such administrative, civil, or criminal fines as
may be imposed any user who violates any provisions of this Part or any
condition of a permit, or plan approval related thereof, shall be financially
responsible and liable to the City in addition to normal service charges and
surcharges for industrial investigation and monitoring of compliance with this
Part including, but not limited to, the following:
      (1)   Cost of mileage, labor and materials incurred in detecting and
correcting the violation.
      (2)   Laboratory analysis costs associated with detecting and correcting
the violation.
      (3)   Additional treatment costs caused by the violation or association
with detecting and correcting the violation.
      (4)   Costs of any additional equipment acquired or expended by the City
for detecting or correcting the violation.
      (5)   Repair and/or replacement of any part of the facility damaged by
the violation.
      (6)   Any liability, damages, fines or penalties incurred by the City as
a result of the violation.
      (7)   Costs incurred in enforcing compliance, including prosecution and/
or settlement of outstanding violations.
      (8)   Other costs as are associated with the prosecution, negotiation
and/or settlement of a violation.
   J.   Denial of access. If the City or its duly authorized employees and
agents, upon presenting identification and appropriate credentials, are denied
access to carry out inspection, surveillance, and monitoring procedures as
described in this Part, the City may immediately institute civil proceedings,
including proceedings for necessary injunctive relief, or criminal proceedings.
   K.   Inspection of connections. If any person shall construct, install,
alter or repair any sewer or connect to any sewer in violation of the
requirements of this Part, the City may, in its discretion, order or direct
such person to uncover and fully expose any or all portions of such sewer or
connection and afford the City and its representatives adequate opportunity for
examination and inspection of the work. If the connection and appurtenances
thereto shall be found not to be in full accord with the requirements of this
Part and the standards established and address its provisions, then the City
may serve the offender with a written notice as provided in §
467-210.
6.   Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 752.4.
§ 467-213. Affirmative defenses to discharge violations.
   A.   Upset.
      (1)   For the purposes of this section, "upset" means an exceptional
incident in which there is unintentional and temporary noncompliance with
categorical pretreatment standards because of factors beyond the reasonable
control of the user. An upset does not include noncompliance to the extent
caused by operational error, improperly designed treatment facilities,
inadequate treatment facilities, lack of preventive maintenance, or careless or
improper operation.
      (2)   An upset shall constitute an affirmative defense to an action
brought for noncompliance with categorical pretreatment standards if the
requirements of Subsection A(3), below, are met.
      (3)   A user who wishes to establish the affirmative defense of upset
shall demonstrate, through properly signed, contemporaneous operating logs or
other relevant evidence that:
         (a)   An upset occurred and the user can identify the cause(s) of the
upset.
         (b)   The facility was at the time being operated in a prudent and
workmanlike manner and in compliance with applicable operation and maintenance
procedures.
         (c)   The user has submitted the following information to the City
within 24 hours of becoming aware of the upset. A written submission must be
provided within five days:
            [1]   A description of the indirect discharge and cause of
noncompliance.
            [2]   The period of noncompliance, including exact dates and times
or, if not corrected, the anticipated time the noncompliance is expected to
continue.
            [3]   Steps being taken and/or planned to reduce, eliminate, and
prevent recurrence of the noncompliance.
      (4)   In any enforcement proceeding, the user seeking to establish the
occurrence of an upset shall have the burden of proof.
      (5)   Users will have the opportunity for a judicial determination on any
claim of upset only in an enforcement action brought for noncompliance with
categorical pretreatment standards.
      (6)   Users shall control production of all discharges to the extent
necessary to maintain compliance with categorical pretreatment standards upon
reduction, loss, or failure of its treatment facility until the facility is
restored or an alternative method of treatment is provided. This requirement
applies in the situation where, among other things, the primary source of power
of the treatment facility is reduced, lost or fails.
   B.   Prohibited discharge standards. A user shall have an affirmative
defense to an enforcement action brought against it for noncompliance with the
general prohibitions in §
467-202A(1) of this Part or the specific prohibitions in §
467-202A(2) of this Part, except §
467-202A(2)(a), (b), (c), (h), (s), (t), (u) and (v) if it can prove that it
did not know, or have reason to know, that its discharge, alone or in
conjunction with discharges from other sources, would cause pass through or
interference and that either:
      (1)   A local limit exists for each pollutant discharged and the user was
in compliance with each limit directly prior to, and during, the pass-through
or interference.
      (2)   No local limit exists, but the discharge did not change
substantially in nature or constituents from the user's prior discharge when
the City was regularly in compliance with its NPDES permit, and in the case of
interference, was in compliance with applicable sludge use or disposal
requirements.
   C.   Bypass.
      (1)   For the purposes of this section, the following terms shall have
the meaning indicated:
   BYPASS — The intentional diversion of waste streams from any portion of a
user's treatment facility.
   SEVERE PROPERTY DAMAGE — Substantial physical damage to property, damage to
the treatment facilities which causes them to become inoperable, or substantial
and permanent loss of natural resources which can reasonably be expected to
occur in the absence of a bypass. Severe property damage does not mean economic
loss caused by delays in production.
      (2)   A user may allow any bypass to occur which does not cause
pretreatment standards or requirements to be violated, but only if it also is
for essential maintenance to assure efficient operation. These bypasses are not
subject to the provision of Subsection C(3) and (4) of this section.
      (3)   Bypass.
         (a)   If a user knows in advance of the need for a bypass, it shall
submit prior notice to the City, at least 10 days before the date of the
bypass, if possible.
         (b)   A user shall submit oral notice to the City of an unanticipated
bypass that exceeds applicable pretreatment standards within 24 hours from the
time it becomes aware of the bypass. A written submission shall also be
provided within five days of the time the user becomes aware of the bypass. The
written submission shall contain a description of the bypass and its cause; the
duration of the bypass, including exact dates and times, and, if the bypass has
not been corrected, the anticipated time it is expected to continue; and steps
taken or planned to reduce, eliminate, and prevent reoccurrence of the bypass.
The City may waive the written report on a case-by-case basis if the oral
report has been received within 24 hours.
      (4)   Bypass prohibited.
         (a)   Bypass is prohibited, and the City may take an enforcement
action against a user for a bypass, unless:
            [1]   Bypass was unavoidable to prevent loss of life, personal
injury or severe property damage.
            [2]   There were no feasible alternatives to the bypass, such as
the use of auxiliary treatment facilities, retention of untreated wastes, or
maintenance during normal periods of equipment downtime. This condition is not
satisfied if adequate backup equipment should have been installed in the
exercise of reasonable engineering judgment to prevent a bypass which occurred
during normal periods of equipment downtime or preventive maintenance.
            [3]   The user submitted notices as required under Subsection C(3)
of this section.
         (b)   The City may approve an anticipated bypass, after considering
its adverse effects, if the City determines that it will meet the three
conditions listed in Subsection C(4)(a) of this section.
§ 467-214. Wastewater treatment rates.
[Amended 11-8-1999 by Ord. No. 29-1999]
   A.   Surcharge rate.
      (1)   Purpose. Nothing contained in this section shall be construed as
prohibiting any special agreement or arrangement between the City and any
person or municipality whereby industrial waste of unusual strength or
character may be admitted into the sewerage system by the City subject to
payment of a surcharge therefor by such person or municipality or by proper and
continuous pretreatment prior to discharge into the sewerage system. The
surcharge shall be based on present invested capital costs and operating costs.
      (2)   Additional charges for strong wastes. There shall be additional
charges for nondomestic wastes, discharged to the POTW from any industry
business or commercial enterprise and having BOD5, TSS and/or NH3-N in excess
of the average BOD5, TSS and/or NH3-N of normal domestic sewage. Normal
domestic sewage shall be defined as having the following concentration:
         (a)   BOD5: 300 mg/l.
         (b)   TSS: 325 mg/l.
         (c)   NH3-N: 20 mg/l.
      (3)   Surcharge formula. In order to determine the additional charge for
nondomestic wastes with strength greater than that of normal domestic sewage,
the following formula shall be used: 7
   SQ = 0.00834 Q1 [(BOD5-300) TA + (TSS1-325) TB ÷ (NH3-N1-20) TC]
Where:
   SQ is the quarterly surcharge to be added to the quarterly sewer rental
charge.
0.00834 is a constant to convert waste strength expressed in mg/l to thousand
pounds of waste.
Q1 is the quarterly volume of nondomestic wastewater flow expressed in millions
of gallons.
   BOD5 is the five-day biochemical oxygen demand of the nondomestic wastewater
expressed in mg/l.
   TSS1 is the total suspended solids in mg/l of the nondomestic wastewater.
   NH3-N1 is the ammonia, expressed as nitrogen in mg/l, of the nondomestic
wastewater.
300, 325 and 20 are constants expressing wasteload strength of domestic waste
in mg/l for the respective pollutant parameters.
   TA represents the cost incurred by the City in treating 1,000 pounds of
BOD5. TB represents the cost of treating 1,000 pounds of total suspended
solids. TC represents the cost incurred by the City in treating 1,000 pounds of
ammonia. TA, TB and TC vary each year as treatment plant operation and
maintenance costs change. Therefore, TA and TB and TC shall be determined at
the beginning of each calendar year by the City based upon budgeted operating
costs, and adopted by ordinance by the City; see
Chapter 212, Fees.
When a value of BOD5 and/or total suspended solids and/or ammonia of a
nondomestic waste is less than 300, 325, and 20 mg/l, respectively, the value
of 300, 325, and 20 mg/l, respectively, shall be used in the calculation of the
strong waste discharge in place of the actual value which is less than 300,
325, and 20 mg/l, respectively.
      (4)   Said surcharge rates shall be effective February 1, 2000, and shall
be applied to the first quarter 2000 surcharge bills, which surcharge rates
shall be as follows: 8
Rate effect:
 
Parameter Cost Represented in Formula by Costs per 1,000 Pounds Rate for Period
                                         First Quarter 2000
BOD5      TA                             $126.90
TSS       TB                             $116.71
NH3-N     TC                             $1,281.69
 
Hereafter, the Director of Public works is authorized to increase surcharge
rates annually based on audited financial statements.
   B.   Septage rates. Septage haulers or any other person disposing of
sanitary or other waste into the sewage system of the City at designated points
as herein provided shall pay a dumping fee to include the following charges:
      (1)   Testing fee for each and every delivery to the City of Reading's
wastewater treatment system.
      (2)   Per-gallon treatment charge based on the rated capacity of the
waste delivery vehicle.
      (3)   Per-gallon surcharge based on the rate capacity of the waste
delivery vehicle as payment for excessive BOD5, total suspended solids, and
total dissolved solids common to septic waste.
      (4)   The rates shall be revised annually at the beginning of each year
by the City by ordinance; see
Chapter 212, Fees. 9
7.   Editor's Note: Amended during codification (see
Ch. 1, General Provisions, Part 2).
8.   Editor's Note: Amended during codification (see
Ch. 1, General Provisions, Part 2).
9.   Editor's Note: Amended during codification (see
Ch. 1, General Provisions, Part 2).
§ 467-215. Fees.
   A.   Purpose. It is the purpose of this Part to provide for the recovery of
costs from users of the City's wastewater disposal system for the
implementation of the program established herein. The applicable charges or
fees shall be set forth in the City's schedule of charges and fees.
   B.   Charges and fees. The City may adopt charges and fees which may
include:
      (1)   Fees for reimbursement of costs of setting up and operating the
City's pretreatment program.
      (2)   Fees for monitoring, inspection and surveillance procedures.
      (3)   Fees for reviewing accidental discharge procedures and
construction.
      (4)   Fees for permit applications.
      (5)   Fees for filing appeals.
      (6)   Fees for administrative hearing.
      (7)   Other fees as the City may deem necessary to carry out the
requirements contained herein.
      (8)   Fees for removal of pollutants otherwise subject to the federal
pretreatment standards.
      (9)   Fees for treatment of extra-strength wastewater, including extra
fees for the treatment of industrial waste containing toxic waste and
pollutants.
   C.   Application/sampling/analysis.
      (1)   The fee schedule applicable to filing permit applications and
sampling/analysis of wastewater by the City shall as provided in
Chapter 212, Fees. Note: Nothing shall prevent the EPA, PaDEP, or the City of
Reading from imposing other fees, penalties or damages where wastewater
discharged to the City's treatment works exceeds permit limits. 10
      (2)   The fees and charges established by this Part shall apply to all
industries within the City of Reading sewage service area that discharge
industrial waste to the City's Fritz Island Wastewater Treatment Plant.
      (3)   These fees relate solely to the matters covered by this Part and
are separate from all other fees chargeable by the City.
   D.   Fee collection.
      (1)   Registered bills will be mailed quarterly. Bills must be paid
within 30 days of receipt. A late charge of 10% APR will be applied to all
bills paid after the due date.
      (2)   Sixty days after receipt, all unpaid bills, exempting cases where a
repayment schedule has been approved by the City, will be subject to civil and/
or criminal action(s) with all applicable charges and fees incurred by the City
being applied to the debt.
      (3)   A list of all bills unpaid after 60 days, not including cases where
other repayment arrangements have been approved by the City, may be published
at least semiannually in the largest daily newspaper published in the
municipality where the POTW is located.
10.   Editor's Note: Amended during codification (see
Ch. 1, General Provisions, Part 2).
§ 467-216. Septage discharge permit system.
   A.   Septage permitting system. Licensed septage and holding tank haulers
shall obtain a valid permit from the City and comply with all the conditions of
this permit and this Part. The septage hauler permit shall be valid for one
year with renewal January 1 of each fiscal year. The permit may be suspended or
revoked according to the policies outlined in §
467-205F of this Part. Haulers shall apply for this permit on forms provided by
the City and shall submit, together with the permit fee, an application
containing the following information:
      (1)   Name, company name, address, telephone number.
      (2)   Vehicle identification, make, and capacity.
      (3)   Copy of septage hauler's license.
      (4)   Any additional information requested by the City.
      (5)   Signed and notarized statement certifying that the information
presented in the application is correct.
      (6)   Performance bond.
   B.   Septage/waste disposal.
      (1)   Septic tank and holding tank waste may be introduced into the POTW
only at locations designated by the City, and at such times as are established
by the City. Such waste shall not violate §
467-202 of this Part or any other requirements established by the City. Septic
tank waste haulers will be required to obtain a hauler's permit and may be
required to obtain a wastewater discharge permit.
      (2)   The City shall require haulers of industrial waste to obtain
wastewater discharge permits. The City may require generators of hauled
industrial waste to obtain wastewater discharge permits. The City also may
prohibit the disposal of hauled industrial waste. The discharge of hauled
industrial waste is subject to all other requirements of this Part. Gallonage
and hours for delivery of waste may be reduced, extended, increased, or
otherwise changed or altered by and at the discretion of the City. City
personnel may require that the load be dumped over a period of a 1/2 hour or
more, depending upon the flow and characteristics of the incoming sewage at the
City's treatment plant.
      (3)   Industrial waste haulers may discharge loads only at locations
designated by the City. No load may be discharged without prior consent of the
City. The City may collect samples of each hauled load to ensure compliance
with applicable standards. The City may require the industrial waste hauler to
provide a waste analysis of any load prior to discharge.
      (4)   Industrial waste haulers must provide a waste-tracking form for
every load. This form shall include, at a minimum, the name and address of the
industrial waste hauler, permit number, truck identification, names and
addresses of sources of waste, and volume and characteristics of waste. The
form shall identify the type of industry, known or suspected waste
constituents, and whether any wastes are RCRA hazardous wastes. The City
reserves the right to prohibit the discharge of hauled industrial waste.
      (5)   Each waste hauler shall furnish the following items to the City
personnel upon arrival at the septage receiving facility:
         (a)   Load manifest form (provided by the City) which states the
hauling company, hauler name, vehicle license number, quantity and source
(owner and address) of the septage, probable content of the septage, and a
certification statement signed by the hauler and generator, attesting to the
accuracy of the information provided on the load manifest form.
         (b)   Previously purchased load ticket(s) corresponding to the
capacity of the truck.
         (c)   Grab samples of the septage taken by the waste hauler under
supervision by the City. The City reserves the right to refuse to accept any
load that is suspected of being or has been determined through sampling and
analysis to be detrimental to the operations of the plant, the safety of its
workers, or to the health or welfare of the public.
      (6)   The hauler shall keep a copy of his/her official permit in the
truck, and display the City issued permit sticker on the windshield.
      (7)   The hauler shall display his tank capacity on the truck.
   C.   Septage prohibitions.
      (1)   Septage haulers shall not discharge specifically prohibited waters,
wastewaters, or substances to the City facilities in accordance with §
467-202 of this Part.
      (2)   No grease trap wastes may be discharged.
   D.   Septage records. Vehicles shall be maintained and records shall be kept
in accordance with state law.
   E.   Compliance required. No statement contained in this section shall
exempt the hauler from complying with all federal, state or local requirements.
§ 467-217. Interference with City property.
No person shall maliciously, willfully, or negligently break, damage, destroy,
uncover, deface, or tamper with any City-owned structure, appurtenance or
equipment. No person shall dump garbage, fill, refuse or other materials on
land easements, rights-of-way, or other structures, including manholes, which
are part of the wastewater facilities. Persons initiating construction
activities that may alter City structures must be permitted pursuant to the
requirements outlined in this Part. Persons causing such interference shall be
billed by the City for any actual damages, the cost of correcting the
interference and may be subject to civil and/or criminal penalties of this
Part.
Chapter 473
SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES
§
473-101.   Purpose and findings.
§
473-102.   Definitions.
§
473-103.   Classification.
§
473-104.   Operator license and employee license required.
§
473-105.   Issuance of license.
§
473-106.   Fees.
§
473-107.   Inspection.
§
473-108.   Expiration of license; denial of renewal.
§
473-109.   Suspension of license.
§
473-110.   Revocation of license.
§
473-111.   Judicial review.
§
473-112.   No transfer of license.
§
473-113.   Location restrictions for sexually oriented businesses.
§
473-114.   Nonconforming uses; amortization.
§
473-115.   Additional regulations for adult motels.
§
473-116.   Additional regulations for escort agencies.
§
473-117.   Additional regulations for nude model studios.
§
473-118.   Additional regulations concerning public nudity.
§
473-119.   Regulations pertaining to exhibition of sexually explicit films and
videos.
§
473-120.   Exterior portions of sexually oriented businesses.
§
473-121.   Signage.
§
473-122.   Sale, use or consumption of alcoholic beverages prohibited.
§
473-123.   Persons younger than 21 years prohibited from entry; attendant
required.
§
473-124.   Massages or baths.
§
473-125.   Hours of operation.
§
473-126.   Exemptions.
§
473-127.   Notices.
§
473-128.   Injunction.
[HISTORY: Adopted by the City Council of the City of Reading 9-27-2004 by Ord.
No. 41-2004 (Ch. 10, Part 11, of the 2001 Code of Ordinances). Amendments noted
where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Zoning — See
Ch. 600.
STATE LAW REFERENCES
Adult-oriented establishments — See 68 Pa.C.S.A. § 5501 et seq.
§ 473-101. Purpose and findings.
   A.   Purpose. It is the purpose of this chapter to regulate sexually
oriented businesses and related activities to promote the health, safety,
morals, and general welfare of the citizens of the City, and to establish
reasonable and uniform regulations to prevent the deleterious location and
concentration of sexually oriented businesses within the City. The provisions
of this chapter have neither the purpose nor effect of imposing a limitation or
restriction on the content of any communicative materials, including sexually
oriented materials. Similarly, it is not the intent nor effect of this chapter
to restrict or deny access by adults to sexually oriented materials protected
by the First Amendment, or to deny access by the distributors and exhibitors of
sexually oriented entertainment to their intended market, neither is it the
intent nor effect of this chapter to condone or legitimize the distribution of
obscene materials.
   B.   Findings. Based on evidence concerning the adverse secondary effects of
adult uses on the community presented in hearings and in reports made available
to the City Council, and on findings incorporated in the cases of City of Erie
v. Pap's A.M, 529 U.S. 277 (2000); Barnes v. Glen Theatre, Inc., 501 U.S. 560
(1991); City of Renton v. Playtime Theatres, Inc., 475 U.S. 41 (1986); Arcara
v. Cloud Books, Inc., 478 U.S. 697, (1986); Iacobucci v. City of Newport, Ky.,
479 U.S. 92 (1986); Young v. American Mini Theatres, 427 U.S. 50 (1976);
California v. LaRue, 409 U.S. 109 (1972); United States v O'Brien, 391 U.S. 367
(1968); DLS Inc. v. City of Chattanooga, 107 F.3d 403 (6th Cir.1997); Kev, Inc.
v. Kitsap County, 793 F. 2d 1053 (9th Cir. 1986); Hang On, Inc. v. City of
Arlington, 65 F.3d 1248 (5th Cir.1995); South Florida Free Beaches, Inc. v.
City of Miami, 734 F 2d 608 (11th Cir. 1984); and N.W. Enterprises v. City of
Houston, 27 F.Supp. 2d 754 (S.D. Tex. 1998), as well as studies conducted in
other cities including, but not limited to, Phoenix, Arizona; Minneapolis,
Minnesota; Houston, Texas; Indianapolis, Indiana; Amarillo, Texas; Garden
Grove, California; Los Angeles, California; Whittier, California; Austin,
Texas; Seattle, Washington; Oklahoma City, Oklahoma; Cleveland, Ohio; and
Beaumont, Texas; and findings reported in the Final Report of the Attorney
General's Commission on Pornography (1986), the Report of the Attorney
General's Working Group on the Regulation of Sexually Oriented Businesses (June
6, 1989, State of Minnesota), and statistics obtained from the U.S. Department
of Health and Human Services, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, the
City Council finds that:
      (1)   Sexually oriented businesses lend themselves to ancillary unlawful
and unhealthy activities that are presently uncontrolled by the operators of
the establishments. Further, there is presently no mechanism to make owners of
these establishments responsible for the activities that occur on their
premises.
      (2)   Crime statistics show that all types of crimes, especially sex-
related crimes, occur with more frequency in neighborhoods where sexually
oriented businesses are located. See, e.g., studies of the cities of Phoenix,
Arizona; Indianapolis, Indiana; and Austin, Texas.
      (3)   Sexual acts, including masturbation, and oral and anal sex, occur
at sexually oriented businesses, especially those which provide private or
semiprivate booths or cubicles for viewing films, videos, or live sex shows.
      (4)   Offering and providing such booths and/or cubicles encourages such
activities, which creates unhealthy conditions.
      (5)   Persons frequent certain adult theaters, adult arcades, and other
sexually oriented businesses, for the purpose of engaging in sex within the
premises of such sexually oriented businesses.
      (6)   At least 50 communicable diseases may be spread by activities
occurring in sexually oriented businesses including, but not limited to,
syphilis, gonorrhea, human immunodeficiency virus infection (HIV-AIDS), genital
herpes, hepatitis B, Non A, Non B.
      (7)   Sanitary conditions in some sexually oriented businesses are
unhealthy, in part, because the activities conducted there are unhealthy, and,
in part, because of the unregulated nature of the activities and the failure of
the owners and operators of the facilities to self-regulate those activities
and maintain those facilities.
      (8)   Numerous studies and reports have determined that bodily fluids,
including semen and urine, are found in the areas of sexually oriented
businesses where persons view adult-oriented films.
      (9)   Nude dancing in adult establishments encourages prostitution,
increases sexual assaults, and attracts other criminal activity.
      (10)   Nude dancing in adult establishments increases the likelihood of
drug-dealing and drug use.
      (11)   Alcohol consumption in adult establishments increases the
likelihood of crime, illegal drug use, and illegal sexual activity, and
encourages undesirable behavior that is not in the interest of the public
health, safety, and welfare.
      (12)   Sexually oriented businesses have operational characteristics
which should be reasonably regulated in order to protect those substantial
governmental concerns.
      (13)   A reasonable licensing procedure is an appropriate mechanism to
place the burden of that reasonable regulation on the owners and operators of
sexually oriented businesses. Further, such licensing procedure will place a
heretofore nonexistent incentive on operators to see that the sexually oriented
business is run in a manner consistent with the health, safety, and welfare of
its patrons and employees, as well as the citizens of the City. It is
appropriate to require reasonable assurances that the licensee is the actual
operator of the sexually oriented business, fully in possession and control of
the premises and activities occurring therein.
      (14)   Removal of doors on adult booths and requiring sufficient lighting
on the premises with adult booths advances a substantial governmental interest
in curbing the illegal and unsanitary sexual activity occurring in adult
establishments.
      (15)   The disclosure of certain information by those persons ultimately
responsible for the day-to-day operation and maintenance of the sexually
oriented business, where such information is substantially related, to the
significant governmental interest in the operation of such uses, will aid in
preventing the spread of sexually transmitted diseases and criminal activity.
      (16)   It is desirable, in the prevention of crime and the spread of
communicable diseases, to obtain a limited amount of information regarding
certain employees who may engage in the conduct this chapter is designed to
prevent, or who are likely to be witnesses to such activity.
      (17)   The fact that an applicant for a sexually oriented business
license has been convicted of a sex-related crime leads to the rational
assumption that the applicant may engage in that conduct in contravention to
this chapter.
      (18)   The barring of such individuals from operation or employment in
sexually oriented businesses for a period of five years for a previous felony
conviction serves as a deterrent to further criminal conduct, and prevents
conduct which leads to the transmission of sexually transmitted diseases.
      (19)   When more than one sexually oriented business use occupies the
same location or business address, the secondary effects caused by such
businesses are increased. Secondary effects are eliminated or controlled to a
greater degree when only a single sexually oriented business use is allowed to
occupy the same location.
      (20)   The general welfare, health, morals, and safety of the citizens of
this City will be promoted by enactment of this chapter. The findings noted in
Subsection B(1) through (18) raise substantial governmental concerns.
§ 473-102. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
   ADULT ARCADE — Any place to which the public is permitted or invited wherein
coin- operated or slug-operated or electronically, electrically, or
mechanically controlled still or motion picture machines, projectors, videos,
or other image-producing devices are maintained to show images to five or fewer
persons per machine at any one time, and where the images so displayed are
distinguished or characterized by the depicting or describing of specified
sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.
   ADULT BOOKSTORE or ADULT VIDEO STORE —
   A.   A commercial establishment that, as one of its principal business
purposes, offers for sale or rental for any form of consideration any one or
more of the following:
      (1)   Books, magazines, periodicals or other printed matter, or
photographs, films, motion picture, videocassettes or video reproductions,
slides, or other visual representations that depict or describe specified
sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.
      (2)   Instruments, devices, or paraphernalia that are designed for use in
connection with specified sexual activities.
   B.   A principal business purpose exists if materials offered for sale or
rental depicting or describing specified sexual activities or specified
anatomical areas generate 20% or more of the business's income, or account for
20% or more of inventory, or occupy 20% or more of total floor space. A
commercial establishment may have other principal business purposes that do not
involve the offering for sale or rental of material depicting or describing
specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas and still be
categorized as "adult bookstore" or "adult video store." Such other business
purposes will not serve to exempt such commercial establishments from being
categorized as an "adult bookstore" or "adult video store," so long as one of
its principal business purposes is the offering for sale or rental for
consideration the specified materials that depict or describe "specified sexual
activities" or "specified anatomical areas."
   ADULT CABARET — A nightclub, bar, restaurant, cafe, or similar commercial
establishment that regularly, commonly, habitually, or consistently features:
   A.   Persons who appear in a state of nudity or seminudity.
   B.   Live performances that are characterized by the exposure of specified
anatomical areas or by specified sexual activities.
   C.   Films, motion pictures, videocassettes, slides, photographic
reproductions, or other image producing devices that are characterized by the
depiction or description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical
areas.
   D.   Persons who engage in "exotic" or erotic dancing or performances/
services that are intended for the sexual interests or titillation of an
audience or customers.
   ADULT MOTEL — A hotel, motel or similar commercial establishment that:
   A.   Offers accommodation to the public for any form of consideration and
provides patrons with closed-circuit television transmissions, films, motion
pictures, videocassettes, slides, or other photographic reproductions that are
characterized by the depiction or description of specified sexual activities or
specified anatomical areas; and has a sign visible from the public right-of-way
that advertises the availability of this adult type of photographic
reproductions.
   B.   Offers a sleeping room for rent for a period of time that is less than
24 hours.
   C.   Allows a tenant or occupant of a sleeping room to subrent the room for
a period of time that is less than 24 hours.
   ADULT MOTION PICTURE THEATER — A commercial establishment where, for any
form of consideration, films, motion pictures, videocassettes, slides, or
similar photographic reproductions are regularly, commonly, habitually, or
consistently shown that are characterized by the depiction or description of
specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.
   ADULT THEATER — A theater, concert hall, auditorium, or similar commercial
establishment that regularly, commonly, habitually, or consistently features
persons who appear, in person, in a state of nudity and/or seminudity, and/or
live performances that are characterized by the exposure of specified
anatomical areas or by specified sexual activities.
   DIRECTOR — The Chief of Police and such employee(s) of the Police Department
as he may designate to perform the duties of the Director under this chapter.
   EMPLOYEE — A person who performs any service on the premises of a sexually
oriented business on a full-time, part-time, contract basis, or independent
basis, whether or not the person is denominated an employee, independent
contractor, agent, or otherwise, and whether or not said person is paid a
salary, wage, or other compensation by the operator of said business.
"Employee" does not include a person exclusively on the premises for repair or
maintenance of the premises or equipment on the premises, or for the delivery
of goods to the premises, nor does "employee" include a person exclusively on
the premises as a patron or customer.
   ESCORT — A person who, for consideration, agrees or offers to act as a
companion, guide, or date for another person, or who agrees or offers to
privately model lingerie or to privately perform a striptease for another
person.
   ESCORT AGENCY — A person or business association who furnishes, offers to
furnish, or advertises to furnish escorts as one of its primary business
purposes for a fee, tip, or other consideration.
   ESTABLISHMENT — Includes any of the following:
   A.   The opening or commencement of any sexually oriented business as a new
business.
   B.   The conversion of an existing business, whether or not a sexually
oriented business, to any sexually oriented business.
   C.   The additions of any sexually oriented business to any other existing
sexually oriented business.
   D.   The relocation of any sexually oriented business.
   E.   A sexually oriented business or premises on which the sexually oriented
business is located.
   LICENSED DAY-CARE CENTER — A facility licensed by the State of Pennsylvania,
whether situated within the City or not, that provides care, training,
education, custody, treatment or supervision for more than 12 children under 14
years of age, where such children are not related by blood, marriage or
adoption to the owner or operator of the facility, for less than 24 hours a
day, regardless of whether or not the facility is operated for a profit or
charges for the services it offers.
   LICENSEE — A person in whose name a license has been issued, as well as the
individual listed as an applicant on the application for a license.
   LIVE THEATRICAL PERFORMANCE — A play, skit, opera, ballet, concert, comedy,
or musical drama.
   NUDE MODEL STUDIO — Anyplace where a person who appears in a state of nudity
or displays specified anatomical areas is provided to be observed, sketched,
drawn, painted, sculptured, photographed, or similarly depicted by other
persons for consideration.
   NUDITY or A STATE OF NUDITY — The appearance of a human bare buttock, anus,
anal cleft or cleavage, pubic area, male genitals, female genitals, or vulva,
with less than a fully opaque covering; or a female breast with less than a
fully opaque covering of any part of the areola; or human male genitals in a
discernibly turgid state even if completely and opaquely covered.
   PERSON — An individual, proprietorship, partnership, corporation,
association, or other legal entity.
   PREMISES — The real property upon which the sexually oriented business is
located, and all appurtenances thereto and buildings thereon, including, but
not limited to, the sexually oriented business, the grounds, private walkways,
and parking lots and/or parking garages adjacent thereto, under the ownership,
control, or supervision of the licensee, as described in the application for a
business license pursuant to §
473-103 of this chapter.
   SEMINUDE or SEMINUDITY — The appearance of the female breast below a
horizontal line across the top of the areola at its highest point. This
definition shall include the entire lower portion of the human female breast,
but shall not include any portion of the cleavage of the human female breast
exhibited by a dress, blouse, skirt, leotard, bathing suit, or other wearing
apparel, provided the areola is not exposed in whole or in part.
   SEXUAL ENCOUNTER CENTER —
   A.   A business or commercial enterprise that, as one of its principal
business purposes, offers for any form of consideration:
      (1)   Physical contact in the form of wrestling or tumbling between
persons of the opposite sex or intended to cause sexual excitement or
stimulation.
      (2)   Activities between persons of the opposite sex and/or persons of
the same sex when one or more of the persons is in a state of nudity or
seminudity.
   B.   A principal business purpose exists if the services offered are
intended to generate business income.
   C.   The definition of sexual encounter establishment or any sexually
oriented businesses shall not include an establishment where a medical
practitioner, psychologist, psychiatrist, or similar professional person
licensed by the state engages in medically approved and recognized sexual
therapy.
   SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS — An adult arcade, adult bookstore or adult video
store, adult cabaret, adult motel, adult motion-picture theater; adult theater,
escort agency, nude model studio, spa or sexual encounter center.
   SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS —
   A.   The human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if fully
and opaquely covered.
   B.   Less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals, pubic region,
buttocks, or a female breast below a point immediately above the top of the
areola.
   SPECIFIED CRIMINAL ACTIVITY — Any of the following offenses:
   A.   Prostitution or promotion of prostitution; dissemination of obscenity;
sale, distribution, or display of harmful material to a minor; sexual
performance by a child; possession or distribution of child pornography; public
lewdness; indecent exposure; indecency with a child; sexual assault;
molestation of a child; or any similar sex-related offenses to those described
above under the criminal or penal code of this state, other states, or other
countries.
   B.   For which:
      (1)   Less than two years have elapsed since the date of conviction or
the date of release from confinement imposed for the conviction, whichever is
the later date, if the conviction is of a misdemeanor offense.
      (2)   Less than five years have elapsed since the date of conviction or
the date of release from confinement imposed for the conviction, whichever is
the later date, if the conviction is of a felony offense.
      (3)   Less than five years have elapsed since the date of the last
conviction or the date of release from confinement imposed for the last
conviction, whichever is the later date, if the convictions are for two or more
misdemeanor offenses or combination of misdemeanor offenses occurring within
any twenty-four-month period.
   C.   This section shall apply even if an aforesaid conviction is being
appealed.
   SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITIES — Includes any of the following:
   A.   The fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic region,
buttocks, anus, or female breasts, whether covered or uncovered.
   B.   Sex acts, normal or perverted, actual or simulated, including
intercourse, oral copulation, or sodomy.
   C.   Masturbation, actual or simulated.
   D.   Excretory functions as part of or in connection with any of the
activities set forth in Subsections A through C above.
   SUBSTANTIAL ENLARGEMENT OF A SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS — The increase in
floor areas occupied by the business by more than 25%, as the floor areas
existed on the effective date of this chapter.
   TRANSFER OF OWNERSHIP OR CONTROL OF A SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS — Includes
any of the following:
   A.   The sale, lease, or sublease of the business.
   B.   The transfer of securities that form a controlling interest in the
business, whether by sale, exchange, or similar means.
   C.   The establishment of a trust, gift, or other similar legal device that
transfers the ownership or control of the business, except for transfer by
bequest or other operation of law upon the death of the person possessing the
ownership or control.
§ 473-103. Classification.
Sexually oriented business uses are classified as either non-live
entertainment, or live entertainment, as follows:
   A.   Non-live entertainment shall include:
      (1)   Adult arcades.
      (2)   Adult bookstores or adult video stores.
      (3)   Adult motels.
      (4)   Adult motion-picture theaters.
   B.   Live entertainment shall include:
      (1)   Adult theaters.
      (2)   Adult cabarets.
      (3)   Escort agencies.
      (4)   Nude model studios.
      (5)   Spas, massage centers, places offering activities that could cause
sexual stimulation or excitement.
      (6)   Sexual encounter centers.
§ 473-104. Operator license and employee license required.
   A.   License required.
      (1)   It shall be unlawful:
         (a)   For any person to establish and/or operate a sexually oriented
business without a valid sexually oriented business operator's license
("operator's license") issued by the Director pursuant to this chapter.
         (b)   For any person who operates a sexually oriented business to
employ a person to work and/or perform services on the premises of the sexually
oriented business, if such employee is not in possession of a valid sexually
oriented business employee license ("employee license") issued to such employee
by the Director pursuant to this chapter.
         (c)   For any person to obtain employment with a sexually oriented
business if such person is not in possession of a valid sexually oriented
business employee license issued to such person by the Director pursuant to
this chapter.
      (2)   It shall be a defense to Subsection A(1)(b) and (c) of this section
if the employment is of limited duration and for the sole purpose of repair
and/or maintenance of machinery, equipment, or the premises.
      (3)   Violation of any provision within this subsection shall constitute
a misdemeanor.
   B.   An application for a sexually oriented business operator's license must
be made on a form provided by the City. The application must be accompanied by
a sketch or a diagram showing the configuration of the premises, including a
statement of total floor space occupied by the business. The sketch or diagram
need not be professionally prepared but must be drawn to a designated scale or
drawn with marked dimensions of the interior of the premises to an accuracy of
plus or minus six inches. Prior to issuance of an operator's license, the
premises must be inspected by the health office, building office, and zoning
office.
   C.   An application for a sexually oriented business employee license must
be made on a form provided by the City.
   D.   All applicants for a license must be qualified according to the
provisions of this chapter.
The application may request, and the applicant shall provide, such information
reasonably necessary (including fingerprints) to enable the City to determine
whether the applicant meets the qualifications established under this chapter.
The applicant has an affirmative duty to supplement an application with new
information received subsequent to the date the application was deemed
completed.
   E.   If a person who wishes to own or operate a sexually oriented business
is an individual, he must sign the application for an operator's license as
applicant. If a person who wishes to operate a sexually oriented business is
other than an individual, each individual who has a 5%, or greater interest in
the business must sign the application for an operator's license as applicant.
If a corporation is listed as owner of a sexually oriented business or as the
entity that wishes to operate such a business, all corporate officers and
directors and shareholders must sign the application for an operator's license
as applicant.
   F.   Applications for an operator's license, whether original or renewal,
must be made to the Director by the intended operator of the enterprise.
Applications must be submitted to the office of the Director or the Director's
designee during regular working hours. Application forms shall be supplied by
the Director. The following information shall be provided on the application
form:
      (1)   The name, street address (and mailing address if different) of the
applicant(s).
      (2)   If the applicant is an individual, the names, the home addresses,
and the dates and places of birth, the social security numbers and federally
issued tax identification number of the individual and any manager of the
business.
      (3)   If the applicant is a corporation, the following information shall
be provided:
         (a)   Names, titles, home addresses, and dates and places of birth of
officers, directors, and stockholders.
         (b)   A resolution by the corporation authorizing the filing of an
application for a sexually oriented business operator's license.
      (4)   If the applicant is a partnership, the following information shall
be provided: names of all partners, their home addresses, dates and places of
birth.
      (5)   The name under which the establishment is to be operated and a
general description of the services to be provided.
         (a)   If the applicant intends to operate the sexually oriented
business under a name other than that of the applicant; he or she must state:
the sexually oriented business's fictitious name; and submit the required
Department of State registration documents regarding fictitious name.
      (6)   Whether the applicant has been convicted, or is awaiting trial on
pending charges, of a "specified criminal activity" as defined in §
473-102, Definitions, and, if so, the specified criminal activity involved, the
date, place, and jurisdiction and disposition of each.
      (7)   Whether the applicant has had a previous license under this chapter
or other similar sexually oriented business ordinance from another City,
county, or state denied, suspended or revoked, including the name and location
of the sexually oriented business for which the business license was denied,
suspended or revoked, as well as the date of the denial, suspension or
revocation, and whether the applicant is or has been a partner in a partnership
or an officer, director or principal stockholder of a corporation that is or
was licensed under a sexually oriented business ordinance whose business
license has previously been denied, suspended or revoked, including the name
and location of the sexually oriented business for which the business license
was denied, suspended or revoked as well as the date of denial, suspension or
revocation.
      (8)   Whether the applicant holds any other licenses under this chapter
or other similar, sexually oriented business ordinance from another City or
county and, if so, the names and locations of such other licensed businesses.
      (9)   The single classification of license, as found in §
473-103, for which the applicant is filing.
      (10)   The telephone number of the establishment.
      (11)   The address and legal description of the tract of land on which
the establishment is to be located.
      (12)   If the establishment is in operation, the date on which the owner
(s) acquired the establishment for which the business license is sought, and
the date on which the establishment began operations as a sexually oriented
business at the location for which the business license is sought.
      (13)   If the establishment is not in operation, the expected startup
date (which shall be expressed in number of days from the date of issuance of
the business license). If the expected startup date is to be more than 10 days
following the date of issuance of the business license, then a detailed
explanation of the construction, repair or remodeling work or other cause of
the expected delay and a statement of the owner's time schedule and plan for
accomplishing the same.
      (14)   If an applicant wishes to operate a sexually oriented business,
other than an adult motel, which shall exhibit on the premises, in a viewing
room or booth of less than 150 square feet of floor space, films,
videocassettes, other video reproductions, or live entertainment which depict
specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas, then the applicant
shall comply with the application requirements set forth in §
473-119 hereunder.
   G.   Each application for an operator's license shall be accompanied by the
following:
      (1)   Payment of the application fee in full.
      (2)   If the establishment is a State of Pennsylvania corporation, a
certified copy of the Articles of Incorporation, together with all amendments
thereto, and proof that said corporation is in good standing in this
commonwealth.
      (3)   If the establishment is a foreign corporation, a certified copy of
the certificate of authority to transact business in this state, together with
all amendments thereto, and that said corporation is in good standing under the
laws of its state of incorporation. The foreign corporations should also
include, if applicable, the address of its registered office for service of
process.
      (4)   If the establishment is a partnership formed under the laws of the
State of Pennsylvania, a certified copy of the certificate of limited
partnership, together with all amendments thereto or, if a general partnership,
a copy of the partnership agreement together with any amendments thereto.
      (5)   If the establishment is a foreign partnership, a certified copy of
the certificate of limited partnership and the qualification documents,
together with all amendments thereto, or, if a general partnership, a copy of
the partnership agreement and the qualification documents, together with any
amendments thereto.
      (6)   Proof of the current fee ownership of the tract of land on which
the establishment is to be situated in the form of a copy of the recorded deed.
      (7)   If the persons identified as the fee owner(s) of the tract of land
in Subsection G(6) is not also the owner of the sexually oriented business,
then the lease, purchase contract, purchase option contract, lease option
contract or other document(s) evidencing the legally enforceable right of the
owner(s) or proposed owner(s) of the sexually oriented business to have or
obtain the use and possession of the tract or portion thereof that is to be
used for the sexually oriented business.
      (8)   A current certificate and straight-line drawing prepared within 30
days prior to application by a land surveyor registered in the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania which shall include, but not be limited to, the property lines and
the structures containing any existing sexually oriented businesses within
1,000 feet of the property to be certified; and the property lines of any
established religious institution/ synagogue, school, public park, recreation
area, residence, family entertainment business, or premises licensed pursuant
to the alcoholic beverage control regulations — uses as set forth in §
473-113 of this chapter — within 1,000 feet of the property to be certified.
For purposes of this section, a use shall be considered existing or established
if it is in existence at the time an application is submitted.
      (9)   Any of Subsection G(2) through (8) above shall not be required for
a renewal application if the applicant submits an affidavit stating that the
documents previously furnished to the Director with the original application or
previous renewals thereof remain correct and are currently accurate, and the
applicant provides tax clearance certificates issued by the Department of
Revenue.
   H.   Applications for an employee license to work and/or perform services in
a sexually oriented business, whether original or renewal, must be made to the
Director by the person to whom the employee license shall issue. Each
application for an employee license shall be accompanied by payment of the
application fee in full. Application forms shall be supplied by the Director.
Applications must be submitted to the office of the Director or the Director's
designee during regular working hours.
      (1)   Each applicant shall be required to give the following information
on the application form:
         (a)   The applicant's given name, and any other names by which the
applicant is or has been known, including "stage" names and/or aliases.
         (b)   Age, and date and place of birth.
         (c)   Height, weight, hair color, and eye color.
         (d)   Present residence address and telephone number.
         (e)   Present business address and telephone number.
         (f)   Date, issuing state, and number of photo driver's license, or
other state-issued picture identification card information.
         (g)   Social security number.
         (h)   Proof that the individual is at least 18 years old.
      (2)   The personal information provided in this subsection shall be
confidential, and shall not be disclosed to the public except to the extent
required by state or federal law.
   I.   Attached to the application form for any license under this chapter
shall be the following:
      (1)   A color photograph of the applicant clearly showing the applicant's
face, and the applicant's fingerprints on a form provided by the Police
Department. Any fees for the photographs and fingerprints shall be paid by the
applicant.
      (2)   A statement detailing the license history of the applicant for the
five years immediately preceding the date of the filing of the application,
including whether such applicant, in this or any other city, county, state, or
country, has ever had any license, permit, or authorization to do business
denied, revoked, or suspended, or had any professional or vocational license or
permit denied, revoked, or suspended. In the event of any such denial,
revocation, or suspension, state the name(s) under which the license was sought
and/or issued, the name(s) of the issuing or denying jurisdiction, and describe
in full the reason(s) for the denial, revocation, or suspension. A copy of any
order of denial, revocation, or suspension shall be attached to the
application.
      (3)   A statement whether the applicant has, within the past five years,
been convicted, or is awaiting trial on pending charges, of a "specified
criminal activity" as defined in §
473-102, Definitions, and, if so, the specified criminal activity involved, the
date, place and jurisdiction of each.
      (4)   A form or forms authorizing a criminal background check on the
applicant and every employee, which forms shall be signed by the individuals
set forth in the application.
   J.   Every application for a license under this chapter shall contain a
statement under oath that:
      (1)   The applicant has personal knowledge of the information contained
in the application, and that the information contained therein and furnished
therewith is true and correct.
      (2)   The applicant has read the provisions of this chapter.
   K.   A separate application and operator's license shall be required for
each sexually oriented business classification as set forth in §
473-103.
   L.   The fact that a person possesses other types of state or City permits
and/or licenses does not exempt him/her from the requirement of obtaining a
sexually oriented business operator or employee license.
§ 473-105. Issuance of license.
   A.   Upon the filing of an application for a sexually oriented business
employee license, the Director shall issue a temporary license to said
applicant. The application shall then be referred to the appropriate City
departments for investigation to be made on the information contained in the
application. The application process shall be completed within 45 days from the
date of the completed application.
      (1)   After the investigation, the Director shall issue an employee
license, unless it is determined by a preponderance of the evidence that one or
more of the following findings is true:
         (a)   The applicant has failed to provide the information reasonably
necessary for issuance of the license or has falsely answered a question or
request for information on the application form.
         (b)   The applicant is under the age of 21 years.
         (c)   The applicant has been convicted of a "specified criminal
activity" as defined in §
473-102, Definitions, of this chapter.
         (d)   The sexually oriented business employee license is to be used
for employment in a business prohibited by local or state law, statute, rule,
or regulation, or prohibited by a particular provision of this chapter.
         (e)   The applicant has had a sexually oriented business employee
license revoked by the City within two years of the date of the current
application.
      (2)   If the sexually oriented business employee license is denied, the
temporary license previously issued is immediately rendered null and void.
Denial, suspension, or revocation of a license issued pursuant to this
subsection shall be subject to appeal as forth in Subsection I of this section.
   B.   A license issued pursuant to Subsection A of this section, if granted,
shall state on its face the name of the person to whom it is granted, the
expiration date, and the address of the sexually oriented business. While
engaged in employment or performing services on the sexually oriented business
premises, an employee shall, at all times, possess the license in such manner
as to be available for immediate inspection upon lawful request.
   C.   A license issued pursuant to Subsection A of this section shall be
subject to annual renewal upon the written application of the applicant and a
finding by the Director that the applicant has not been convicted of any
"specified criminal activity" as defined in this chapter, or committed any act
during the existence of the previous license which would be grounds to deny the
initial license application. The decision whether to renew a license shall be
made within 45 days of the completed application. The renewal of a license
shall be subject to the fee as set forth in §
473-106. Nonrenewal of a license shall be subject to appeal as set forth in
Subsection I of this section.
   D.   If application is made for a sexually oriented business operator's
license, the Director shall approve or deny issuance of the license within 45
days of receipt of the completed application. The Director shall issue a
license to an applicant unless it is determined by a preponderance of the
evidence that one or more of the following findings is true:
      (1)   An applicant has failed to provide the information reasonably
necessary for issuance of the license or has falsely answered a question or
request for information on the application form.
      (2)   An applicant is under the age of 21 years.
      (3)   An applicant has been denied a license by the City to operate a
sexually oriented business within the preceding 12 months, or whose license to
operate a sexually oriented business has been revoked within the preceding 12
months.
      (4)   An applicant is overdue in payment to the City for taxes, fees,
fines, or penalties assessed against or imposed upon him/her in relation to the
sexually oriented business for which license is sought, or the property on
which the sexually oriented business is located or will be located.
      (5)   An applicant has been convicted of a "specified criminal activity"
as defined in §
473-102, Definitions.
      (6)   The premises to be used for the sexually oriented business have not
been approved by the Health Department, Building Department, and Zoning
Department as being in compliance with applicable laws and ordinances, if such
approval is required under other sections of this chapter.
      (7)   The license fee required under this chapter has not been paid.
      (8)   An applicant of the proposed establishment is in violation of or is
not in compliance with one or more of the provisions of this chapter.
   E.   A license issued pursuant to Subsection D of this section, if granted,
shall state on its face the name of the person or persons to whom it is
granted, the expiration date, the address of the sexually oriented business,
and the §
473-103 classification for which the license is issued. The license shall be
posted in a conspicuous place at or near the entrance to the sexually oriented
business so that it may be easily read at any time.
   F.   If so required under other sections of this chapter, the Health
Department, Building Department, and Zoning Department shall complete their
certification that the premises are in compliance or not in compliance within
20 days of receipt of the completed application by the Director. The
certification shall be promptly presented to the Director. Failure of an
appropriate department to timely certify its inspection shall not be grounds
for refusing to issue a license within the mandatory time period prescribed in
Subsection D. (In the event the Director fails to render a decision on the
application within the time specified herein, the operator shall be permitted
to commence operation of the business.)
   G.   A sexually oriented business license shall issue for only one of the
classifications as set forth in §
473-103 per applicant.
   H.   In the event that the Director determines that an applicant is not
eligible for a sexually oriented operator's license, the applicant shall be
given notice in writing of the reasons for the denial within 45 days of the
receipt of the completed application by the Director, provided that the
applicant may request, in writing, at any time before the notice is issued,
that such period be extended for an additional period of not more than 10 days
in order to make modifications necessary to comply with this chapter.
   I.   An applicant may appeal the decision of the Director regarding a denial
to the City Council by filing a written notice of appeal with the City Clerk
within 10 days after service of notice upon the applicant of the Director's
decision. The notice of appeal shall be accompanied by a memorandum or other
writing setting out fully the grounds for such appeal and all arguments in
support thereof. Simultaneously with the filing of the written notice of appeal
and/or memorandum, the applicant shall serve a copy of these documents upon the
Director. The Director may, within 15 days of service upon him of the
applicant's written notice/memorandum, submit a responsive memorandum to the
City Council. The City Council shall hear any appeal of a denial of a permit or
renewal permit at a public hearing and render a decision within 30 days of
receiving the notice of appeal. Notice of the public hearing shall appear in at
least one newspaper of general circulation in the City, including the time,
date, and place of the hearing, once a week for two weeks immediately preceding
the hearing.
   J.   A license issued pursuant to Subsection D of this section shall be
subject to annual renewal upon the written application of the applicant and a
finding by the Director that the applicant has not been convicted of any
"specified criminal activity" as defined in this chapter, or committed any act
during the existence of the previous license which would be grounds to deny the
initial license application. The decision whether to renew a license shall be
made within 45 days of the completed application. The renewal of a license
shall be subject to the fee as set forth in §
473-106.
§ 473-106. Fees.
The annual fee for a sexually oriented business operator's license, whether new
or renewal, is $500. The annual fee for a sexually oriented business employee
license, whether new or renewal, is $50. These fees are to be used to pay for
the cost of the administration and enforcement of this chapter.
§ 473-107. Inspection.
   A.   The City shall regularly inspect the premises of the sexually oriented
business in order to ensure compliance with the provisions of this chapter. An
applicant or licensee shall permit representatives of the Police Department
and/or Health Department to inspect the premises at any time the establishment
is open for business. Such inspection shall be limited to visual assessment of
the activities conducted in areas to which patrons have access or are allowed
access; to requests for inspection of the licenses required under this chapter;
and to requests for identification of those individuals who reasonably appear
to be under the age of 21.
   B.   A person who operates a sexually oriented business or his agent or
employee commits a misdemeanor if he/she refuses to promptly permit such lawful
inspection of the premises.
§ 473-108. Expiration of license; denial of renewal.
   A.   Each license shall expire one year from the date of issuance and may be
renewed only by making application as provided in §
473-104. Application for renewal should be made at least 45 days before the
expiration date. When application is made less than 45 days before the
expiration date, the expiration of the license will not be affected.
   B.   When the Director denies renewal of a license, the applicant shall not
be issued a license for one year from the date of denial. Notwithstanding the
provisions of this section, in the event a licensee appeals the nonrenewal of a
license, the status quo immediately prior to nonrenewal shall be maintained
throughout the pendency of the appeal, up to and including judicial review on
the merits as set forth in §
473-111.
§ 473-109. Suspension of license.
   A.   The Director shall suspend a license for a period not to exceed 45 days
if he determines that licensee or an employee of licensee has:
      (1)   Violated or is not in compliance with any section of this chapter.
      (2)   Operated or performed services in a sexually oriented business
while intoxicated by the use of alcoholic beverages or controlled substances.
      (3)   Refused to allow prompt inspection of the sexually oriented
business premises as authorized by this chapter.
      (4)   With knowledge, permitted gambling by any person on the sexually
oriented business premises.
   B.   A licensee may appeal the suspension of a license to the City Council
in accordance with the procedure set forth in §§
473-104 and 473-105. Notwithstanding any other provisions of this section, in
the event a licensee appeals the suspension of a license, the status quo
immediately prior to suspension shall be maintained throughout the pendency of
the appeal, up to and including judicial review on the merits as set forth in §
473-111.
§ 473-110. Revocation of license.
   A.   The Director shall revoke a license if a cause of suspension in §
473-109 occurs and the license has been suspended within the preceding 12
months.
   B.   The Director shall revoke a license if he determines that:
      (1)   A licensee gave materially false or misleading information in the
material submitted during the application process.
      (2)   A licensee was convicted of a specified criminal activity on a
charge that was pending prior to the issuance of the license.
      (3)   A licensee has, with knowledge, permitted the possession, use, or
sale of controlled substances on the premises.
      (4)   A licensee has, with knowledge, permitted the sale, use, or
consumption of alcoholic beverages on the premises.
      (5)   A licensee has, with knowledge, permitted prostitution on the
premises.
      (6)   A licensee has, with knowledge, operated the sexually oriented
business during a period of time when the licensee's license was suspended.
      (7)   A licensee has, with knowledge, permitted any act of sexual
intercourse, sodomy, oral copulation, masturbation, or other sexual conduct to
occur in or on the licensed premises.
      (8)   A licensee is delinquent in payment to the City or state for any
taxes, fees, fines, or penalties relating to the sexually oriented business or
the premises thereon.
      (9)   A licensee has, with knowledge, permitted a person under 21 years
of age to enter or remain in the establishment.
      (10)   A licensee has attempted to sell his business license, or has
sold, assigned, or transferred ownership or control of the sexually oriented
business to a nonlicensee of the establishment.
      (11)   A licensee has, with knowledge, permitted a person or persons to
engage in specified sexual activities on the premises of the sexually oriented
business.
      (12)   The Reading Police Department has issued three quality-of-life
citations for the disruptive behavior of a patron or visitor to the business
during the calendar year.
   C.   When the Director revokes a license, the revocation shall continue for
one year, and the licensee shall not be issued a license for one year from the
date revocation became effective. A licensee may appeal the revocation of a
license to the City Council in accordance with the procedure set forth in §
473-105I. Notwithstanding any other provisions of this section, in the event
the licensee appeals the revocation of a license, the status quo immediately
prior to revocation shall be maintained throughout the pendency of the appeal,
up to and including judicial review on the merits as set forth in §
473-111.
§ 473-111. Judicial review.
Within 14 days of a denial of an initial or renewal application by the Director
and City Council, or suspension or revocation of a license by the Director, the
applicant or licensee may seek prompt judicial review of such administrative
action in any court of competent jurisdiction. Upon notification by summons of
the filing of a complaint seeking judicial review of the City's administrative
action, the City shall transmit the record of the administrative action to the
court no later than five business days after receipt of said summons, and shall
answer the complaint no later than 10 days after receipt of the summons. In
addition, the City shall submit its response brief within 14 days of receipt of
the petitioner's brief. The administrative action shall then be promptly
reviewed by the court.
§ 473-112. No transfer of license.
   A.   A licensee shall not transfer his/her license to another, nor shall a
licensee operate a sexually oriented business under the authority of a license
at any place other than the address designated in the application and set forth
in the operator's license.
   B.   An operator's license shall not be transferable from one location to
another.
§ 473-113. Location restrictions for sexually oriented businesses.
   A.   A person commits a misdemeanor if that person operates or causes to be
operated a sexually oriented business in any zoning district other than HM
Heavy Manufacturing Districts, as defined and described in
Chapter 600, Zoning, of the Code of the City of Reading. 1
   B.   A person commits an offense if the person operates or causes to be
operated a sexually oriented business within 1,000 feet of:
      (1)   A church, synagogue, mosque, temple, or building which is used
primarily for religious worship and related religious activities.
      (2)   A public or private educational facility including, but not limited
to, child day- care facilities, nursery schools, preschools, kindergartens,
elementary schools, private schools, intermediate schools, junior high schools,
middle schools, high schools, vocational schools, secondary schools,
continuation schools, special education schools, junior colleges, and
universities; "school" includes the school grounds, but does not include
facilities used primarily for another purpose and only incidentally as a
school.
      (3)   A boundary of a residential district as defined in
Chapter 600, Zoning, of the Code of the City of Reading.
      (4)   A public park or recreational area which has been designated for
park or recreational activities including, but not limited to, a park,
playground, nature trails, swimming pool, reservoir, athletic field, basketball
or tennis courts, pedestrian/bicycle paths, wilderness areas, or other similar
public land within the City which is under the control, operation, or
management of the City park and recreation authorities.
      (5)   The property line of a lot devoted to a residential use as defined
in
Chapter 600, Zoning, of the Code of the City of Reading.
      (6)   An entertainment business which is oriented primarily towards
children or family entertainment.
      (7)   Any premises licensed pursuant to the alcoholic beverage control
regulations of the state.
   C.   A person commits a misdemeanor if that person causes or permits the
operation, establishment, substantial enlargement, or transfer of ownership or
control of a sexually oriented business within 1,000 feet of another sexually
oriented business.
   D.   A person commits a misdemeanor if that person causes or permits the
operation, establishment, or maintenance of more than one sexually oriented
business in the same building, structure, or portion thereof, or the increase
of floor area of any sexually oriented business in any building, structure, or
portion thereof containing another sexually oriented business.
   E.   For the purpose of Subsection B of this section, measurement shall be
made in a straight line, without regard to the intervening structures or
objects, from the nearest portion of the building or structure used as the part
of the premises where a sexually oriented business is conducted, to the nearest
property line of the premises of a use listed in Subsection B. The presence of
a City, County or other political subdivision boundary shall be irrelevant for
purposes of calculating and applying the distance requirements of this section.
   F.   For purposes of Subsection C of this section, the distance between any
two sexually oriented businesses shall be measured in a straight line, without
regard to the intervening structures or objects or political boundaries, from
the closest exterior wall of the structure in which each business is located.
1.   Editor's Note: Amended during codification (see
Ch. 1, General Provisions, Part 2).
§ 473-114. Nonconforming uses; amortization.
   A.   Any sexually oriented business (lawfully operating on the effective
date of this chapter), that is in violation of §
473-113 shall be deemed a nonconforming use. The three existing businesses:
Al's Diamond Cabaret, 1810 North 50th Street; The Second Story Lounge, 612
Franklin Street; and the Reading Adult Outlet, 316 Penn Street, shall be
grandfathered for location only and will be permitted to operate in their
current locations; however, all other provisions of this chapter apply and are
enforceable. The nonconforming use will be permitted to continue, unless
terminated for any reason or voluntarily discontinued for a period of 30 days
or more. Such nonconforming uses shall not be increased, enlarged, extended, or
altered except that the use may be changed to a conforming use. If two or more
sexually oriented businesses are within 1,000 feet of one another and otherwise
in a permissible location, the sexually oriented business which was first
established and continually operating at a particular location is the
conforming use and the later established business(es) is/are nonconforming.
   B.   Any sexually oriented business lawfully operating on the effective date
of this chapter that is in violation of §
473-113, but located in an area zoned for commercial highway as defined in
Chapter 600, Zoning, of the Code of the City of Reading, shall be deemed a
nonconforming use and shall be allowed to continue operating as long as this
business is in compliance with all other requirements of this chapter governing
sexually oriented businesses.
   C.   Sexually oriented business lawfully operating as a conforming use is
not rendered a nonconforming use by the location, subsequent to the grant or
renewal of the sexually oriented business license, of a use listed in §
473-113B within 1,000 feet of the sexually oriented business. This provision
applies only to the renewal of a valid license, and does not apply when an
application is made for a license after the applicant's previous license has
expired or been revoked.
§ 473-115. Additional regulations for adult motels.
   A.   Evidence that a sleeping room in a hotel, motel, or a similar
commercial enterprise has been rented and vacated two or more times in a period
of time that is less than 10 hours creates a rebuttable presumption that the
enterprise is an adult motel as that term is defined in this chapter.
   B.   It is unlawful if a person, as the person in control of a sleeping room
in a hotel, motel, or similar commercial enterprise that does not have a
sexually oriented business license, rents or subrents a sleeping room to a
person and, within 10 hours from the time the room is rented, he rents or
subrents the same sleeping room again.
   C.   For purposes of Subsection B of this section, the terms "rent" or
"subrent" mean the act of permitting a room to be occupied for any form of
consideration.
   D.   Violation of Subsection B of this section shall constitute a
misdemeanor.
§ 473-116. Additional regulations for escort agencies.
   A.   An escort agency shall not employ any person under the age of 21 years.
   B.   A person commits an offense if the person acts as an escort or agrees
to act as an escort for any person under the age of 21 years.
   C.   It shall be an offense for a person, while acting as an escort, nude or
seminude, to touch a patron or the clothing of a patron, or for a patron to
touch a nude or seminude escort or the clothing of a seminude escort or for the
escort to touch a nude or seminude patron or the clothing of a seminude patron.
   D.   Violation of this section shall constitute a misdemeanor.
§ 473-117. Additional regulations for nude model studios.
   A.   A nude model studio shall not employ any person under the age of 21
years.
   B.   A person under the age of 21 years commits a misdemeanor if the person
appears seminude or in a state of nudity in or on the premises of a nude model
studio. It is a defense to prosecution under this subsection if the person
under 21 years was in a rest room not open to the public view or visible by any
other person.
   C.   A person commits a misdemeanor if the person appears in a state of
nudity, or with knowledge, allows another to appear in a state of nudity in an
area of a nude model studio premises which can be viewed from the public right-
of-way.
   D.   A nude model studio shall not place or permit a bed, sofa, or mattress
in any room on the premises, except that a sofa may be placed in a reception
room open to the public.
§ 473-118. Additional regulations concerning public nudity.
   A.   It shall be a misdemeanor for a person who, with knowledge and intent,
appears in person in a nude or seminude condition in a sexually oriented
business, unless the person is an employee who, while nude or seminude, is at
least 10 feet from any patron or customer, and on a stage raised at least two
feet from the floor (upholding ten-foot distance requirement).
   B.   It shall be a misdemeanor for an employee, while nude or seminude, to
solicit any pay or gratuity from any patron or customer on the sexually
oriented business premises.
   C.   No patron shall directly give any gratuity to any entertainer. A patron
who wishes to give a gratuity to a performer shall place the gratuity in a
container that is at all times located separately from the performers for the
purpose of preventing any physical contact between a patron and a performer.
   D.   It shall be a misdemeanor for an employee, while nude or seminude, to
touch a patron or the clothing of a patron, or for a patron to touch a nude or
seminude employee or the clothing of a nude or seminude employee, while the
employee is on the sexually oriented business premises.
§ 473-119. Regulations pertaining to exhibition of sexually explicit films and
videos.
   A.   A person who operates or causes to be operated a sexually oriented
business, other than an adult motel, which exhibits on the premises in a
viewing room of less than 150 square feet of floor space, a film,
videocassette, or other video reproduction, that depicts specified sexual
activities or specified anatomical areas, shall comply with the following
requirements:
      (1)   Upon application for a sexually oriented business license, the
application shall be accompanied by a diagram of the premises showing a plan
thereof specifying the location of one or more manager's stations and the
location of all overhead lighting fixtures and designating any portion of the
premises in which patrons will not be permitted. A manager's station may not
exceed 32 square feet of floor area. The diagram shall also designate the place
at which the business license will be conspicuously posted, if granted. A
professionally prepared diagram in the nature of an engineer's or architect's
blueprint shall not be required; however, each diagram should be oriented to
the north or to some designated street or object and should be drawn to a
designated scale or with marked dimensions sufficient to show the various
internal dimensions of all areas of the interior of the premises to an accuracy
of plus or minus six inches. The Director may waive the foregoing diagram for
renewal applications if the applicant adopts a diagram that was previously
submitted and certifies that the configuration of the premises has not been
altered since said diagram was prepared.
      (2)   The application shall be sworn to be true and correct by the
applicant.
      (3)   No alteration in the configuration or location of a manager's
station may be made without the prior approval of the Director or his designee.
      (4)   It is the duty of the owners and operator of the premises to ensure
that at least one employee is on duty and situated in each manager's station at
all times that any patron is present inside the premises.
      (5)   The interior of the premises shall be configured in such a manner
that there is an unobstructed view from a manager's station of the entire area
of the premises to which any patron is permitted access for any purpose,
excluding rest rooms. Rest rooms may not contain video reproduction equipment.
If the premises has two or more manager's stations designated, then the
interior of the premises shall be configured in such a manner that there is an
unobstructed view of the entire area of the premises to which any patron is
permitted access for any purpose from at least one of the manager's stations.
The view required in this subsection must be by direct line of sight from the
manager's station.
      (6)   It shall be the duty of the operator, and it shall also be the duty
of any agents and employees present in the premises, to ensure that the view
area specified in Subsection A(5) of this section remains unobstructed at all
times. No doors, walls, partitions, curtains, merchandise, display racks, or
other object(s) shall obstruct from view of the manager's station any portion
of the premises to which patrons have access. It shall be the duty of the
operator, and it shall also be the duty of any agents and employees present in
the premises, to ensure that no patron is permitted access to any area of the
premises that has been designated as an area in which patrons will not be
permitted, as designated in the application filed pursuant to Subsection A(1)
of this section.
      (7)   The premises shall be equipped with overhead lighting fixtures of
sufficient intensity to illuminate every place to which patrons are permitted
access at an illumination of not less than five footcandles as measured at the
floor level.
      (8)   It shall be the duty of the operator, and it shall also be the duty
of any agents and employees present in the premises, to ensure that the
illumination described above is maintained at all times that any patron is
present in the premises.
      (9)   No viewing room or booth may be occupied by more than one person at
any time.
      (10)   No opening of any kind shall exist between viewing rooms or
booths.
      (11)   It shall be the duty of the operator, and it shall also be the
duty of any agents and employees present in the premises, to ensure that no
more than one person at a time occupies a viewing booths or rooms, and to
ensure that no person attempts to make an opening of any kind between the
viewing booths or rooms.
      (12)   The operator of the sexually oriented business shall, each
business day, inspect the walls between the viewing booths to determine if any
openings or holes exist.
      (13)   The operator of the sexually oriented business shall cause all
floor coverings in viewing booths to be nonporous, easily cleanable surfaces,
with no rugs or carpeting.
      (14)   The operator of the sexually oriented business shall cause all
wall surfaces and ceiling surfaces in viewing booths to be constructed of, or
permanently covered by, nonporous, easily cleanable material. No wood, plywood,
composition board or other porous material shall be used within 48 inches of
the floor.
   B.   A person having a duty under Subsection A(1) through (14) of this
section commits a misdemeanor if he/she, with knowledge, fails to fulfill that
duty.
§ 473-120. Exterior portions of sexually oriented businesses.
   A.   It shall be unlawful for an owner or operator of a sexually oriented
business to allow the merchandise or activities of the establishment to be
visible from a point outside the establishment.
   B.   It shall be unlawful for the owner or operator of a sexually oriented
business to allow the exterior portion of the sexually oriented business to
have flashing lights, or any words, lettering, photographs, silhouettes,
drawings, or pictorial representations of any manner except to the extent
permitted by the provisions of this chapter.
   C.   It shall be unlawful for the owner or operator of a sexually oriented
business to allow exterior portions of the establishment to be painted any
color other than a single achromatic color. This provision shall not apply to a
sexually oriented business if the following conditions are met:
      (1)   The establishment is a part of a commercial multiunit center.
      (2)   The exterior portions of each individual unit in the commercial
multiunit center, including the exterior portions of the business, are painted
the same color as one another or are painted in such a way so as to be a
component of the overall architectural style or pattern of the commercial
multiunit center.
   D.   Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to require the painting of
an otherwise unpainted exterior portion of a sexually oriented business.
   E.   A violation of any provision of this section shall constitute a
misdemeanor.
§ 473-121. Signage.
   A.   Notwithstanding any other City ordinance, code, or regulation to the
contrary, it shall be unlawful for the operator of any sexually oriented
business or any other person to erect, construct, or maintain any sign for the
sexually oriented business other than the one primary sign and one secondary
sign, as provided herein.
   B.   Primary signs shall have no more than two display surfaces. Each such
display surface shall:
      (1)   Not contain any flashing lights.
      (2)   Be a flat plane, rectangular in shape.
      (3)   Not exceed 75 square feet in area.
      (4)   Not exceed 10 feet in height or 10 feet in length.
   C.   Primary signs shall contain no photographs, silhouettes, drawings or
pictorial representations in any manner, and may contain only the name of the
enterprise.
   D.   Each letter forming a word on a primary sign shall be of solid color,
and each such letter shall be the same print type, size and color. The
background behind such lettering on the display surface of a primary sign shall
be of a uniform and solid color.
   E.   Secondary signs shall have only one display surface. Such display
surface shall:
      (1)   Be a flat plane, rectangular in shape.
      (2)   Not exceed 20 square feet in area.
      (3)   Not exceed five feet in height and four feet in width.
      (4)   Be affixed or attached to any wall or door of the enterprise.
   F.   The provisions of Subsections B(1), C and D shall also apply to
secondary signs.
   G.   Violation of any provision of this section shall constitute a
misdemeanor.
§ 473-122. Sale, use or consumption of alcoholic beverages prohibited.
   A.   The sale, use, or consumption of alcoholic beverages on the premises of
a sexually oriented business is prohibited.
   B.   Any violation of this section shall constitute a misdemeanor.
§ 473-123. Persons younger than 21 years prohibited from entry; attendant
required.
   A.   It shall be unlawful to allow a person who is younger than 21 years of
age to enter or be on the premises of a sexually oriented business at any time
the sexually oriented business is open for business.
   B.   It shall be the duty of the operator of each sexually oriented business
to ensure that an attendant is stationed at each public entrance to the
sexually oriented business at all times during such sexually oriented
business's regular business hours. It shall be the duty of the attendant to
prohibit any person under the age of 21 years from entering the sexually
oriented business. It shall be presumed that an attendant knew a person was
under the age of 21 unless such attendant asked for and was furnished:
      (1)   A valid operator's, commercial operator's, or chauffeur's driver's
license.
      (2)   A valid personal identification certificate issued by the State of
Pennsylvania and a picture identification card reflecting that such person is
21 years of age or older.
   C.   Violation of this section shall constitute a misdemeanor.
§ 473-124. Massages or baths.
It shall be unlawful for any sexually oriented business, regardless of whether
in a public or private facility, to operate as a massage salon, massage parlor,
spa, or sexual encounter center, or any similar type business. Violation of
this section shall constitute a misdemeanor.
§ 473-125. Hours of operation. 2
No sexually oriented businesses, except for an adult motel, may remain open at
any time between the hours of 12:00 midnight and 6:00 a.m.
2.   Editor's Note: Amended during codification (see
Ch. 1, General Provisions, Part 2).
§ 473-126. Exemptions.
   A.   It is a defense to prosecution under this chapter that a person
appearing in a state of nudity did so in a modeling class operated:
      (1)   By a proprietary school licensed by the State of Pennsylvania, a
college, junior college, or university supported entirely or partly by
taxation.
      (2)   By a private college or university that maintains and operates
educational programs in which credits are transferable to a college, junior
college, or university supported entirely or partly by taxation.
   B.   Notwithstanding any other provision in this chapter, movies rated G,
PG, PG-13, or R by the Motion Picture Association of America (MPAA), or live
theatrical performances with serious artistic, social, or political value, that
depict or describe specified anatomical areas or specified sexual activities,
are expressly exempted from regulation under this chapter.
§ 473-127. Notices.
   A.   Any notice required or permitted to be given by the Director or any
other City office, division, department or other agency under this chapter to
any applicant, operator or owner of a sexually oriented business may be given
either by personal delivery or by certified United States mail, postage
prepaid, return receipt requested, addressed to the most recent address as
specified in the application for the license, or any notice of address change
that has been received by the Director. Notices mailed as above shall be deemed
given upon their deposit in the United States mail. In the event that any
notice given by mail is returned by the postal service, the Director or his
designee shall cause it to be posted at the principal entrance to the
establishment.
   B.   Any notice required or permitted to be given to the Director by any
person under this chapter shall not be deemed given until and unless it is
received in the office of the Director.
   C.   It shall be the duty of each owner who is designated on the license
application and each operator to furnish notice to the Director in writing of
any change of residence or mailing address.
§ 473-128. Injunction.
A person who operates or causes to be operated a sexually oriented business
without a valid operator's license, or in violation of §
473-113 of this chapter, is subject to a suit for injunction as well as
prosecution for criminal violations. Each day a sexually oriented business so
operates is a separate offense or violation.
Chapter 479
SIDEWALK CAFES
§
479-101.   Purpose.
§
479-102.   Permit required.
§
479-103.   Definitions.
§
479-104.   Unlawful to operate without registering.
§
479-105.   Issuance of permit; display.
§
479-106.   Design standards and regulations.
§
479-107.   Regulations.
§
479-108.   Permit fees.
§
479-109.   Application requirements.
§
479-110.   Review of application.
§
479-111.   Conditions for issuance of permit.
§
479-112.   Removal of improvements.
§
479-113.   Permit renewal.
§
479-114.   Written notice of violations; revocation of permit.
§
479-115.   Violations and penalties; effect on eligibility for permit.
§
479-116.   Determination on application.
§
479-116.1   Review and appeals.
§
479-117.   Reservation of rights.
[HISTORY: Adopted by the City Council of the City of Reading 5-29-2007 by Ord.
No. 34-2007 (Ch. 10, Part 15, of the 2001 Code of Ordinances). Amendments noted
where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Construction codes — See
Ch. 180.
Noise — See
Ch. 387.
Streets and sidewalks — See
Ch. 508.
§ 479-101. Purpose.
The City of Reading City Council encourages an attractive, functional and
economically vital community and shopping areas that are safe and pleasant
environments to live near and to do business within. Council recognizes that
commercial development is a major identifying feature in a community, offering
impressions to residents and visitors alike of the quality of life available.
It is Council's intent to encourage commercial growth that contributes to a
vibrant and attractive community. As the current Code does not allow sidewalk
cafes due to public health and safety concerns, Council believes that these
activities can greatly contribute to a pedestrian- friendly community if they
conform to specific public health and safety requirements defined herein.
§ 479-102. Permit required.
No person shall engage in the operation of a sidewalk cafe, without first
applying for and obtaining a permit from the City of Reading Codes Enforcement
Office and then operating within the terms and conditions of all applicable
City ordinances. The sidewalk cafe permit enables a restaurant to have outdoor
dining, consistent with the terms herein, between April 15 and October 15 of
each calendar year.
§ 479-103. Definitions.
For the purpose of this chapter, the following terms shall have the following
meanings:
   ABUTTING PROPERTY — Property contiguous to a public street right-of-way on
which a sidewalk cafe will be operated under the terms of this chapter.
   CITY ENGINEER — The Director of Public Works or his authorized
representative.
   COMMERCIAL CORE — The zoning district defined as the downtown center for
government services, offices, shopping, hotels, entertainment and cultural
activity.
   HEALTH OFFICER — The Health Officer of the City of Reading Codes Enforcement
Office or his authorized representative.
   MINI CAFE — A sidewalk cafe comprised of bistro tables which seats no more
than four persons, does not serve alcohol and is without service from wait
staff.
   OWNER — Includes any owner of fee simple title, part owner, joint owner,
tenant in common, tenant in partnership, joint tenant or tenant by the entirety
of the whole of the land contiguous to the street right-of-way on which a
sidewalk cafe is to be operated under the authority of this chapter.
   PEDESTRIAN WALKWAY — That portion of a sidewalk area which is free of any
obstruction, fixture or appurtenance and is used for pedestrian travel.
   PERSON — Includes a partnership, corporation, association, trust, estate or
other legally recognized entity, as well as an individual.
   PUBLIC SERVICE FACILITY — A public telephone, mailbox, bench or other
facility provided for the use of the general public.
   RESTAURANT — A food service establishment where food is purchased and served
in individual portions for consumption on the premises. This term shall not
include an establishment which operates exclusively as a caterer, a commissary,
a food processing establishment, a mobile food unit, a retail food store or a
temporary food service establishment.
   SIDEWALK — Any paved area between the curbline and a structure, whether
publicly or privately owned, which is used by the public or open to use by the
public.
   SIDEWALK CAFE — An outdoor dining area operated by a restaurant, generating
65% of its annual revenue from food sales, serves alcohol, has tables that seat
two or more patrons, provides wait staff for its patrons and is located on a
sidewalk area or other designated public place and containing removable tables,
chairs, plants and related appurtenances, which is not located on or does not
encroach upon the pedestrian walkway as established under the provisions of
this chapter. It shall not be enclosed by fixed walls and shall be open to the
air, except that it may have a canopy. It may, but is not required to, abut its
sponsoring restaurant.
   STREET RIGHT-OF-WAY — The entire right-of-way of a public highway, public
alley or public road, including the designated sidewalk areas.
§ 479-104. Unlawful to operate without registering.
   A.   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, corporation, transient
merchant, church, club, charitable institution, hawker or peddler to vend, sell
or dispose of or offer to vend, sell, dispose of or display, any food, goods,
wares, merchandise, produce or vegetables on any public walk, street, alley or
anywhere within the City of Reading without registering with the City Codes
Enforcement Office and the Tax Division.
   B.   The phrase "sidewalk cafe" in this chapter will be applied to both
sidewalk cafes and mini cafes unless otherwise stated.
§ 479-105. Issuance of permit; display.
The Codes Enforcement Office is hereby authorized to grant revocable permits
for the use of the sidewalks for sidewalk cafes in the Commercial Core Zoning
District upon the following terms and conditions. Registration shall be on a
permit approved by the City Council. When the Codes Enforcement Office has
approved the issuance of a sidewalk cafe permit, the applicant shall be issued
a permit. The permit shall contain the information required on the application,
the expiration date, and one of the photographs submitted with the application.
The permit shall be carried by the applicant at all times when engaged in
sidewalk cafe activities and shall be exhibited for inspection for any person.
   A.   The applicant shall comply with all of the terms and conditions for a
sidewalk cafe permit, set forth in this chapter, including, without limitation,
the indemnification, and insurance requirements. 1
   B.   The applicant shall delineate the cafe area with a removable physical
barrier separating patrons from pedestrian traffic. The delineation and layout
of the cafe area shall be consistent with the site plan submitted by the
applicant.
   C.   No sidewalk cafe may be operated except:
      (1)   As an accessory to a restaurant or retail food store lawfully
operating on the first floor of the premises.
      (2)   On the sidewalk in front of the principal place of business of such
entity.
      (3)   By the entity which operates the restaurant or retail food store.
   D.   Sidewalk cafes shall operate only during the hours that the facility's
kitchen is open for service, but not after 11:00 p.m.
   E.   Furnishings of a sidewalk cafe shall consist solely of readily
removable umbrellas, covers, railings, tables, chairs, planters containing live
plants, waste receptacles and accessories. Furnishings may not be attached,
even in a temporary manner, to the sidewalk or other public property or to any
building or structure. All furnishings shall be removed from the sidewalk and
stored in an approved manner when the sidewalk cafe is not in operation.
   F.   All food must be prepared within the existing restaurant or retail food
store upon which the cafe permit has been granted.
   G.   The applicant shall be responsible for obtaining, maintaining in full
force and effect and complying with the terms and conditions of any permit
which may be required under any other law or regulation for the serving of food
or beverages, including alcoholic beverages, at a sidewalk cafe.
   H.   Sidewalk cafes, the public property on which they are located and the
surrounding area shall at all times be kept free and clear of litter, debris
and any substance that may damage the sidewalk or cause pedestrian injury.
   I.   The applicant shall maintain a sufficient number of receptacles for the
disposal of waste, properly covered to prevent infestation by insects. Such
receptacles shall be emptied as often as is necessary, but in no event less
than once per day.
   J.   All sidewalk cafes and attendant facilities shall be inspected by the
Codes Enforcement Office or his designee and the Public Works Director or his
designee prior to the issuance of a sidewalk cafe permit.
   K.   Acceptance of a sidewalk cafe permit is an express acknowledgment and
consent to the terms and restrictions set by this chapter and the Health
Officer. The grant and usage of such permit is a privilege, not a right,
subject to reasonable restrictions as set out herein or as may be promulgated
by the regulatory authority.
   L.   As an express condition of the acceptance of a permit hereunder, the
recipient agrees to police for trash and debris in an area extending 15 feet in
each direction from the outermost portion or boundary of the sidewalk cafe at
least twice daily.
1.   Editor's Note: Amended during codification (see
Ch. 1, General Provisions, Part 2).
§ 479-106. Design standards and regulations.
All sidewalk cafes shall comply with the following standards:
   A.   A sidewalk cafe shall have a pedestrian walkway with a clear
unobstructed width of three feet between the sidewalk cafe and any obstacle
(tree, pole, post, sign, planting area, bus shelter, etc.). The pedestrian
walkway shall be provided with an unobstructed height of seven feet between the
ground plane and an overhead obstacle (tree branch, overhead sign, awning,
etc.).
   B.   No sidewalk cafe may be permanently located within the sidewalk area by
means of raised deck platform, fence, walls or other structures or enclosed by
fixed walls, except that sidewalk cafe boundaries may be delineated by the use
of temporary barriers such as balustrades, cordons or railings. Any such
temporary barriers must be easily removed and three feet or less in height
above the sidewalk. Under no circumstances shall temporary barriers as
authorized hereunder be allowed in the identified pedestrian walkway, nor shall
a temporary barrier be affixed to the sidewalk or to any permanent structure,
except that it may be attached by removable clips or devices approved in
advance by the City Engineer.
   C.   The City Engineer may approve temporary platforms or similar structures
for the sole purpose of leveling sidewalk cafe areas on which sidewalk cafes
are located.
   D.   No sidewalk cafe shall be situated:
      (1)   Within six feet of any pedestrian crossing as defined in the City
of Reading Code.
      (2)   Within five feet along the street line of any fire hydrant or other
emergency facility.
      (3)   Within five feet of any driveway.
      (4)   Within 10 feet to the rear of any sign marking a designated bus
stop.
      (5)   In a manner which restricts sight easements of vehicular traffic.
      (6)   In a manner which obstructs traffic control devices or traffic
signs.
   E.   All sidewalk cafes shall be open to the air.
   F.   Canopies and awnings may be permitted in accordance with
specifications, as delineated by the City Building Code 2  and
Chapter 600, Zoning, which relate to height, placement, interference with
pedestrian passage and traffic sight easements. HARB approval may be required.
   G.   Sidewalk cafes shall in no way obstruct the ingress to or the egress
from any building or business.
   H.   All sidewalk cafes and their attendant facilities or improvements shall
comply with clearances required for structures in relation to utility lines as
provided in the City Building Code.
   I.   No sidewalk cafe shall be located on the sidewalk between the building
facade and a bus stop.
   J.   No portion of a sidewalk cafe or its facilities, appurtenances,
planters, shrubs, tables, chairs or other materials shall be permitted in the
pedestrian walkway as defined in this chapter.
   K.   Sidewalk cafes shall provide and maintain adequate lighting in and
around the pedestrian walkway so as to allow sidewalk users to observe and
avoid obstructions.
   L.   Sidewalk cafes shall not obstruct access to hydrants, streetlights,
telephones, mailboxes, transit stops or any other public service facility on
the sidewalk area or street.
   M.   No signs shall be hung or attached to any portion of the sidewalk cafe,
except those signs that are in compliance with provisions of
Chapter 600, Zoning.
   N.   A sidewalk cafe may be expanded to an abutting property with the
written permission of that abutting property owner.
   O.   In the event that the proposed sidewalk cafe is not in front of a
restaurant or abutting property, the applicant must provide written permission
from the owner of the property and reasonable procedures that a sidewalk cafe
can be operated in a noncontiguous location.
2.   Editor's Note: See
Ch. 180, Construction Codes.
§ 479-107. Regulations.
A sidewalk cafe authorized and operated pursuant to this chapter shall:
   A.   Comply with all plans submitted to and approved by the Codes
Enforcement Office.
   B.   Serve alcoholic beverages only in conformance with Pennsylvania Liquor
Control Board requirements.
   C.   Operate only during the same hours that the kitchen is open for
service. All patrons must be vacated from the sidewalk cafe and all utensils,
containers or any other serving materials used in the operation of the sidewalk
cafe or within the area used by the sidewalk cafe shall be removed from the
sidewalk cafe area within one hour after the kitchen closes; provided, however,
that any railing, flooring or other support or enclosure used in the assembly,
operation or enclosure of the sidewalk cafe may be allowed to remain on the
sidewalk area if specifically permitted in the Code Enforcement Office's
approval of the sidewalk cafe plans as described under §
479-107 below.
   D.   Remove all sidewalk cafe structures by October 30, and not install
prior to April 1, in any year for which a permit is granted.
      (1)   In the event that favorable weather conditions should prevail, a
sidewalk cafe may temporarily reopen on a daily basis during the time period
set forth in Subsection D above, with the approval of the Codes Enforcement
Office. All tables, chairs and other materials must be removed every day by
sundown.
   E.   Use no food serving or food service equipment to hold, store, heat,
warm, cool, chill or otherwise keep food to be served outside of the sponsoring
restaurant for use in or by a sidewalk cafe.
   F.   Serve no food or beverages to a patron at a sidewalk cafe unless that
patron is seated at a table.
      (1)   If the sidewalk cafe is located adjacent to the sponsoring
restaurant, in lieu of Subsection E above, the following is allowed:
         (a)   Self-service by patrons, without table service.
         (b)   Facilities for standing instead of sitting.
   G.   Play no music, from whatever source (acoustical, electric, or other) on
the premises outdoors, except in conformance within
Chapter 387, Noise, of the Code of the City of Reading.
   H.   Police for trash and debris an area extending 15 feet in each direction
from the outermost portion or boundary of the sidewalk cafe at least twice
daily. 3
   I.   Comply with all other provisions of the Code of the City of Reading.
3.   Editor's Note: Amended during codification (see
Ch. 1, General Provisions, Part 2).
§ 479-108. Permit fees. 4
Permit fees shall be as provided in
Chapter 212, Fees. There shall be no prorating or rebating of permit fees.
4.   Editor's Note: Amended during codification (see
Ch. 1, General Provisions, Part 2).
§ 479-109. Application requirements.
Each applicant for a permit under this chapter shall submit three copies of his
application and plans for the sidewalk cafe to the Codes Enforcement Office,
who shall issue a permit upon compliance with the terms and conditions of this
chapter. Application must be made within 14 business days prior to the intended
start date. Applications for sidewalk cafe permits shall include the following:
   A.   The name and street address of the applicant.
   B.   The name and street address of the owner of the sidewalk cafe, of the
owner of the underlying freehold and/or abutting property owner, if not the
same person, and:
      (1)   A description of the owner of the abutting property, if other than
a natural person, including the legal status (corporation, partnership, etc.)
and a general description of the type(s) of business operated on the abutting
property.
      (2)   Letter from the abutting property showing their support for the
operation of a sidewalk cafe.
      (3)   Written authority in the form of a power of attorney from the owner
to submit the application if the applicant is not the owner of the abutting
property.
   C.   The name and street address of the registered agent for the service of
process, if the applicant represents a corporation; or the names and street
addresses of the officers or partners, if the applicant represents an
association, partnership or other entity.
   D.   The name and street address of the operator, manager or other person
responsible for the operation of the sidewalk cafe.
   E.   The name under which the sidewalk cafe will be operated.
   F.   The street address and the City food establishment permit number of the
restaurant operating and servicing the sidewalk cafe.
   G.   A copy of the current City business permit.
   H.   A site plan drawn to a scale of 1/2 inch equals one foot, showing:
      (1)   The entirety of the sidewalk abutting the property of the owner.
      (2)   The frontage of the property proposed for the sidewalk cafe.
      (3)   All abutting properties.
      (4)   All existing sidewalk features including, but not limited to,
trees, utility poles, sign poles, fire hydrants, permanent litter receptacles,
telephone booths, news vending racks and mailboxes.
      (5)   Any bus stops within 25 feet on either side of the proposed
sidewalk cafe area.
      (6)   Detailed drawings of legible proportions showing the limits of the
proposed sidewalk cafe site, the design dimension and proposed location of all
proposed temporary structures (i.e., canopies, umbrellas, planters,
landscaping, tables, chairs, all exterior lighting, electrical outlets, etc.),
the proposed pedestrian walkway and the side and front elevations of the
proposed sidewalk cafe.
   I.   The seating capacity of the proposed sidewalk cafe.
   J.   A copy or copies of the certificate or certificates of insurance
required to be provided.
   K.   If the serving of alcoholic beverages is proposed, a copy of the
current state liquor license that will allow or can be amended to allow
applicant to serve alcoholic beverages in the sidewalk cafe.
§ 479-110. Review of application.
   A.   Before any permit is issued pursuant to this chapter, the plans
submitted to the Codes Enforcement Office pursuant to this chapter shall be
referred to and approved by the Public Works Director, Reading Police
Department and Department of Fire and Rescue Services.
   B.   The Codes Enforcement Office shall determine if the applicant has:
      (1)   Obtained the approval of the Public Works Director and Building
Official for any railing, flooring or other support or enclosure used in the
assembly, operation or enclosure of the sidewalk cafe. No such railing,
flooring or other support or enclosure shall be considered an erection of,
addition to or a structural alteration of a building or structure under
applicable City Building Code unless such railing, flooring or other support or
enclosure is permanently attached to such building or structure.
      (2)   Obtained the approval of the Historical Architectural Review Board
(HARB) if the sidewalk cafe is located within any area designated as part of an
historic district and if the applicant proposes any facilities which are under
the jurisdiction of the HARB. The HARB shall use the review criteria for such
plans relating to a sidewalk cafe's specific location, size and structure, for
its compatibility of scale and design. Alteration in the plans for a sidewalk
sale approved by the HARB requires reapproval from the HARB. Once approval is
granted by the HARB, the approved plans are valid and do not require annual
reapproval. The HARB shall only review applications which have the written
approval from the Public Works Director as specified herein. 5
      (3)   Complied with all rules, regulations and specifications of this
chapter.
   C.   The Codes Enforcement Office may impose any other restriction on the
location, size or design of the sidewalk cafe that, in his sole judgment,
protects the health, safety and welfare of the public.
5.   Editor's Note: Amended during codification (see
Ch. 1, General Provisions, Part 2).
§ 479-111. Conditions for issuance of permit.
   A.   Upon approval by the Codes Enforcement Office of the plans submitted by
the applicant and upon the applicant furnishing to the City of Reading the
following, the Codes Enforcement Office shall issue a permit, valid through the
end of the calendar year:
      (1)   A hold-harmless agreement executed by the applicant and
indemnifying the City against loss, including costs and expenses, resulting
from injury to person or property as a direct or indirect result of the
operation of the sidewalk cafe. Said hold-harmless agreement shall be subject
to the approval of the City Solicitor.
      (2)   Proof of liability insurance in the amount of $500,000 per
individual and $100,000,000 per occurrence.
      (3)   If applicable, proof that the applicant has a State liquor license
authorizing him to serve alcoholic beverages in his/her sidewalk cafe.
   B.   Sidewalk cafe permits are not transferable. Changes in ownership/
operation require reapplication for a permit.
§ 479-112. Removal of improvements.
   A.   If the City incurs any costs in removing any equipment or improvements
from a sidewalk cafe for the following reasons: the establishment failed to
remove equipment at the close of the business day, the establishment went out
of business or the establishment failed to renew its permit, within 30 days of
the close of the outdoor season, the City shall remove and store all equipment
and bill the property owner for the actual costs of labor, materials, equipment
or any other item, service, including storage costs, or expense incurred by the
City to correct such violation, plus any additional administrative fees. The
equipment removed shall remain in the City's possession until the bill for
removal and any fines or fees are paid in full.
   B.   Any bill for such removal of equipment undertaken pursuant to this
section shall be billed to and paid by the property owner within 60 days. Upon
failure of the property owner to pay the amounts due within 60 days, the City
shall assess this uncollected debt on the property taxes of this building.
§ 479-113. Permit renewal.
A sidewalk cafe permit may be renewed annually, upon review of the renewal
application and complaint history, if any, which shall be provided by the Codes
Enforcement Office, Reading Police Department, Department of Public Works, and
Department of Fire and Rescue Services, Bureau of Police. Each agency shall
provide to the Codes Enforcement Office copies of any inspection results,
complaints filed and citations issued concerning the sidewalk cafe under
consideration. The renewal fee for the renewed permit shall be as stipulated in
§ 379-108 above.
§ 479-114. Written notice of violations; revocation of permit.
[Amended 9-11-2017 by Ord. No. 87-2017]
   A.   Upon finding by either the Codes Enforcement Office or Reading Police
Department that an applicant has violated any provisions of this chapter, the
Codes Enforcement Office shall give written notice to the applicant to correct
said operational violation. The Codes Enforcement Office shall, in his/her sole
judgment, give a violator reasonable time to repair any structural damage or
physical violation of any provision of this chapter. Upon failure to correct
said operational violation within the time frame specified, the Codes
Enforcement Office may take appropriate action, as necessary, to maintain the
pedestrian walkway.
   B.   The Codes Enforcement Office may revoke the applicant's permit issued
pursuant to this chapter, as well as pursue prosecution in accordance with the
requirements herein.
§ 479-115. Violations and penalties; effect on eligibility for permit.
[Amended 9-11-2017 by Ord. No. 87-2017]
   A.   Whoever violates any provisions of this chapter shall, upon conviction
thereof in a summary proceeding, be fined not less than $200 and not more than
$1,000 for each offense, to be collected as other fines and costs are by law
collectible, or imprisoned for not more than 90 days, or both. Each day during
which a violation occurs shall constitute a separate offense.
   B.   Any person who fails to remove a sidewalk structure by October 30, as
provided for in §
479-107, may not be eligible for a permit in any following year.
   C.   This chapter and the foregoing penalties shall not be construed to
limit or deny the right of the City or any person to such equitable or other
remedies as may otherwise be available with or without process of law.
§ 479-116. Determination on application.
The Codes Enforcement Office shall grant or deny an application for a permit
pursuant to this chapter within 10 business days of its complete submission.
§ 479-116.1. Review and Appeals.
[Adopted 9-11-2017 by Ord. No. 87-2017]
Any person directly affected by a decision of the code official or a notice or
order issued under this code, shall have the right to appeal to the Code and
License Board of Appeals, as per City Code Section 23 Part 14 with a fee set
out in
Chapter 212, provided that a written application for appeal is filed with the
Property Maintenance Division Manager within 15 days after the day the
decision, notice or order was served. An application for appeal shall be based
on a claim that the true intent of this code or the rules legally adopted
thereunder have been incorrectly interpreted, the provisions of this code do
not fully apply, or the requirements of this code are adequately satisfied by
other means. If the Code and License Appeals Board approves the appeal, the
appeal fee shall be refunded.
§ 479-117. Reservation of rights.
Neither the adoption of this chapter nor the granting of any permit pursuant
hereto shall be construed as a waiver of any right, privilege or immunity of
the City of Reading with respect to streets and sidewalks, whether express or
implied. 6
6.   Editor's Note: Original § 10-1518, Penalties for offenses, which
immediately followed this section, was repealed during codification (see
Ch. 1, General Provisions, Part 2).
Chapter 485
SIGNS
Part 1
Political Campaign Matter
§
485-101.   Definitions.
§
485-102.   Placing of political campaign matter.
§
485-103.   Violations and penalties.
Part 2
Roadside and Utility Pole Signs
§
485-201.   Legislative intent.
§
485-202.   Definitions.
§
485-203.   Temporary signs.
§
485-204.   Duration of posting.
§
485-205.   Consent of owner.
§
485-206.   Registration, permit and fees.
§
485-207.   Accountability of sponsor.
§
485-208.   Conflict with other provisions.
§
485-209.   Removal procedure for unpermitted signs.
§
485-210.   Public nuisance.
§
485-211.   Notice.
§
485-212.   Enforcement.
§
485-213.   Violations and penalties.
[HISTORY: Adopted by the City Council of the City of Reading as indicated in
part histories. Amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Construction codes — See
Ch. 180.
Zoning — See
Ch. 600.
Part 1
Political Campaign Matter
[Adopted 6-7-1972 by Ord. No. 26-1972 (Ch. 19, Part 1, of the 2001 Code of
Ordinances)]
§ 485-101. Definitions.
As used in this Part, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
   POLITICAL CAMPAIGN MATTER — Decals, posters, flyers, cards and other printed
material, published or printed by or behalf of candidates, committees,
political parties or committees for political parties, for the election of
candidates to political office or for the furtherance of the candidacy of a
candidate or slate of candidates for political office or for any issue to be
voted on by the electorate as certified by the County Board of Elections.
§ 485-102. Placing of political campaign matter.
No person shall affix political campaign matter to any private or public real
or personal property, including but not limited to utility poles, traffic
standards, parking meters, exterior of walls and store windows, billboards and
other surfaces, without first having secured the consent of the person or
persons owning, leasing or in control or custody of the property upon which
said political campaign matter is placed, except that in the case of utility
poles, the public utility shall not have the right to give such consent without
prior approval of the Council of the City of Reading.
§ 485-103. Violations and penalties. [Amended 5-29-2001 by Ord. No. 14-2001]
Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any provision of this Part
shall be, upon conviction thereof, sentenced to pay a fine of not more than
$600 plus costs and, in default of payment of said fine and costs, to a term of
imprisonment not to exceed 30 days. Each day that a violation continues shall
constitute a separate offense.
Part 2
Roadside and Utility Pole Signs
[Adopted 3-12-2001 by Ord. No. 5-2001; amended in its entirety 3-22-2010 by
Ord. No. 8-2010 (Ch. 19, Part 2, of the 2001 Code of Ordinances)]
§ 485-201. Legislative intent.
The City Council makes the following findings:
   A.   Unauthorized signs along City roads and on utility poles are a danger
because they are intended to distract motor vehicle operators and because they
often obstruct views of other vehicles.
   B.   Unauthorized signs along City roads spoil the natural beauty that is an
invaluable asset treasured by residents, commuters and visitors.
   C.   Residents, commuters and visitors have frequently asked City Council
members what could be done to eliminate roadside signs including, but not
limited to, signs supporting candidates for elected public and labor union
offices and signs soliciting for a variety of business interest.
§ 485-202. Definitions.
For the purpose of this Part, the following definition shall apply unless the
context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning:
   ELECTION — Any regularly scheduled primary or general election, or any
special election authorized by the Election Board of the County of Berks.
   POLITICAL SIGN — Any temporary sign which publicizes the candidacy or
promotes the election of any contestant for elected public office, or which
advocates a particular position on any referendum appearing on an election
ballot.
   SIGN — Any surface, fabric or device bearing lettered, pictorial or
sculptured matter designed to convey information visually and exposed to public
view; or any structure including bill board or poster panel designed to carry
the above visual information.
   SPECIAL EVENT SIGN — Any temporary sign announcing an upcoming event,
whatsoever in nature. This does not include yard or garage sale signs.
   SPONSOR OF A SIGN —
   A.   For a political sign, the contestant for elected public office whose
candidacy is advertised on the sign or, if applicable, the committee or
organization promoting the election of said contestant; or the individual,
group, organization or other entity listed on the sign as advocating the
advertised position on a referendum.
   B.   For a special event sign, the individual, organization, corporation,
government body, or other entity listed on the sign as the producer, promoter,
or offeror of the event advertised.
   C.   For a yard or garage sale sign, the individual, family, or other entity
residing at the address listed on the sign.
   STREET LIGHT STANDARD — Any pole or standard to which is attached a device
used for illuminating a street, sidewalk, or other portion of any public right-
of-way.
   TEMPORARY SIGN — A sign, poster, placard, or other advertising device
pertaining to an event at a fixed and limited time or duration and intended for
a limited period of display.
   UTILITY POLE — Any pole or standard owned, maintained, serviced, or in any
other way utilized by any regulated public utility, and located within the
corporate limits of the City of Reading.
   YARD OR GARAGE SALE SIGN — Any temporary sign announcing an upcoming public
sale of items taking place at a private residence. This shall include, but not
be limited to, yard sales, garage sales, and porch sales.
§ 485-203. Temporary signs.
Temporary signs are prohibited as follows:
   A.   No temporary sign shall be affixed to any utility pole or streetlight
standard by means of nails, tacks, staples, or any other metal or hard
substance or so as to cover the identifying label of the pole.
   B.   No temporary sign affixed to any utility pole or streetlight standard
shall have a glue, gum backing or other adhesive backing.
   C.   No temporary sign shall exceed 30 inches in height or 24 inches in
width.
   D.   No temporary sign shall be affixed in any manner to any tree or shrub
in the public right- of-way.
   E.   No temporary sign shall be posted on City property.
   F.   No temporary sign shall be so posted or constructed as to impair,
impede, or otherwise obstruct the free flow of pedestrian or vehicular traffic
along a public right-of-way by any pedestrian or vehicle operator.
   G.   No temporary sign shall be posted on any traffic control device.
   H.   No yard or garage sale sign which does not include the address and date
of the sale may be posted.
§ 485-204. Duration of posting.
   A.   Political signs may not be posted to a utility pole or streetlight
standard earlier than 45 days prior to an election. Such signs shall be removed
within seven days following the election.
   B.   Special event signs may not be affixed to a utility pole or streetlight
standard earlier than 30 days prior to the event advertised. Such signs shall
be removed within seven days following the event. In cases where a special
event sign lists more than one event, the sign shall be removed within seven
days following the last event listed.
   C.   Yard or garage sale signs may not be affixed to a utility pole or
streetlight standard earlier than three days prior to the sale advertised. Such
signs shall be removed within 24 hours following the close of the sale.
§ 485-205. Consent of owner.
This Part shall not be construed to grant permission to any person, entity,
organization or corporation to use any utility pole or other property for the
posting of signs, nor shall it be considered to infer the consent of the owner
thereof.
§ 485-206. Registration, permit and fees.
   A.   No person shall post temporary signs without first registering the name
and mailing address of the sponsor of said sign in the Codes Office. Such
registration shall not be construed to grant permission to post temporary signs
on the property of another without said property owner's consent.
   B.   For signs to be posted, a permit must be obtained in the Codes Office
stating the applicant's name, address, telephone number, and the purpose of the
sign. The fee shall be set as provided in
Chapter 212, Fees. 1
1.   Editor's Note: Added during codification (see
Ch. 1, General Provisions, Part 2).
§ 485-207. Accountability of sponsor.
   A.   In all cases in which temporary signs are posted, it shall be the
responsibility of the sponsor of the sign to insure that each sign is posted
and removed in accordance with the provisions of this Part.
   B.   If any signs are found to have been posted in violation of this Part,
or to have remained posted beyond the specified time period for removal of
signs, the sponsor of the signs shall be liable to punishment under the terms
of this Part.
§ 485-208. Conflict with other provisions.
This Part shall not be in conflict with
Chapter 180, Construction Codes, and
Chapter 600, Zoning, of the Code of the City of Reading.
§ 485-209. Removal procedure for unpermitted signs.
Any sign found to violate this Part may be removed forthwith by the Department
of Public Works employees or by any other City employee. If the sign is located
upon a state or County right-of-way, the City may notify the designated state
or county authorities of the pending violation.
§ 485-210. Public nuisance.
Any sign posted in violation of this Part is hereby declared to be a nuisance.
In addition to any other remedy provided by this Part, the City may apply to a
court of competent jurisdiction for an injunction to prohibit the continuation
of any violation.
§ 485-211. Notice.
The Zoning Office is authorized to send written notices to individuals or
organizations that have violated this Part or who may be inclined to do so in
the future, including candidates for elected office.
§ 485-212. Enforcement.
Codes Enforcement, Zoning, and the Police Department shall be responsible for
enforcing all provisions of this Part.
§ 485-213. Violations and penalties.
   A.   A violation of this Part shall be a summary offense. Each sign in
violation of this Part shall constitute a separate offense. The owner of the
sign and/or any person who caused the violation of this Part shall be subject
to the prosecution and fine.
   B.   Any person or persons who violate(s) any provisions of this Part and
who fails to comply with any requirements within seven days of being sent
notice shall be guilty of a violation. A fine of $10 shall be paid for the
first violation of each sign and a fine of $5 for each sign shall be paid for
each day thereafter that a violation continues.
Chapter 496
SOLID WASTE
Part 1
Dumpster and Trash Receptacle Placement
§
496-101.   Definitions.
§
496-102.   General.
§
496-103.   Conditions of use.
§
496-104.   Screening all dumpsters and trash receptacles permitted to be
visible from the public right-of-way.
§
496-105.   Existing dumpsters, toters/carts/receptacles in the public right-of-
way.
§
496-106.   Permits, fees and fines.
§
496-107.   Administration; violations and penalties.
§
496-108.   Administrative appeals.
Part 2
Storage and Collection
§
496-201.   Definitions.
§
496-202.   Administration.
§
496-203.   Municipal collection fee.
§
496-204.   Mandatory recycling.
§
496-205.   Mandatory solid waste and recycling requirements.
§
496-206.   Municipal collection.
§
496-207.   Non-interference with existing contracts.
§
496-208.   Private collection.
§
496-209.   Ownership of solid waste and recyclable materials.
§
496-210.   Licensed haulers.
§
496-211.   Collection vehicles.
§
496-212.   Administration; violations and penalties.
[HISTORY: Adopted by the City Council of the City of Reading as indicated in
part histories. Amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Reading Downtown Improvement District Authority — See
Ch. 14, Part 5.
Property maintenance — See
Ch. 180, Part 14.
Health code — See
Ch. 288, Part 1.
Historic districts — See
Ch. 295.
STATE LAW REFERENCES
Solid Waste Management Act — See Ch. 35 P.S. § 6018.101 et seq.
Part 1
Dumpster and Trash Receptacle Placement
[Adopted 7-13-2005 By Ord. No. 38-2005; Amended In Its Entirety 5-14-2007 By
Ord. No. 23-2007; Amended In Its Entirety 12-13-2021 by Ord. 87-2021 (Ch. 20,
Part 2, Of The 2001 Code Of Ordinances)]
§ 496-101. Definitions.
[Amended 7-25-2016 by Ord. No. 26-2016]
The following words and phrases, when used in this Part, shall have, unless the
context clearly indicates otherwise, the meanings given to them in this
section:
BUSINESS DAY — That part of any day on which City Hall is open to the public
for carrying on substantially all of its functions.
CART/TOTER/RECEPTACLE — Any container which is made of rigid plastic, with two
wheels, which is intended to be mechanically emptied and used for the purpose
of temporarily holding refuse with a maximum capacity of ½ cubic yard or 96
gallons. [Amended 4-28-2025 by Ord. No. 28-2025]
COMMERCIAL PROPERTY — A property relating to or connected with trade and
traffic or commerce in general or a property which includes six or more
separate residential dwelling units. [Amended 4-28-2025 by Ord. No. 28-2025]
CURBLINE — The line in the public right-of-way, constructed or proposed, as
shown on the Official Map, that separates the portion of the public right-of-
way dedicated to vehicular traffic from that dedicated to pedestrian traffic.
DUMPSTER/ROLL-OFFS — Any container with a lid used for the purpose of storing
refuse until the scheduled collection day with a capacity of one cubic yard
(202 gallons) or greater. The container's lid shall be closed at all times
except when placing refuse into container or container contents are being
placed into a disposal collection vehicle. [Amended 4-28-2025 by Ord. No. 28-
2025]
HAULER — Any person or company with a valid state hauler's license, who
collects, transports or disposes of recyclables, solid waste or refuse.
LICENSED HAULER — One with a valid state hauler's license to own and service
dumpsters and/or rents dumpsters or toters to another. [Amended 8-26-2013 by
Ord. No. 35-2013; 4-28-2025 by Ord. No. 28-2025]
LESSEE — A property owner or agent thereof who leases a dumpster or toter from
a licensed hauler as defined herein.
OBSTRUCTION — Any structure or other object whatsoever that, in any manner,
impedes, obstructs or otherwise limits or prevents that full and unrestricted
use whatsoever, by the public, of any public right-of-way.
OFFICIAL MAP — The topographical map of Reading, Pennsylvania, on file in the
Engineering Office.
PASSABLE — Free of any impediment or obstruction, whatsoever, that would hinder
the travel of the public.
PERMANENT DUMPSTER — Any dumpster (of three cubic yards or less) intended to be
used for an undetermined period of time for the purpose of solid waste storage.
PERSON — Any individual, partnership, corporation, association, institution,
cooperative enterprise, municipal authority, federal government or agency,
state institution or agency, or any other legal entity whatsoever.
PRIVATE PROPERTY — Any land and the improvements thereon owned by any person
and includes front, side and rear yards; vacant lots, buildings and other
structural improvement; walkways and alleyways; and parking areas, designed or
used either wholly or in part for private residential, industrial or commercial
purposes, whether inhabited or temporarily or continuously uninhabited or
vacant, including any yard, grounds, walk, driveway, porch, steps, vestibule or
mailbox belonging or appurtenant to such dwelling, house, building or other
structure.
PROPERTY OWNER/LESSEE — Any person who owns or leases a dumpster, toter or cart
from a hauler with a valid State license as defined herein or who applies and
receives a permit for permanent placement of a permanent trash receptacle in
the public right-of-way.
PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY (ROW) — See §
180-1202 Property Maintenance Rules & Regulations.
PUBLIC VIEW — Visible from the public right-of-way. [Amended 4-28-2025 by Ord.
No. 28-2025]
RESIDENTIAL — A property designed for people to live in. [Amended 4-28-2025 by
Ord. No. 28-2025]
SCREENING — Covering to obscure dumpsters, toters and/or carts (all trash
receptacles) from public view by the installation of shrubbery, an opaque fence
no higher than six (6) feet, unless a higher structure is required to
adequately screen the dumpster, a shed or other such device as approved by the
City of Reading Public Works Solid Waste Division and Zoning Office. [Amended
6-26-2023 by Ord. No. 51-2023 ; 4-28-2025 by Ord. No. 28-2025]
SIDEWALK — That portion of the sidewalk area for which paving is required by
Chapter 508, Streets and Sidewalks, Part 5, Sidewalks and Curbs.
SIDEWALK AREA — That portion of the public right-of-way occurring between the
curbline and the topographical building line or the established edge of the
roadway. (For the purpose of this Part).
STREET PROPERTY LINE — The line that is coincident to and identical with the
line marking the extremity of the public right-of-way as shown on the Official
Map of the City of Reading.
TEMPORARY DUMPSTER — Any dumpster or roll-off dumpster intended to be used for
a specified period of time for the purpose of construction, demolition or
rehabilitation project waste storage.
TOPOGRAPHICAL BUILDING LINE — The property line as shown on the Official Map of
the City of Reading.
TRASH BAG — Any trash bag more than one mil thick holding from 30 to 55 gallons
which is properly tied. [Amended 4-28-2025 by Ord. No. 28-2025]
TRASH CAN/DRUM — Any container under 95 gallons, but not less than 30 gallons,
with a lid and in any other way differs from a cart.
TRASH RECEPTACLE — All containers used for the storage of trash.
VIOLATION TICKET — A form issued by a police officer or public officer to a
person who violates a provision of this Part. The violation ticket is an offer
by the City of Reading extended to a person to settle a violation by paying the
fine in lieu of a citation being issued against the violator as per §
180-1202.
§ 496-102. General.
[Amended 6-13-2022 by Ord. No. 51-2022; 4-28-2025 by Ord. No. 28-2025]
   A.   Dumpster, cart, toter, or trash receptacle lessees, owners, or
permittees shall be responsible for keeping the area around the container clean
and sanitary as required by herein, Health Code Regulations (
Chapter 288, Part 1) and the Property Maintenance Code (
Chapter 180, Part 14).
   B.   Permanent dumpster, cart, toter, or trash receptacles shall not be
located in public right-of-way, or areas visible from public right-of-way,
unless permitted by the Solid Waste Division. The property owner or lessee
shall make application for permanent dumpsters through the Solid Waste
Division. Permanent dumpsters, carts, toters or trash receptacles permitted to
be placed on private property require a zoning permit and the submission of a
site plan showing the location of dumpsters and the proposed screening, as per
Zoning Ordinance § 600-916.
      (1)   Dumpsters of three cubic yards or greater may not be placed on
sidewalk.
      (2)   Dumpsters of three cubic yards or less may not be placed in the
street.
      (3)   All dumpsters, permanent and temporary shall maintain, on the
outside of each dumpster in legible letters not less than three (3) inches in
height, the owner's name or company logo, telephone number, and the dumpster
permit issued by the Solid Waste Division for such container. All dumpsters
shall be fitted with Department of Transportation regulated reflective tape in
a vertically stripped fashion on each of the four corners from the top of the
base (or bottom), extending around each corner by a minimum of two feet.
   C.   Temporary dumpsters for construction, demolition or rehabilitation
projects shall be permitted by the Building/Trades Division. A temporary
construction trailer permitted to be placed on private property requires a
zoning permit as per Zoning Ordinance §
600-604-A and the submission of a site plan showing the location of dumpsters,
as per Zoning Ordinance §
600-916.
   D.   Each property shall have no more than one toter or cart per unit to a
maximum of three toters or carts per address that shall not exceed 95 gallons
each stored within the public right-of-way or visible from the public right-or-
way. All dumpsters, carts, toters, or trash receptacles permitted to be in the
public right-of-way or visible from the public right-or-way shall be screened
as per this section. Permanent dumpsters, carts, toters or trash receptacles
permitted to be placed within the public right-of-way or visible from the
public right-of-way require a zoning permit and submission of a site plan
showing the location of dumpsters, along with the proposed screening, as per
Zoning Ordinance §
600-916.
   E.   The fee schedules for temporary dumpsters and permanent dumpsters,
carts and toters located in the public-right of way, or visible from public
rights-of-way can be found in City Code §
212-138.
   F.   Emptying - All dumpsters, carts, toters, and trash receptacles are
required to be emptied at least once a week. If they contain "non-grindable"
food waste, they should be emptied every three days. [Additional collection(s)
may be required by the City.].
   G.   Cleaning. Dumpsters should be kept clean, in good repair, and free of
offensive odors. They should be cleaned a minimum of two times a year.
(Additional cleaning may be required by the City.) Cleaning dumpsters on the
street or sidewalk is not permitted and will constitute a violation.
   H.   Persons who do not comply with the Provisions of this Part may be fined
or otherwise penalized in accordance with §
496-107 Administration; violations and penalties, herein, and may also have
their Business Privilege License revoked. Dumpsters, carts, toters, and trash
receptacles placed on the public right-of-way without a valid permit will be
presumed to be abandoned and subject to removal.
§ 496-103. Conditions of use.
[Amended 6-13-2022 by Ord. No. 51-2022; 4-28-2025 by Ord. No. 28-2025]
      A.   Placement and maintenance of carts, toters and receptacles and
dumpsters/rolloffs.
      (1)   (a)   Carts, toters and receptacles shall be located in the rear of
properties and may not be visible from the public right-of-way. No permit is
required for these receptacles.
         (b)   Permanent dumpsters on private property outside public view
require a zoning permit, and the submission of a site plan showing the location
of the dumpster, as per Zoning Ordinance §
600-916. A copy of the zoning permit shall be sent to the Solid Waste Division.
      (2)   Toters/carts/receptacles shall not be stored within the public
right-of-way on commercial, industrial property, or residential property unless
it has been determined by the Property Maintenance Division and Department of
Public Works that no other location is available for trash storage. Permits for
toters/carts/receptacles located within the public right-of-way shall be issued
by theSolid Waste Division. The permit shall be placed on the toters/carts/
receptacles. All receptacles (dumpsters, carts, toters, or trash receptacles)
permitted to be in the public right of way shall be screened as per this
section.
      (3)   Permanent dumpsters, toters carts and receptacles stored within the
public right-of-way also require a zoning permit and the submission of a site
plan showing the location of dumpsters, along with the proposed screening as
per Zoning Ordinance §§
600-916 and
496-104. Screening all dumpsters and toters/carts/receptacles permitted to be
visible from the public right-of-way. The permitting process for placement and
screening must be completed within 60 days and the installation of the
screening must be completed within six months.
      (4)   Historic districts.
         (a)   No permanent toters/carts/receptacles shall be allowed on any
public right-of-way or be allowed to be visible from any public right-of-way in
any area designated as a historic district as per
Chapter 295, Historic Districts. Where it is preclusive to place toters/carts/
receptacles out of view of the public right-of-way as a result of the design of
the structure, the location of placement of the toters/carts/receptacles shall
be determined and a permit issued by the Solid Waste Division accordingly upon
consultation with the Public Works Department, the Property Maintenance
Division and Historic Preservation Officer. Issuance of a permit for placement
of a container in a historic district within the view of the public right- of-
way is subject to
Chapter 295, Historic Districts, where appropriate.
         (b)   All dumpsters, carts, toters, or trash receptacles permitted to
be in the public right of way shall be screened as per this section and
approved by the Zoning Administrator as per Zoning Ordinance §
600-916 requiring a site plan showing the location of the toters/carts/
receptacles. Issuance of a permit for placement of a trash receptacle and
screening structures in a historic district with the view of the public right
of way is subject to
Chapter 295, Historic Districts, where appropriate.
      (5)   Commercial Core Zoning District.
         (a)   No permanent dumpster, toters/carts/receptacles shall be
installed in any public right-of-way or be visible from any public right-of-way
within the Commercial Core Zoning District without review and approval by the
Department of Public Works, Historic Preservation Specialist (subject to
Chapter 295, Historic Districts, where appropriate) and the Property
Maintenance Division and a permit issued by the Solid Waste Division. The
permit shall be placed upon the receptacle. Issuance of a permit for placement
of a dumpster, toters/carts/receptacles in a historic district within view of
the public right-of-way is subject to
Chapter 295, Historic Districts, where appropriate.
         (b)   All dumpsters, carts, toters, or trash receptacles permitted to
be in the public right-of- way shall be screened as per this section and
approved by the Zoning Administrator as per Zoning Ordinance §
600-916 requiring a site plan showing the location of the dumpster, toters/
carts/receptacles. Issuance of a permit for placement of a dumpster, toters/
carts/receptacles and screening structures in a historic district within the
view of the public right of way is subject to
Chapter 295, Historic Districts, where appropriate.
   B.   Identification. The owner of the dumpster, toters/carts/receptacles
shall place and maintain, on the outside of each dumpster, toters/carts/
receptacles in legible letters not less than one inch in height, the owner's
name, address dumpster, toters/carts/receptacles is servicing (if private) the
permit issued by the Solid Waste Division for such receptacle, where
applicable.
   C.   Maintenance. Each dumpster, toters/carts/receptacles shall be covered
at all times by a clean, leak-proof, proper fitting and functioning lid. All
dumpster, toters/carts/receptacles shall not be loaded at any time in such a
manner to constitute overloading thereby preventing suitable required covering.
   D.   Clearance requirements. Permitted dumpster, toters/carts/receptacles
shall not obstruct or otherwise limit or prevent the full and unrestricted use
of any public right-of-way. Minimum sidewalk clearances of five feet must be
retained at all times.
   E.   Set-out requirements. Carts, toters and receptacles may be placed
temporarily at curbside directly in front of the property being serviced no
earlier than 5:00 p.m. the day before and shall be removed from the public
right-of-way by 8:00 p.m. the day of scheduled refuse collection. [Amended 12-
9-2013 by Ord. No. 70-2013]
   F.   Temporary dumpsters. [Amended 9-12-2011 by Ord. No. 40A-2011; 5-14-2012
by Ord. No. 53-2012]
      (1)   Temporary dumpsters. Temporary dumpsters, incidental to
construction, rehabilitation or demolition work, may be placed within the
public right-of-way, or on private property, for a maximum of 10 days after
receipt of the necessary permit by the Building Trades Division. The permit
shall be displayed in the window of the property or posted on the dumpster so
that it is easily recognizable from the public right-of-way. It shall be the
responsibility of the state licensed hauler to obtain and display required
permits. The property owner or lessee shall also ensure that all temporary
dumpsters containing refuse, whether placed on private property or within a
public right-of-way, are covered with a suitable cover or tarpaulin during:
periods of nonuse; night hours (6:00 p.m. to 6:00 a.m.); and high-wind
conditions in order to prevent unauthorized use and/or scattering of any
contents therein. It shall be the responsibility of the state licensed hauler
to cover the dumpster during transport. The City shall have the right to
impound any unpermitted dumpster at the cost of the property owner and/or the
state licensed hauler as per §
496-102E. and 107 herein.
§ 496-104. Screening all dumpsters and trash receptacles permitted to be
visible from the public right-of-way.
[Amended 4-28-2025 by Ord. No. 28-2025]
Screening of all dumpsters and toters/carts/receptacles shall be required for
the purpose of improving the aesthetic and functional quality of every City
neighborhood. This part shall apply to all permitted permanent dumpsters,
carts, toters and trash receptacles located within public view, new and
existing.
   A.   Screening area requirements: all screening areas for permanent
dumpsters and permanent toters/carts/receptacles permitted to be in the public
right of way shall be approved by the Public Works Department and Zoning
Administrator (or Historic Preservation Specialist, where required by this
part) on a form approved by the Zoning Administrator and the Public Works
Director according to a submitted site plan as regulated by the applicable
requirements of this section and the Zoning Ordinance. Screening areas shall be
designed, and maintained according to the following:
      (1)   Screening materials shall be made of durable materials made to
endure severe weather conditions.
      (2)   Screening materials shall be structurally sound and may include but
are not limited to the following:
         (a)   Vinyl, painted wood, cedar, fencing excluding chain link fences
for permanent dumpsters and receptacles - chain link style fences may be used
for temporary dumpsters.
         (b)   Industrial/commercial grade plastic or composite fiber mesh
materials (plastic tarps are not permitted).
         (c)   Live vegetation that provides full screening but that does not
exceed four (4) feet in height. Such vegetation must be regularly maintained by
the property owner and allow the unobstructed use of the public right-of-way.
         (d)   Permanent masonry walls made from material that is similar in
appearance to the main structure as approved by the Building/Trade Division
when applicable and the Historical Architectural Review Board when the property
is located within a historic district.
      (3)   The screening shall be no higher than six (6) feet, unless a higher
structure is required to adequately screen the dumpster and all screening
structures shall have an opening with a self-latching gate that will allow the
regular emptying of the dumpster, cart, toter or receptacle. [Amended 6-26-2023
by Ord. No. 51-2023]
      (4)   Any gate(s) shall remain closed except when being serviced.
      (5)   Any screening structure(s) shall be well maintained, remain
operable and in good repair.
   B.   Site plans for Screening - this section shall supersede Zoning
Ordinance
600-1303A.
      (1)   May be hand drawn to scale or electronically generated consisting
of the dimensions, and representation of the structure.
      (2)   Shall show the location of the structure that:
         (a)   Provides five (5) feet of open, clear space between the
structure and the curb.
         (b)   Is at least six (6) feet from the property line.
         (c)   The Zoning Administrator and Public Works Director shall approve
the location of all structures in writing prior to the installation of the
structure.
         (d)   The Public Works Director shall be provided with the discretion
to authorize plans that fall outside the scope of this section if no other
option is available to the property owner or lessee.
   C.   Compliance for existing permanent dumpsters. Compliance with screening
requirements for existing permanent dumpsters within the public right-of-way:
      (1)   Property owners with existing permitted permanent dumpsters within
the public right-of-way shall have the screening installed by October 1, 2025,
as per §
496-105 below.
      (2)   Property owners with existing unpermitted permanent dumpsters
within the public right-of-way shall obtain permits for screening and have the
screening installed by November 1, 2026, as per §
496-105 below.
      (3)   All property owners who are not in compliance with these
regulations as listed above shall be charged the following assessment. This
assessment is apart and separate from the revocation of business privilege
license as per §
496-102H. and the violations and fines that can be ordered by the Judicial
System as per §
496-107. The assessments will be billed to the property owner and are due
within 15 days of the date of the assessment. Liens against the subject
property will be filed for all untimely unpaid assessments.
         (a)   Permitted dumpsters that are not screened by October 1, 2025
shall receive an assessment of $300.
         (b)   Unpermitted dumpsters that remain unpermitted and are not
screened by October 1, 2025 shall receive an assessment of $600.
   D.   Compliance for existing permanent carts/toters/receptacles. Compliance
with screening requirements for existing permanent carts, taters and
receptacles within the public right-of-way.
      (1)   Property owners with existing permitted permanent toters/carts/
receptacles within the public right-of-way shall obtain permits for screening
and have the screening installed by October 1, 2026, as per §
496-105 below.
      (2)   Property owners with existing unpermitted permanent toters/carts/
receptacles within the public right-of-way shall obtain permits for screening
and have the screening installed by November 1, 2026, as per §
496-105 below.
      (3)   All property owners who are not in compliance with these
regulations as listed in divisions D.(1) and D.(2) above shall be charged an
assessment. This assessment is apart and separate from the revocation of
business privilege license as per §
496-102H. and the violations and fines that can be ordered by the Judicial
System as per §
496-107. The assessments will be billed to the property owner and are due
within 15 days of the date of the assessment. Liens against the subject
property will be filed for all untimely unpaid assessments.
         (a)   Unpermitted toters/carts/receptacles that are not screened by
December 1, 2026 shall receive an assessment of $300.
         (b)   Unpermitted toters/carts/receptacles that remain unpermitted and
are not screened by December 1, 2026 shall receive an assessment of $600.
§ 496-105. Existing dumpsters, carts and toters in the public right-of-way.
[Amended 4-28-2025 by Ord. No. 28-2025]
Dumpsters, carts and toters that currently sit within the public right-of-way
shall comply with the screening requirements and all provisions herein
required. The Public Works Department shall draft a plan to assist property
owners with the cost of these screening requirements which shall be submitted
to Council for approval by resolution. The plan will be effective from April 1,
2022 through December 31, 2026.
§ 496-106. Permits, fees and fines.
[Amended 2-27-2023 by Ord. No. 18-2023; 4-28-2025 by Ord. No. 28-2025]
All revenue generated through the fees required by
Chapter 496 Part 1 Dumpster Placement shall be used to fund the programs and
projects performed by the City's Clean City Program.
   A.   Temporary dumpsters.
      (1)   The cost of the permit shall be as provided in §
212-138, Fees.
      (2)   Permits for temporary dumpsters may be renewed for up to 10
calendar day increments at the sole discretion of the Building Trades Division
if the work is deemed to be in the best interest of the public. Each renewal
permit shall cost equal to the cost of the first 10 calendar days.
      (3)   The permit shall be displayed on the temporary dumpsters for which
the permit was issued.
      (4)   In the event the City incurs costs described herein, an accounting
of such expenses shall be delivered along with a bill to the licensed hauler
and/or the property owner at which time payment to the City shall be due and
payable. This shall have no effect on other action the City may take such as
issuing citations for violations of this Part.
      (5)   The temporary dumpsters may be transferred to other locations
within the City of Reading, as approved by the Building/Trades Division. The
licensed hauler must provide the new service address within one business day
prior to the relocation of service for the license to be transferred without
fee or fine and a new permit will be issued for a 10-day period by the
Building/Trades Division, which must be attached to the dumpster.
   B.   Permanent dumpsters.
      (1)   Permits shall be issued by the Public Works Solid Waste Division
and billed to the property owner and are required for each dumpster in the
public right-of-way in the City of Reading.
      (2)   The permit shall be displayed on the permanent dumpster for which
the permit was issued. The permit shall be issued for a period of one year.
      (3)   The cost of the permit shall be as provided in §
212-138, Fees. These fees are separate from the Zoning Permit Fees as provided
in §
212-147. The lessee shall provide to the City, upon request, a copy of the
lease agreement if applicable and the agreement with the licensed hauler with
schedule of pickup. 1
      (4)   In the event the City incurs costs described herein, an accounting
of such expenses shall be delivered along with a bill to the licensed hauler
and/or the property owner at which time payment to City shall be due and
payable. This shall have no effect on other action the City may take such as
issuing citations for violations of this Part.
   C.   Permanent carts, toters and receptacles.
      (1)   Permits shall be obtained by the property owner or lessee and are
required for each cart, toter or receptacle in the public right-of-way in the
City of Reading. The property owner or lessee applying for a cart, toter or
receptacle permit shall list the address of the property where the cart, toter
or receptacle will be serviced. All carts, toters or receptacles permitted to
be in the public right of way shall be screened as per §
496-103. Conditions of use herein.
      (2)   The permit shall be displayed on the cart, toter or receptacle in a
conspicuous location. The permit shall be issued for a period of one year.
      (3)   (a)   The cost of the cart, toter or receptacle permit shall be as
provided in §
212-138, Fees. These fees are separate from the Zoning Permit Fees as provided
in §
212-147.
         (b)   The property owner or lessee shall provide to the City, a copy
of the lease agreement if applicable and the agreement with the licensed hauler
with schedule of pickup. 2
      (4)   In the event the City incurs costs described herein, an accounting
of such expenses shall be delivered along with a bill to the licensed hauler at
which time payment to City shall be due and payable. This shall have no effect
on other action the City may take such as issuing citations for violations of
this Part.
      (5)   Carts, toters or receptacles are permitted to be stored on private
property without obtaining a permit.
   D.   Property and liability insurance. Prior to the issuance by the City of
any permit or other authority to erect or place, a dumpster, cart, toter or
receptacle in the public right-of-way, the licensed hauler, dumpster owner, or
person requesting such a permit hereof shall execute an indemnification and
hold harmless agreement in such form as the City shall provide, guaranteeing to
defend, protect and compensate the City as a result of any cause of action
which may be brought or perfected against the City in connection to the
dumpster, car, toter or receptacle; or shall deposit with the Law Department of
the City of Reading, a certificate of insurance acceptable to the City
Solicitor covering such licensed hauler for property damages in an amount of
not less than $50,000 for anyone claim, and not less than $100,000 for claims
arising from the same undertaking, as well as public liability insurance in an
amount of not less than $100,000 from anyone claim and not less than $300,000
for more than one claim arising from the same undertaking, such certificate
shall be for continuous coverage unless canceled by the insurance company at
which time the appropriate offices of the City shall be notified, in writing,
by such insurance company.
 
Notes
1 1. Editor's Note: Amended during codification (see
  Ch. 1, General Provisions, Part 2).
2 2. Editor's Note: Amended during codification (see
  Ch. 1, General Provisions, Part 2).
§ 496-107. Administration; violations and penalties.
[Amended 6-13-2022 by Ord. No. 51-2022; 4-28-2025 by Ord. No. 28-2025]
   A.   Regulations. The Manager of the Solid Waste Division may promulgate
such regulations as are necessary for the proper administration and enforcement
of this Part.
   B.   Administrative authority. This Part shall be enforced under the
jurisdiction of the City Property Maintenance and Solid Waste Division.
Enforcement is delegated to and shared with the Property Maintenance Division,
Police Department and the Department of Public Works Solid Waste Division.
   C.   Penalty.
      (1)   Placement without permit.
         (a)   Any person who has placed, places or causes to be placed any
dumpster, cart, toter, or receptacle of any kind in the public right-of-way or
in view from, unless otherwise permitted by this Part, without first obtaining
authorization and a permit from the Solid Waste Division of the City of Reading
upon notice by the City of Reading and failure to comply therewith shall be
subject to the provisions and/or penalty as prescribed by this and any other
applicable ordinance of the City of Reading.
      (2)   Removal of dumpster, cart, toter, or receptacle.
         (a)   Any person who has placed, places or causes to be placed any
dumpster, cart, toter, or receptacle in the public right-of-way, when
alternative storage and collection methods are available, shall immediately
remove such dumpster, cart, toter, or receptacle upon notice by the City and
shall be subject to provisions and/or penalty as prescribed by this or other
ordinances of the City of Reading.
         (b)   The failure of the licensed hauler to remove the dumpster, cart,
toter, or receptacle, upon notice by lessee or by the City to do so, shall be a
violation of this Part and subject to provisions and/or penalty as prescribed
by this or other ordinances of the City of Reading herein.
      (3)   Remedies.
         (a)   All violations of this Part shall be corrected within five days
of notice from the City, or be subject to the penalties below:
            [1]   Whoever violates any provision of this Part shall, upon
conviction thereof in a summary proceeding, be fined a minimum of $100 but not
more than $1,000. If costs and damages are incurred, restitution shall be
awarded to the City in addition to any fines or other penalties awarded herein.
            [2]   Every violator of the provisions of this Part shall be deemed
guilty of a separate offense for each and every day such violation shall
continue and shall be subject to the penalty imposed by this section for each
and every separate offense.
            [3]   Noncompliance with any of the provisions contained within
this Part may result in the removal of any and all receptacles by the City of
Reading or its delegates.
            [4]   Abatement. The City shall have the right to take any and all
steps necessary to abate violations of this Part, and to bill and collect from
any person deemed responsible for such violations, including, but not limited
to, a property owner/lessee, dumpster owner, or licensed hauler.
§ 496-108. Administrative Appeals.
   A.   Any party aggrieved by the aforesaid procedures to abate, bill and
collect costs for the abatement of a violation of this Part shall have the
right to appeal to the Code and License Appeals Board,
Chapter 23, Part 14, by filing an appeal request with the Property Maintenance
Division Manager 15 days after the issuance of the bill for collection of costs
for abatement of the violation. An administrative fee defined in
Chapter 212 Fees shall be charged for each appeal. The appeal fee shall be
refunded if the appeal is approved by the Code and License Appeals Board.
   B.   Appeals to the Code and License Appeals Board shall stay the
enforcement of this part.
   C.   The decision of Code and License Appeals Board may be appealed to the
Court of Common Pleas of Berks County within 30 days after notice of the
decision has been made.
   D.   Nothing in this section shall be construed as to limit the right to
appeal a Summary Conviction for a violation of this Part to the Court of Common
Pleas.
Part 2
Storage and Collection
[Adopted 5-22-2006 By Ord. No. 43-20067 (Ch. 20, Part 1, Of The 2001 Code Of
Ordinances); and Amended and replaced 7-13-2020 by Ord. No. 49-2020]
7.   Editor's Note: Ord. No. 28-2010, Adopted 6-28-2010, Repealed This Part To
The Extent Inconsistent With Or In Direct Contrast To The Property Maintenance
Rules And Regulations, Enacted And Authorized By Ord. No. 28-2010 (
Ch. 180, Part 13).
§ 496-201. Definitions.
[Amended 1-25-2021 by Ord. No. 8-2021; Amended 12-27-2021 by Ord. 98-2021; 6-
27-2022 by Ord. No. 52-2022]
In addition to the definitions in Part 1 Section
496-101 as amended which are hereby incorporated by reference as being more
fully stated herein, the following words and phrases, when used in this Part,
shall have, unless the context clearly indicates otherwise, the meanings given
to them in this section.
BULKY WASTE — Any municipal waste that will not fit into a standard trash
container, such as small furniture, carpet, mattresses, and box springs.
Appliances containing freon must have the freon removed by a certified
technician prior to placement for collection. For safety purposes, doors must
be removed prior to placement for collection.
CART/TOTER — Any container which is made of rigid plastic, with two wheels,
which is intended to be mechanically emptied and used for the purpose of
temporarily holding refuse with a maximum capacity of one-half cubic yard or 96
gallons.
COMMUNITY ACTIVITIES — Events sponsored in whole or in part by a municipality,
or conducted within a municipality and sponsored privately, that are required
to obtain an event permit from the City, which include, but are not limited to
fairs, bazaars, socials, picnics and organized sporting events.
CURBSIDE — The correct location for the placement of material to be collected
as part of the municipal collection program, which shall be:
   A.   On the enrolled property adjacent to the curb;
   B.   Be no more than five feet from the public street, or
   C.   If an accommodation is approved by the City due to the physical
unfeasibility of curbside collection at the property or a property owner or
resident's disability, placement may be made at a specified location such as a
rear alley or other approved location.
CITY — The City of Reading, Berks County, Pennsylvania.
CONSTRUCTION/DEMOLITION WASTE — Solid waste resulting from the construction or
demolition of buildings and other structures including, but not limited to,
wood, plaster, metals, asphalt substances, bricks, block and unsegregated
concrete.
CONTAINER — A hollow object used to hold municipal waste or recycling.
DESIGNATED RECYCLABLE MATERIALS — Source-separated recyclable materials,
specified by §496-205 of this Part, that are designated to be separated for
collection in the City of Reading. Such materials may include, but are not
limited to, clear glass, colored glass, aluminum, steel and bimetallic cans,
high-grade office paper, newsprint, corrugated paper, plastics, leaf waste,
electronic waste, and tires.
DISPOSAL — The incineration, deposition, injection, dumping, spilling, leaking,
or placing of solid waste into or on the land or water in a manner that the
solid waste or a constituent of the solid waste enters the environment, is
emitted into the air or is discharged to the waters of the Commonwealth.
DWELLING UNIT — see
Ch. 180 “Property Maintenance Code” section
202.
ELECTRONIC WASTE — At minimum, waste covering the items defined as 'Covered
Devices' in the PA Covered Device Recycling Act (CDRA), to include desktop and
laptop computers, computer monitors, computer peripherals, and televisions.
Covered devices are prohibited from being placed with Municipal Waste and must
be recycled.
HAZARDOUS WASTE - As fully defined in the Solid Waste Management Act, any waste
that, because of its quantity, concentration, or physical, chemical, or
infectious characteristics may:
   A.   Cause or significantly contribute to an increase in mortality or an
increase in morbidity in either an individual or the total population; or
   B.   Pose a substantial present or potential hazard to human health or the
environment when improperly treated, stored, transported, disposed of or
otherwise managed.
HOUSEHOLD HAZARDOUS WASTE — Portion of municipal waste that would be considered
hazardous under the Solid Waste Management Act but for the fact that it is
produced in quantities smaller than those regulated as hazardous waste under
the Act and is generated by persons not otherwise covered as hazardous waste
generators by the Act. Household Hazardous Waste includes the following
materials and other materials of a similar nature:
   A.   Anti-freeze;
   B.   Batteries;
   C.   Chlorinated hydrocarbons;
   D.   Fluorescent light bulbs and other mercury-containing devices;
   E.   Gasoline and kerosene;
   F.   Grease and rust solvents;
   G.   Oven, toilet and drain cleaners;
   H.   Paints, rust preventatives, stains and wood preservatives;
   I.   Pesticides, fungicides, herbicides, insecticides, rodenticides, roach
and ant killers;
   J.   Photographic and pool chemicals;
   K.   Thinners, solvents and furniture strippers;
   L.   Transmission and brake fluids;
   M.   Used oil or other hydrocarbon based lubricants;
   N.   Wood, metal, rug and upholstery cleaners and polishes.
ILLEGAL DUMPING — The unauthorized depositing, placing, throwing or dumping of
solid waste or recyclable materials on public or private property or at any
location other than a permitted disposal or processing facility.
LICENSED HAULER — A person or entity licensed by the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania to collect, haul, transport, and dispose of solid waste.
MIXED-USE PROPERTY — A property having both nonresidential and residential
units.
MULTI-DWELLING UNITS — All dwelling units in properties housing two or more
total dwelling units.
MUNICIPAL COLLECTION — Collection program, under the direction of the City, for
the collection, disposal, and processing of municipal waste and designated
recyclable materials.
MUNICIPAL ESTABLISHMENT — Public facilities owned or operated by the City of
Reading and other government authorities.
MUNICIPAL WASTE — Any garbage, refuse, rubbish, trash, industrial lunchroom or
office waste and other material including solid, liquid, semisolid or contained
gaseous material resulting from operation of residential, municipal, commercial
or institutional establishments and from community activities and any sludge
not meeting the definition of residual or hazardous waste hereunder from a
municipal, commercial or institutional water supply, treatment plant, waste
water treatment plant, or air pollution control facility. The term does not
include source separated recyclable materials.
NONRESIDENTIAL UNITS — All commercial, municipal, institutional, and other
establishments excluding dwelling units and multi-dwelling units.
PERSON — Any individual, partnership, corporation, association, institution,
cooperative enterprise, municipal authority, federal government or agency,
state institution and agency, or any other legal entity whatsoever which is
recognized by law as being subject to such rights and duties.
PUBLIC RIGHT OF WAY — See §
180-1202 Property Maintenance Rules & Regulations.
RECYCLABLE MATERIAL — Any material which would be municipal waste but, through
source separation, can be collected and processed into raw materials or
products which are beneficially reused.
RECYCLE — The collection, separation, recovery, and sale or reuse of metals,
glass, paper, leaf waste, plastics and other recyclable materials which would
otherwise be disposed or processed as municipal waste; or the mechanized
separation and treatment of municipal waste (other than through combustion) and
creation and recovery of reusable materials (other than a fuel for the
operation of energy).
RESIDENTIAL UNITS — For the purpose of this Part, all dwelling units that are
deemed part of the City's municipal collection program per section §
496-207 of this Part.
RESIDUAL WASTE — As fully defined in the Solid Waste Management Act, any solid
waste, not classified as municipal waste, hazardous waste, or recyclable
materials.
ROOMING HOUSE — See
Ch. 180 Property Maintenance Code section
202.
ROOMING UNIT — See
Ch. 180 Property Maintenance Code section
202.
SCAVENGING — The unauthorized removal of designated recyclable materials from
storage and/or collection containers.
SINGLE STREAM — A subset of recyclable materials, including fibers and
containers, which are separated from municipal waste but are not separated into
individual categories of recyclable materials.
SOLID WASTE — As defined in the Solid Waste Management Act, any waste,
including but not limited to, municipal, residual or hazardous wastes,
including solid, liquid, semisolid or contained gaseous materials. The term
does not include coal ash or drill cuttings.
SOURCE SEPARATE or SOURCE SEPARATION — The separation of recyclable materials
from municipal waste at the point of waste generation.
TIRES — For the purposes of this Part, refers to passenger car, van, and light
truck tires from non-commercial uses, not to exceed 17" diameter, removed from
the rim.
TRASH — See Municipal Waste.
TRASH BAG — Properly tied plastic bags that can hold from 30 to 55 gallons of
refuse and have a minimum thickness of 1 mil used to set out municipal waste
for collection.
TRASH CAN/DRUM — Any container under 95 gallons, but not less than 30 gallons,
with a lid and in any other way differs from a cart.
TRASH RECEPTACLE — All containers used for the storage of trash.
UNITS — Collectively can refer to any of residential units, multi-dwelling
units, nonresidential units, or rooming units.
YARD WASTE — Leaves, garden residues, shrubbery and tree trimmings, and similar
material, but not including grass clippings.
YARD WASTE BAG — A thirty gallon or equivalent biodegradable Kraft paper bag
used for the collection of yard waste.
§ 496-202. Administration.
The municipal waste and designated recyclable material of the residential units
in the City are collected under the direction of the Department of Public
Works.
§ 496-203. Municipal collection fee.
   A.   There is hereby imposed upon the owner of each unit that, pursuant to §
496-207, participates in the City's municipal collection program, an annual
fee, contained in the City Code
Chapter 212, for the collection, transport, and disposal of residential
municipal waste; the collection, transport, and processing/marketing of
designated recyclable materials; and related services.
   B.   The Director of Public Works shall submit an annual report by October 1
to City Council detailing projected expenses and revenues for the upcoming year
and recommend a service fee to cover the costs associated with municipal
collection program to the extent that the costs cannot be covered by grants,
marketing of materials, and program self-sufficiency.
   C.   Senior Discount. All residents of the City of Reading who are sixty
five (65) years of age or over shall be eligible for a discount of this fee on
their principal place of residence, in the amount of 50% of this fee, provided
that:
      (1)   Such residence is a single family dwelling, owned and occupied by
the claimant.
      (2)   A request for senior discount shall be filed with the Department of
Public Works on such form as is provided by the Department for such purpose.
      (3)   The total household income does not exceed the median household
income for the City of Reading as listed in the most recent five-year census
estimate.
      (4)   The Department of Public Works may require such evidence or
information as it deems necessary or appropriate in determining eligibility for
exoneration in accordance with this section.
      (5)   Any information gained by any official, agent or employee of the
City, as a result of any claim, investigations, or hearings required or
authorized by this Part shall be confidential and shall not be disclosed to any
person except for official use in connection with the administration or
enforcement of this ordinance or as otherwise provided by law.
      (6)   False or untrue statements made in an application for a senior
discount shall be a violation of this Part and may be subject to the penalties
for violation of this Part as further set forth herein.
§ 496-204. Mandatory recycling.
   A.   All persons within the City shall source separate and recycle all
designated recyclable materials generated by such person or generated within
any dwelling unit, multi-dwelling unit or nonresidential unit occupied by such
person. [Amended 1-25-2021 by Ord. No. 8-2021]
   B.   Designated recyclable materials shall include:
      (1)   Single stream recycling to include at least three materials chosen
from: clear glass, colored glass, aluminum, steel and bimetallic cans, high-
grade office paper, newsprint, corrugated paper, and plastics;
      (2)   Yard waste; [Amended 12-27-2021 by Ord. 98-2021]
      (3)   Electronic waste;
      (4)   Tires.
   C.   The Public Works Director, or his/her designee, shall determine the
current list of recyclable materials designated as single stream. This
designation process shall consider operations, public education, marketability,
program sustainability, and other conditions when making the City's official
list of designated recyclable materials. Residents can find the current list of
single stream materials by visiting Public Works or the Citizens Service
Center, accessing the Public Works section of the City's website
(www.ReadingPa.gov), or contacting the City.
   D.   Nothing shall preclude individuals, businesses, or other entities from
recycling additional items through private recycling programs or other means
consistent with this Part; however, no additional items shall be accepted for
collection as part of the municipal collection program.
§ 496-205. Mandatory solid waste and recycling requirements.
   A.   It shall be the responsibility of the owner/operator of every property
in the City of Reading to:
      (1)   Ensure its compliance with the requirements of this Part including,
but not limited to, notifying any and all occupants of the requirements hereof
and ensuring their compliance herewith;
      (2)   Ensure that the property is entered into a contract/agreement with
a licensed hauler for the collection of solid waste and recycling or that the
property's solid waste and recycling is collected through the City of Reading
municipal collection program.
      (3)   Permanently post and maintain in each unit, in at least English and
Spanish, up to date information covering the solid waste and recycling rules
and regulations. Alternatively, owners/operators can supply this information to
tenants with a lease agreement. This material is available by visiting Public
Works or the Citizens Service Center, accessing the Public Works section of the
City's website (www.ReadingPa.gov), or contacting the City.
   B.   Location and hours of collection.
      (1)   Residential municipal waste and designated recyclable materials
collection will be restricted to occurring a certain day, within designated
areas of the City, as directed by the Public Works Director, or his/her
designee.
      (2)   All solid waste and designated recyclable materials shall be
collected between the hours of 6:30 a.m. and 8:00 p.m., Monday through Friday;
6:30 a.m. and 11:30 a.m. on Saturdays. No collection shall be permitted on
Sundays.
      (3)   No licensed hauler shall collect solid waste and/or designated
recyclable materials between the hours of 7:30 a.m. to 9:00 a.m. and again
between the hours of 4:00 p.m. and 5:30 p.m. on the following streets:
         (a)   Schuylkill Avenue;
         (b)   Fourth Street south of Buttonwood Street;
         (c)   Fifth Street south of Buttonwood Street;
         (d)   Perkiomen Avenue;
         (e)   Buttonwood Street;
         (f)   Washington Street;
         (g)   Walnut Street;
         (h)   Penn Street;
         (i)   Franklin Street;
         (j)   Mineral Spring Road.
      (4)   The Public Works Director, or his/her designee, may temporarily
alter these collection hours in response to current or predicted severe weather
or other hazardous conditions such as, but not limited to, extreme heat, snow,
flooding, and public health risks.
   C.   Burning. No person shall ignite, cause, feed, permit or maintain any
fire for the destruction of solid waste and/or designated recyclable materials
on or in any property or structure under his control without first having
obtained a permit from the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection.
§ 496-206. Municipal collection.
[Amended 1-25-2021 by Ord. No. 8-2021]
   A.   Authorization for municipal collection.
      (1)   The City, through the Department of Public Works, shall provide for
the collection, transportation, and disposal and/or processing for municipal
waste and designated recyclable materials from all residential units.
Alternatively, the City may contract for part or all of these services.
      (2)   Residential units shall include all dwelling units located in:
         (a)   All residential single family properties;
         (b)   All residential properties with six or fewer dwelling units;
         (c)   Rooming houses with up to 18 rooming units, where three rooming
units are considered equal to one dwelling unit for purposes of this Part;
         (d)   Condominiums, town homes, or similar developments that may be on
a single tract of land but where dwelling units are owned individually;
      (3)   Additionally, owners of mixed-use properties, nonresidential units,
and multi-dwelling unit properties with more than 6 dwelling units not
considered residential units may request the units be part of the municipal
collection and, if the units meet all of the requirements in this subsection
and subsection
496-207(B), and are approved by the City, the units may participate in the
municipal collection program provided that:
         (a)   The owner of the units pays the designated municipal collection
fee or, for the collection of only designated recyclable materials, 50% of said
fee;
         (b)   The owner and occupants of the units follow all rules and
regulations for municipal collection;
         (c)   The units generate no more than the maximum allowed weekly
material for the municipal collection program, as provided in this Part;
         (d)   Waste collection occurs on the property, at the curb, in
approved containers which are serviceable by the residential collection
vehicles;
         (e)   By virtue of the type of business conducted and the type of
waste generated, certain commercial or institutional facilities listed below
shall not be eligible for municipal collection:
            (i)   Auto repair or service station;
            (ii)   Dry cleaner;
            (iii)   Manufacturing, wholesale or warehousing operations;
            (iv)   Cleaning or construction contractor;
            (v)   Medical facilities (including physicians, dentists,
laboratories, etc.);
            (vi)   Funeral homes;
            (vii)   Retail facilities over 5,000 square feet;
            (viii)   Licensed food service establishments;
            (ix)   Commercial or institutional establishments located in strip
shopping centers;
            (x)   Any other entity deemed unsuitable by the Public Works
Director or his/her designee due to its location, the quantity or nature of the
material generated within the facility or any other factor.
      (4)   Exemptions.
         (a)   Condominiums, townhomes, and similar housing developments
serviced by a homeowner's association, or equivalent entity, that coordinates
collection services using consolidated collection areas rather than individual
collection points.
         (b)   Properties not bordering an accessible public street, that would
otherwise be included in the municipal collection program, may be exempted from
inclusion in said program. This decision will be made by the Public Works
Director, or his/her designee.
      (5)   The City may collect solid waste and designated recyclable
materials from municipal establishments.
      (6)   The City is hereby authorized to place public collection containers
on sidewalks within the public right-of-way and to provide collection for said
containers. Alternatively, the City may contract for part or all of this
service.
   B.   Municipal collection requirements.
      (1)   All containers used for municipal collection shall be placed for
collection no earlier than 5:00 p.m. the day before the scheduled collection.
Containers shall be returned to a storage location no later than daybreak on
the day after the scheduled collection.
         (a)   Collection shall be at the curbside in front of the home unless
the property owner is granted an exception as provided in subsection (b) and
(c).
         (b)   The City may provide rear alley collection in certain situations
where said collection is feasible. The collection point for rear alley
collection shall be the rear edge of the property, unobstructed by fences or
other barriers.
         (c)   Residents with documented disabilities, for whom placement of
waste at the designated collection point represents a hardship, may request
accommodation by filing a request with the Department of Public Works on such
form as is provided by the Department for such purpose.
      (2)   Each unit enrolled in the municipal collection program may, per
week, place for collection:
         (a)   Four 30-55 gallon trash bags of municipal waste that have a
thickness of no less than 1 mil, not to exceed 35 pounds each or a trash
receptacle that does not exceed 70 pounds nor 100 gallons; [Amended 6-27-2022
by Ord. No. 52-2022]
         (b)   One bulky waste item not to exceed 200 pounds or one bundle of
construction/demolition waste not to exceed 100 pounds;
         (c)   Single stream recyclable materials;
      (3)   Units enrolled in the municipal collection program must use City-
approved recycling containers.
      (4)   The City shall provide, to units enrolled in the municipal
collection program, one recycling container at no additional cost. This
container shall remain the property of the City and:
         (a)   The property owner/operator shall be responsible for securing
the container;
         (b)   No person other than the City, or its designees, shall
permanently modify such containers;
         (c)   Containers shall be used solely for the storage and collection
of single stream designated recyclable materials;
         (d)   The property owner/operator shall be responsible for the
replacement cost, at the most recent per unit cost encountered by the City, of
such containers modified or removed from the property without the City's
authorization.
      (5)   Units enrolled in the municipal collection program may, by
contacting the City to request service, have the following designated
recyclable materials collected:
         (a)   Electronic waste;
         (b)   Tires;
         (c)   Yard waste properly contained in yard waste bags; [Amended 12-
27-2021 by Ord. 98-2021]
         (d)   The Public Works Director, or his/her designee, shall determine
the limits and procedures for the collection of these items.
§ 496-207. Non-interference with existing contracts.
   A.   Nothing in this Part shall be construed to interfere with or in any way
modify the provisions of any existing contracts which are in force in the City
on the effective date of this Part.
   B.   No renewal or modification of any existing contract upon the expiration
of the original term thereof and no new contract for the collection, storage,
transportation, processing, or purchase of municipal waste or designated
recyclable materials shall be entered into after the effective date of this
Part, unless such renewal or such contract shall conform to the requirements of
this Part.
§ 496-208. Private collection.
   A.   It shall be the responsibility of all property owners/operators not
enrolled in the City's municipal collection program to provide for, at their
own expense, collection services for all solid waste and designated recyclable
materials.
      (1)   It shall be prohibited for property owners/operators to self-haul
solid waste unless the owner/operator is a licensed hauler.
      (2)   Property owners/operators shall contract with a licensed hauler for
collection services.
      (3)   Contracted collection services shall abide by regulations set forth
in §496-210 of this Part.
      (4)   Storage, collection, and disposal services must meet the
requirements of this chapter and all other City codes.
      (5)   The property owner/operator shall provide the City with evidence of
a private contract/agreement with a licensed hauler within 5 days of entering
into a new agreement, or the City may consider the property to have no current
waste hauler.
      (6)   The City reserves the right to periodically request proof of
collection services in the form of a collection contract, invoices, and weight
slips. The City may use the annual customer list provided by a licensed hauler
as sufficient proof of collection service.
   B.   All owners/operators of properties not enrolled in the City's municipal
collection program must establish a recycling program, including suitable
containers in easily accessible locations and instructions to occupants, that
provides for the storage and collection of at least the following recyclable
materials:
      (1)   Multi-dwelling units: all designated recyclable materials; [Amended
1-25-2021 by Ord. No. 8-2021]
      (2)   Nonresidential units: cardboard, aluminum, metal cans, and high
grade office paper. These entities should also recycle any materials commonly
recycled in their industry or trade.
   C.   If an owner/operator of a property not identified as a residential unit
requests but is not approved to add the property to the municipal collection
program, the property owner/operator must maintain an active collection
agreement with a licensed hauler according to the rules in this Part.
   D.   It shall be the responsibility of all sponsors and organizers of
community activities to provide for, at their own expense, solid waste and
designated recyclable material collection services as are appropriate for the
event. Public waste containers and dumpsters are not to be used for waste
disposal from community activities without prior approval by the Public Works
Director, or his/her designee.
   E.   Exemptions.
      (1)   Certain properties may be exempt from the requirement to have an
active solid waste and recycling collection service, provided they meet any of
the following conditions:
         (a)   Vacant lot - property is a vacant lot with no tangible
structure;
         (b)   Side lot - a property that functions as a yard or secondary lot
to an adjacent residence or business, provided that the residence or business
is on the municipal collection program or has an active collection agreement;
         (c)   Surface parking lot - Ground-level parking lots not affiliated
with an adjacent business;
         (d)   Vacant buildings - If a building is deemed vacant, solid waste
and recycling collection services may be suspended only if water service is
suspended. If water service resumes, solid waste and recycling collection
services must also resume.
      (2)   The Public Works Director, or his/her designee, will make final
determination whether a property is eligible for exclusion from collection
services.
   F.   Private collection requirements.
      (1)   All containers used for private collection services that are placed
in the public right-of-way shall be placed there no earlier than 5:00 p.m. the
day before the scheduled collection. Containers placed in the public right-of-
way shall be returned to a storage location no later than daybreak on the day
after the scheduled collection.
      (2)   Owners/operators choosing to self-haul their recyclable materials
shall save all weight slips provided by the processing facility and complete
and return to the City an annual form, made publicly available by the City,
indicating annual recycling tonnage. All self-hauled recyclable materials must
be taken to a recycling facility permitted by the Pennsylvania Department of
Environmental Protection.
§ 496-209. Ownership of solid waste and recyclable materials.
   A.   From the time of placement for collection until the time of pickup by
the licensed hauler, all materials shall remain the property of the generator.
   B.   From the time of collection until the time of disposal or processing,
all materials shall become the property of the licensed hauler or, in the case
of self-transported recycling, the generator.
   C.   No person shall place material of any kind generated at one property
out for collection at another property, regardless of whether the same person
owns both properties.
   D.   Any article found within a container or bag, regardless of location,
that displays the name or address of a person or address, shall be assumed to
be owned by that person or address.
   E.   Owners of material found on properties other than their own shall be
considered responsible for said material and may be cited in accordance with
applicable regulations.
   F.   Litter receptacles shall be used for the purpose of collecting small
items of trash and preventing litter. No person shall deposit household or
business material in or around litter receptacles.
   G.   Scavenging shall be prohibited.
§ 496-210. Licensed haulers.
   A.   Only private licensed haulers, licensed by the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania, may collect or remove solid waste from any property within the
City of Reading.
   B.   Licensed haulers must dispose of solid waste in permitted facilities
according to all applicable regulations.
   C.   Licensed haulers shall make a good faith effort to refrain from picking
up or removing any bag or container of municipal waste known or believed to
contain designated recyclable materials. Upon discovery of such materials
combined with municipal waste, the licensed hauler shall reject the material
and affix a tag or sticker indicating the type of contamination.
   D.   All licensed haulers shall provide, at minimum, one annual bulky waste
item collection per year or provide information to their customers about bulky
waste disposal options.
   E.   Collection and transportation service.
      (1)   Any hauler collecting or transporting solid waste or designated
recyclable materials shall:
         (a)   Prevent and remedy any spillage from their vehicle or
containers;
         (b)   Not transfer material from one collection vehicle to another
within the City;
         (c)   Return the collection container to the premises from which it
was removed;
         (d)   Remedy, within four hours of notification by the City, any
material which, by accident or otherwise, may have been placed or fallen in the
public right-of-way by such hauler.
      (2)   All complaints to licensed haulers regarding the collection or
transport of material, with the exception of complaints concerning the
municipal collection program, shall be made directly to the licensed hauler
responsible for such service.
   F.   In the event of contract termination, it shall be the responsibility of
the licensed hauler servicing a property to empty and remove any collection
containers provided by said hauler.
   G.   Any licensed hauler who desires to place any large storage or
collection container within the public right-of-way shall comply with all City
ordinances including obtaining any necessary permits.
   H.   Reporting responsibility.
      (1)   Licensed haulers.
         (a)   All licensed haulers operating within the City of Reading shall
annually report, at minimum, the following information for each property
serviced to the Department of Public Works of the City of Reading no later than
February 1st:
            (i)   List of all properties serviced;
            (ii)   Day(s) of week each property is serviced;
            (iii)   Property owners/operators name, mailing address, and
telephone number;
            (iv)   Type of service provided (municipal waste or recycling);
            (v)   Type of property (multi-dwelling or commercial); [Amended 1-
25-2021 by Ord. No. 8-2021]
            (vi)   Annual recycling report, which shall be provided by the
City.
         (b)   All licensed haulers operating within the City of Reading shall
notify the City, no later than the 15th of the month, of any properties added
or removed from their service.
         (c)   Failure by a licensed hauler to provide annual reporting or
monthly list of properties added or removed from their service may result in
suspension of hauler's business license and placement of customers on City
trash service, where applicable.
§ 496-211. Collection vehicles.
A.   All owners/operators of vehicles used in the collection or transportation
of municipal waste or residual waste within the City limits shall comply with
all requirements of the PA Waste Transportation & Safety Act, 25 PA Code §285,
and all other relevant laws, rules, and regulations of the Commonwealth.
B.   All collection vehicles transporting solid waste within the City shall:
   (1)   Be designed specifically for the collection and transportation of
solid waste;
   (2)   Be of waterproof construction;
   (3)   Be constructed and maintained in good working condition that limits
hazards and nuisances such as, but not limited to: spills, scattering of
material outside the vehicle, generation and leakage of leachate, odors;
   (4)   Be of safe construction, without attachments, appendages, or other
conditions which could create a significant safety hazard for operators, other
drivers, the general public, or public or private property;
   (5)   Be equipped with a fire extinguisher with a current inspection;
   (6)   Load compartments shall be provided with drain plugs or valves at the
lowest point.
C.   Vehicles not specifically designed for the collection and storage of solid
waste, such as pick-up trucks, box trucks, or other general service vehicles,
shall only be used by licensed haulers provided that:
   (1)   The vehicle is properly secured such that nothing shall be strewn from
the vehicle, either while in motion or while stationary;
   (2)   The vehicle is covered securely by a waterproof material;
   (3)   The vehicle is used only for the collection of:
      (a)   Construction/demolition waste;
      (b)   Recyclable materials;
      (c)   Waste that was not collected during regular collection by the
primary collection vehicle due to a missed stop or late waste placement;
      (d)   Large or bulky items, or similar services.
   (4)   The use of the vehicle and collection activity comply with all other
relevant laws, rules, and regulations of the Commonwealth.
D.   Parking. Vehicles used for collecting solid waste shall, at all times, be
subject to the following parking restrictions:
   (1)   If loaded or partially loaded:
      (a)   No parking or standing on any street, highway or alley at any time
in excess of one hour;
      (b)   No off-street parking at any time in excess of two hours.
   (2)   If empty:
      (a)   No parking on any highways, streets or alleys at any time in excess
of one hour;
      (b)   No off-street parking at any time in excess of 48 hours and no more
than four hours if the vehicle is within 400 feet of an occupied dwelling or in
a residential area.
   (3)   Permitted parking. Compliance with Chapter 600, Zoning, shall be
required.
E.   All vehicles shall always be kept clean and well maintained so as not to
create a public nuisance or present in any way a threat to the public health
and safety and shall at all times be subject to rigid inspection by any police
officer or any authorized agent of the City. Additionally, all vehicles shall
be kept free of graffiti.
§ 496-212. Administration; violations and penalties.
A.   Authorized retrieval and responsibility therefor.
   (1)   Abatement and costs/billing. The City of Reading is authorized to pick
up, abate and/or remove violations of this Part, including, but not limited to,
items not picked up by the property's licensed hauler, placement of bags for
retrieval in excess of that permitted, dumping or items placed improperly.
Alternatively, the City may contract for part or all of these services. The
City of Reading shall obtain documentation of such violations and note the
address thereof prior to retrieval of said violations. The City, or its
contractor, shall verify said violations, provide documentation of their
removal, and generate an invoice for said services. The Public Works Director,
or his/her designee, will coordinate with the Property Maintenance Division to
issue a bill to the owner of the property from where the violation was
retrieved for the costs it incurred to abate the violation. The City, or its
contractor's removal of the violation and issuance of the City of a bill,
therefor shall not be exclusive remedy for abatement of such violations. The
City reserves the right to undertake any additional action for such violation
including but not limited to commencing any appropriate legal action to recover
costs for the abatement and/or commencement of penalty proceedings as set forth
herein.
   (2)   Means of appeal.
      (a)   Application for appeal. Any person aggrieved by the aforesaid
procedure to abate, bill and collect costs for abatement of violations of this
Part as set forth above in Subsection A(1) shall have the right to appeal to
the Codes and License Appeals Board, Chapter 23 Part 14, by filing an appeal
request in writing with the Property Maintenance Division Manager within 15
days after issuance of the bill for collection of costs for abatement of
violation of this Part per above. An administrative fee specified in Chapter
212 Fees shall be charged for each appeal. The appeal fee shall be refunded if
the appeal is approved by the Code and License Appeals Board.
         (i)   Administration. The Public Works Director, or his/her designee,
shall take immediate action in accordance with the decision of the Board.
      (b)   Judicial review. Any appeal of the Board's decision shall be made
to the appropriate court of jurisdiction in the manner and time required by
law.
      (c)   Stays of enforcement. Appeals of decisions of the Board shall stay
the enforcement and collection of the bill for costs of abatement of violation
of this Part as provided for in Subsection A(1).
B.   Violations and penalty.
   (1)   Prosecution of violation. In addition to abating a violation of this
Part and billing for costs of said abatement as provided for in Subsection A(1)
herein, at the discretion of the City of Reading, legal proceedings in the form
of summary offense shall be commenced by the appropriate authority with
enforcement power against any person failing to comply with the provisions of
this Part and the violation shall be deemed a strict liability offense. At the
discretion of the City of Reading, any action taken thereby on such premises to
abate the violation shall be charged against the real estate upon which the
structure is located and requested as restitution in any legal proceedings or
shall be a lien upon such real estate in lieu of billing of costs for such
abatement as provided for in Subsection A(1).
   (2)   Penalties.
      (a)   Any person or entity found to be in violation of any provision of
this Part shall, upon first conviction, be fined not less than $50 but not more
than $300 plus costs and, in default of payment of said fine and costs, to a
term of imprisonment not to exceed 30 days. If costs for abatement are incurred
by the City, restitution of 200% of the costs shall be awarded to the City in
addition to any fines or other penalties awarded herein. Owner shall also be
required to provide a receipt from a licensed trash hauler for one year of
prepaid trash collection service.
      (b)   Upon second or subsequent offenses occurring within five years of a
first offense, fines shall be doubled, to a minimum fine of $100 but not more
than $600 plus costs and, in default of payment of said fine and costs, to a
term of imprisonment not to exceed 30 days. If costs for abatement are incurred
by the City, restitution of 200% of the costs shall be awarded to the City in
addition to any fines or other penalties awarded herein. Owner shall also be
required to provide a receipt from a licensed trash hauler for one year of
prepaid trash collection service.
      (c)   Every violator of the provisions of this Part shall be deemed
guilty of a separate offense for each and every day such violation shall
continue and shall be subject to the penalty imposed by this section for each
and every separate offense.
C.   Enforcement. The City's Property Maintenance Division, Department of
Public Works, the Police Department and any other City-designated enforcement
officers are authorized and directed to enforce this Part. The Director of the
Department of Public Works is hereby authorized and directed to promulgate and
establish reasonable rules and regulations for the collection, storage and
disposal of solid waste and designated recyclable materials in accordance with
the terms herein and any other matters required to implement this Part. The
City may change, modify, repeal or amend any portion of said rules and
regulations at any time.
D.   Forfeiture and seizure. Any person or entity violating relevant provisions
of this Part, including collection of trash outside of the zoned collection
day, may be subject to forfeiture and seizure of property as set forth in 53
P.S. § 4000.1715 and 25 Pa. Code § 271.431.
Chapter 502
STORAGE FACILITIES
Part 1
Portable Home Storage Units
§
502-101.   Purpose.
§
502-102.   Definitions.
§
502-103.   Permit required; application; insurance; fee.
§
502-104.   Duration.
§
502-105.   Limitation of number of permits for PHSUs.
§
502-106.   Permits for extended hardship.
§
502-107.   Location.
§
502-108.   Number of units.
§
502-109.   Violations and penalties.
[HISTORY: Adopted by the City Council of the City of Reading as indicated in
part histories. Amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Historic districts — See
Ch. 295.
Streets and sidewalks — See
Ch. 508.
Zoning — See
Ch. 600.
Part 1
Portable Home Storage Units
[Adopted 2-25-2008 By Ord. No. 19-2008 (Ch. 10, Part 19, Of The 2001 Code Of
Ordinances); amended 11-9-2020 by Ord. No. 71-2020]
§ 502-101. Purpose.
In order to enhance the public health, safety and welfare of the citizens of
Reading, the City of Reading City Council recognizes the necessity for the
regulation of the location, licensing, storage regulation and placement of
portable home storage units at residential parcels within the City.
§ 502-102. Definitions.
As used in this Part, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
   PORTABLE HOME STORAGE UNITS — Portable sheds (hereinafter referred to as
"PHSUs") that are used for the purpose of being loaded with materials and
placed on a residential parcel for purposes of temporary storage of materials,
including but not limited to household goods, building materials (prior to
being used for building purposes), and for any other storage on a limited basis
on a parcel which is either zoned residential or used primarily for residential
purposes.
§ 502-103. Permit required; application; insurance; fee.
   A.   Prior to the placement of any PHSU on any residential parcel in the
City of Reading, the owner of such parcel must apply for and obtain a permit
for the placement of such PHSU from the City of Reading Building/Trades
Division.
   B.   All applications for permit under this section must be accompanied by
an insurance certificate providing liability insurance in an amount not less
than $100,000 in general liability coverage from the company supplying the
PHSU.
   C.   The City of Reading shall collect an application fee for each permit
issued hereunder for a five-day permit, as provided in
Chapter 212, Fees.1
   D.   Permits issued under this section, and any renewal of permits issued
hereunder, must be signed by a Building/Trades Official of the City and
prominently displayed on the PHSU for which the permit is issued in a sealed
and watertight manner, so as to protect the permit from denigration by the
weather, rain or other elements.
1.   Editor's Note: Amended during codification (see
Ch. 1, General Provisions, Part 2).
§ 502-104. Duration.
   A.   Initial permits may be granted for a period of five days by the
Building/Trades Official, upon proper submission of the required application
and supporting documentation as provided under §
502-103.
   B.   After the expiration of the five-day period for the initial permit, an
applicant may submit an extension application for an additional two days. All
such applications for an extension of permit must be accompanied by an
extension fee in the amount specified in
Chapter 212, Fees. 2
   C.   No more than one extension may be granted for any permit issued under
this Part for any PHSU.
2.   Editor's Note: Amended during codification (see
Ch. 1, General Provisions, Part 2).
§ 502-105. Limitation of number of permits for PHSUs.
No resident under this Part may be issued more than two permits for the
placement of a PHSU during any twelve-month period. Such limitations shall
include applications for extension.
§ 502-106. Permits for extended hardship.
Upon a finding by the Building/Trades Official, and/or any other official so
authorized, that a parcel of property has experienced a flood, fire, natural
disaster or other act of God, so as to render the primary residential dwelling
thereon uninhabitable, and so as to require, in the judgment of the Building/
Trades Official and/or any other official so authorized, the placement of a
PHSU on the property or on a street for a period longer than that provided
under §
502-104 or
502-105, the Building/Trades Official and/or other authorized official may
issue an extended hardship permit under this section, for the placement of a
PHSU for such period of time as fixed by the Building/Trades Official and not
otherwise subject to the limitations provided under this Part. All such
extended hardship permits must be duly registered with the City of Reading
Building/Trades Division and shall be issued without application fee.
§ 502-107. Location.
   A.   All PHSUs must be kept in the driveway of the parcel at the farthest
accessible point from the street.
   B.   In the event that a parcel is devoid of a driveway or other paved
surface, permitted PHSUs may be placed in the parking lane of a public right-
of-way area, without violating a minimum sidewalk clearance of five feet, or on
another area of private property.
   C.   PHSUs in Historical Districts and in areas of the Downtown Improvement
District. No PHSU shall be allowed on any public right-of-way or be allowed to
be visible from any public right-of-way in any area designated as a historic
district in the Code of the City or areas in the Downtown Improvement District
without review and approval of the Building/Trades Division and the Historic
Preservation Specialist pursuant to
Chapter 295, Historic Districts, of the Code of the City of Reading.
§ 502-108. Number of units.
Only one PHSU may be placed on any one residential parcel at one time. The
Building/Trades Official, and/or any other authorized official, is authorized
to permit the placement of more than one PHSU under the terms of §
502-106, in the event that the circumstances giving rise to the hardship permit
warrant the placement of additional PHSUs in order to accommodate the storage
of interior furnishing, goods and materials from a residence substantially
damaged by flood, fire, act of God or other natural disaster.
§ 502-109. Violations and penalties.
   A.   Any person who shall place a PHSU in violation of this Part shall, upon
conviction before a Magisterial District Judge, be sentenced to pay a fine not
exceeding $1,000, together with the cost of prosecution, and upon default from
the payment thereof, may be sentenced to undergo imprisonment for a period not
exceeding 30 days. Each day in which a violation shall continue after due
notice to the property owner, shall be deemed a separate offense, punishable by
the terms and conditions provided under this section.
   B.   Any Building/Trades Official, or law enforcement officer of the City of
Reading, and/or any other official so authorized, is duly empowered to enforce
the terms, conditions and provision of this Part, and to commence such summary
criminal proceedings as may be warranted upon the finding of any violation of
the terms, conditions and provisions of this Part.
Chapter 505
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT
Publisher's Note: This Chapter has been AMENDED by new legislation (Ord. 28-
2021, enacted 4-12-2021). The text of the amendment will be incorporated below
when the ordinance is codified.
Part 1
Watershed Stormwater Management
A   General Provisions
§
505-101.   Short title.
§
505-102.   Findings.
§
505-103.   Purpose.
§
505-104.   Statutory authority.
§
505-105.   Applicability; regulated activities.
§
505-106.   Compatibility with other ordinance requirements.
B   Terminology
§
505-111.   Interpretation.
§
505-112.   Definitions.
C   Stormwater Management
§
505-121.   General requirements.
§
505-122.   Permit requirements by other government entities.
§
505-123.   Erosion and sediment control during regulated earth disturbance
activities.
§
505-124.   Nonstructural project design (sequencing to minimize stormwater
impacts).
§
505-125.   Groundwater recharge (infiltration; recharge; bioretention).
§
505-126.   Water quality requirements.
§
505-127.   Stream bank erosion requirements.
§
505-128.   Stormwater management districts.
§
505-129.   Calculation methodology.
§
505-130.   Other requirements.
§
505-131.   NPDES requirements.
D   Drainage Plan Requirements
§
505-141.   General requirements.
§
505-142.   Exemptions.
§
505-143.   Drainage plan contents.
§
505-144.   Plan submission.
§
505-145.   Drainage plan review.
§
505-146.   Modification of plans.
§
505-147.   Resubmission of disapproved drainage plans.
E   Inspections
§
505-151.   Schedule of inspections.
F   Fees and Expenses
§
505-161.   Municipality drainage plan review and inspection fee.
§
505-162.   Expenses covered by fees.
G   Maintenance Responsibilities
§
505-171.   Performance guarantee.
§
505-172.   Responsibilities for operations and maintenance of stormwater
controls and BMPs.
§
505-173.   Municipality review of stormwater control and BMP operations and
maintenance plan.
§
505-174.   Adherence to approved stormwater control and BMP operations and
maintenance plan.
§
505-175.   Operations and maintenance agreement for privately owned stormwater
controls and BMPs.
§
505-176.   Stormwater management easements.
§
505-177.   Maintenance agreement for privately owned stormwater facilities.
§
505-178.   Recording of approved stormwater control and BMP operations and
maintenance plan and related agreements.
§
505-179.   Municipal stormwater control and BMP operation and maintenance fund.
H   Prohibitions
§
505-181.   Prohibited discharges.
§
505-182.   Prohibited connections.
§
505-183.   Roof drains.
§
505-184.   Alteration of BMPs.
I   Enforcement and Penalties
§
505-191.   Right of entry.
§
505-192.   Public nuisance.
§
505-193.   Enforcement generally.
§
505-194.   Suspension and revocation of permits and approvals.
§
505-195.   Violations and penalties.
§
505-196.   Notification.
§
505-197.   Enforcement.
§
505-198.   Appeals.
Appendix A, Operations and Maintenance Agreement
Appendix B, Stormwater Management Design Criteria
Appendix C, Sample Drainage Plan Application
Appendix D, Stormwater Management District Watershed Map
Appendix E, LID Practices, Managing Stormwater Runoff
Appendix F, West Nile Virus Guidance
Appendix G, References
[HISTORY: Adopted by the City Council of the City of Reading as indicated in
part histories. Amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Subdivision and land development — See
Ch. 515.
Zoning — See
Ch. 600.
STATE LAW REFERENCES
Stormwater Management Act — See 32 P.S. § 680.1 et seq.
Part 1
Watershed Stormwater Management
A   General Provisions
§ 505-101. Short title.
This Part shall be known and may be cited as the "Watershed Stormwater
Management Ordinance."
§ 505-102. Findings.
The governing body of the municipality finds that:
   A.   Inadequate management of accelerated stormwater runoff resulting from
development throughout a watershed increases flood flows and velocities,
contributes to erosion and sedimentation, overtaxes the carrying capacity of
existing streams and storm sewers, greatly increases the cost of public
facilities to convey and manage stormwater, undermines floodplain management
and flood-reduction efforts in upstream and downstream communities, reduces
groundwater recharge, and threatens public health and safety.
   B.   Inadequate planning and management of stormwater runoff resulting from
land development and redevelopment throughout a watershed can also harm surface
water resources by changing the natural hydrologic patterns, accelerating
stream flows (which increase scour and erosion of streambeds and stream banks,
thereby elevating sedimentation), destroying aquatic habitat and elevating
aquatic pollutant concentrations and loadings such as sediments, nutrients,
heavy metals and pathogens. Groundwater resources are also impacted through
loss of recharge.
   C.   A comprehensive program of stormwater management (SWM), including
minimization of impacts of development, redevelopment and activities causing
accelerated erosion, is fundamental to the public health, safety, welfare, and
the protection of the people of the municipality and all the people of the
commonwealth, their resources, and the environment.
   D.   Inadequate management of accelerated stormwater runoff resulting from
development throughout a watershed poses a threat to surface and groundwater
quality.
   E.   Stormwater can be an important water resource by providing groundwater
recharge for water supplies and base flow of streams, which also protects and
maintains surface water quality.
   F.   Impacts from stormwater runoff can be minimized by using project
designs that maintain the natural hydrologic regime, and sustain high water
quality, groundwater recharge, stream baseflow and aquatic ecosystems. The most
cost-effective and environmentally advantageous way to manage stormwater runoff
is through nonstructural project design, minimizing impervious surfaces and
sprawl, avoiding sensitive areas (i.e., stream buffers, floodplains, steep
slopes), and designing to topography and soils to maintain the natural
hydrologic regime.
   G.   Public education on the control of pollution from stormwater is an
essential component in successfully addressing stormwater.
   H.   Federal and state regulations require certain municipalities to
implement a program of stormwater controls. These municipalities are required
to obtain a permit for stormwater discharges from their separate storm sewer
systems under the National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES).
   I.   Nonstormwater discharges to municipal separate storm sewer systems can
contribute to pollution of waters of the commonwealth by the municipality.
§ 505-103. Purpose.
The purpose of this Part is to promote the public health, safety, and welfare
within the City of Reading and its watersheds by maintaining the natural
hydrologic regime by minimizing the impacts described in §
505-102 of this Part through provisions designed to:
   A.   Promote alternative project designs and layout that minimizes impacts
to surface and groundwater.
   B.   Promote nonstructural best management practices (BMPs).
   C.   Minimize increases in stormwater volume.
   D.   Minimize impervious surfaces.
   E.   Manage accelerated runoff and erosion and sedimentation problems at
their source by regulating activities that cause these problems.
   F.   Provide review procedures and performance standards for stormwater
planning and management.
   G.   Utilize and preserve the existing natural drainage systems.
   H.   Manage stormwater impacts close to the runoff source, which requires a
minimum of structures and relies on natural processes.
   I.   Focus on infiltration of stormwater where compatible, to maintain
groundwater recharge, to prevent degradation of surface and groundwater quality
and to otherwise protect water resources.
   J.   Maintain existing base flows and quality of streams and watercourses,
where possible.
   K.   Meet legal water quality requirements under state law, including
regulations at 25 Pa. Code,
Chapter 93.4a, to protect and maintain existing uses and maintain the level of
water quality to support those uses in all streams, and to protect and maintain
water quality in special protection streams.
   L.   Address the quality and quantity of stormwater discharges from the
development site.
   M.   Provide a mechanism to identify controls necessary to meet the NPDES
permit requirements.
   N.   Implement an illegal discharge detection and elimination program to
address nonstormwater discharges into the municipality's separate storm sewer
system.
   O.   Preserve and restore the flood-carrying capacity of streams.
   P.   Prevent scour and erosion of stream banks and streambeds.
   Q.   Provide performance standards and design criteria for watershed-wide
stormwater management and planning.
   R.   Provide proper operation and maintenance of all permanent stormwater
management facilities and BMPs that are implemented in the municipality.
§ 505-104. Statutory authority.
The municipality is empowered to regulate land use activities that affect
runoff, surface and groundwater quality and quantity by the authority of:
   A.   Act of October 4, 1978, P.L. 864 (Act 167), 32 P.S. § 680.1 et seq., as
amended, the "Stormwater Management Act" (hereinafter referred to as "the
Act");
   B.   Water Resources Management Act of 2002, as amended;
   C.   Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code (MPC), Act 247, 1  as
amended; and
   D.   The Third Class City Code, 11 Pa.C.S. §§10101 et seq. as amended.
1.   Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 505-105. Applicability; regulated activities.
   A.   This Part shall apply to those areas of the City of Reading within the
Schuylkill River and Tulpehocken Creek Watersheds, as delineated in Appendix D
which is hereby adopted as part of this Part. 3
   B.   This Part shall only apply to permanent nonstructural and structural
stormwater management best management practices (BMPs) constructed as part of
any of the regulated activities listed in this section.
   C.   This Part contains only the stormwater management performance standards
and design criteria that are necessary or desirable from a watershed-wide
perspective. Local stormwater management design criteria (e.g., inlet spacing,
inlet type, collection system design and details, outlet structure design,
etc.) shall continue to be regulated by the applicable municipal ordinances and
applicable state regulations.
   D.   The following activities are defined as "regulated activities" and
shall be regulated by this Part:
      (1)   Land development.
      (2)   Subdivisions.
      (3)   Alteration of the natural hydrologic regime.
      (4)   Construction or reconstruction of, or additional impervious or
semipervious surfaces (driveways, parking lots, roads, etc.).
      (5)   Construction of new buildings or additions to existing buildings.
      (6)   Redevelopment of a site which will increase runoff or change a
discharge point. Any redevelopment that does not increase the runoff must still
comply with §
505-124, Nonstructural project design, §
505-125, Groundwater recharge, §
505-126, Water quality requirements, and §
505-127, Stream bank erosion requirements"
      (7)   Diversion piping or encroachments in any natural or man-made
channel.
      (8)   Nonstructural and structural stormwater management BMPs or
appurtenances thereto.
      (9)   Regulated earth disturbance. 4
      (10)   City permit-regulated construction activities.
      (11)   Any of the above-regulated activities which were approved more
than five years prior to the effective date of this Part and resubmitted for
municipal approval.
3.   Editor's Note: Appendix D is included at the end of this chapter.
4.   Note: Earth disturbance activities and associated stormwater management
controls are also regulated under existing state law and implementing
regulations. This Part shall operate in coordination with those parallel
requirements; the requirements of this Part shall be no less restrictive in
meeting the purposes of this Part than state law.
§ 505-106. Compatibility with other ordinance requirements.
   A.   Approvals issued pursuant to this Part do not relieve the applicant of
the responsibility to secure required permits or approvals for activities
regulated by any other applicable code, rule, act, or ordinance.
   B.   Nothing in this Part shall be construed to affect any of the
municipality's requirements regarding stormwater matters which do not conflict
with the provisions of this Part, such as local stormwater management design
criteria (e.g., inlet spacing, inlet type, collection system design and
details, outlet structure design, etc.). Conflicting provisions in other
municipal ordinances or regulations shall be construed to retain the
requirements of this Part addressing state water quality requirements.
B   Terminology
§ 505-111. Interpretation.
For the purposes of this Part, certain terms and words used herein shall be
interpreted as follows:
   A.   Words used in the present tense include the future tense; the singular
number includes the plural, and the plural number includes the singular; words
of masculine gender include feminine gender; and words of feminine gender
include masculine gender.
   B.   The word "includes" or "including" shall not limit the term to the
specific example, but is intended to extend its meaning to all other instances
of like kind and character.
   C.   The word "person" includes an individual, firm, association,
organization, partnership, trust, company, corporation, unit of government, or
any other similar entity.
   D.   The words "shall" and "must" are mandatory; the words "may" and
"should" are permissive.
   E.   The words "used or occupied" include the words "intended, designed,
maintained, or arranged to be used, occupied or maintained."
§ 505-112. Definitions.
As used in this Part, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
   ACCELERATED EROSION — The removal of the surface of the land through the
combined action of man's activity and the natural processes of a rate greater
than would occur because of the natural process alone.
   AGRICULTURAL ACTIVITIES — The work of producing crops and raising livestock
including tillage, plowing, disking, harrowing, pasturing and installation of
conservation measures. For purposes of regulation by this Part, construction of
new buildings or impervious area is not considered an agricultural activity.
   ALTERATION — As applied to land, a change in topography as a result of the
moving of soil and rock from one location or position to another; also the
changing of surface conditions by causing the surface to be more or less
impervious; land disturbance.
   AS-BUILT DRAWINGS — Those maintained by the contractor as he constructs the
project and upon which he documents the actual locations of the building
components and changes to the original contract documents. These, or a copy of
same, are turned over to the engineer, Municipal Engineer, and municipality in
the current City standard format for hard copy, electronic copy, and
reproducibles at the completion of the project. See also "record drawing" in
this section.
   APPLICANT — A person who has filed an application for approval to engage in
any regulated activities as defined in §
505-105 of this Part.
   BANKFULL — The channel at the top-of-bank or point where water begins to
overflow onto a floodplain.
   BASEFLOW — Portion of stream discharge derived from groundwater; the
sustained discharge that does not result from direct runoff or from water
diversions, reservoir releases, piped discharges, or other human activities.
   BIORETENTION — A stormwater retention area which utilizes woody and
herbaceous plants and soils to remove pollutants before infiltration occurs.
   BMP (BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICE) — Methods, measures or practices to prevent
or reduce surface runoff and/or water pollution including, but not limited to,
structural and nonstructural stormwater management practices and operation and
maintenance procedures. See also "nonstructural best management practices
(BMPs)."
   BUFFER — The area of land immediately adjacent to any stream, measured
perpendicular to and horizontally from the top-of-bank on both sides of a
stream. (See "top-of-bank.")
   CHANNEL — A drainage element in which stormwater flows with an open surface.
Open channels include, but shall not be limited to, natural and man-made
drainageways, swales, streams, ditches, canals, and pipes flowing partly full.
   CHANNEL EROSION — The widening, deepening, and headward cutting of small
channels and waterways, caused by stormwater runoff or bankfull flows.
   CISTERN — An underground reservoir or tank for storing rainwater.
   CONSERVATION DISTRICT — The Berks County Conservation District.
   CULVERT — A structure with appurtenant works which carries water under or
through an embankment or fill.
   DAM — An artificial barrier, together with its appurtenant works,
constructed for the purpose of impounding or storing water or another fluid or
semifluid, or a refuse bank, fill or structure for highway, railroad or other
purposes which does or may impound water or another fluid or semifluid.
   DEPARTMENT — The Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection.
   DESIGNEE — The agent of the Berks County Planning Commission, Berks County
Conservation District and/or agent of the governing body involved with the
administration, review or enforcement of any provisions of this Part by
contract or memorandum of understanding.
   DESIGN PROFESSIONAL (QUALIFIED) — A Pennsylvania registered professional
engineer, registered landscape architect, professional geologist, qualified
soils scientist or a registered professional land surveyor qualified to perform
the specific design task at hand based upon the applicable code of ethics.
   DESIGN STORM — The magnitude and temporal distribution of precipitation from
a storm event measured in probability of occurrence (e.g., a five-year storm)
and duration (e.g., 24 hours), used in the design and evaluation of stormwater
management systems.
   DESIGNATED WATERSHED (ACT 167) — A watershed which is listed under the
Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection's "Index of Designated
Watersheds (Stormwater Management)" pursuant to the Stormwater Management Act,
P.L. 864, No. 167, October 4, 1978, 5  and published in the Pennsylvania
Bulletin on May 31, 1980, and August 9, 1980, as amended on November 19, 1991,
April 21, 1992, June 21, 1994, April 16, 1996, April 15, 1997, and December 16,
1997.
   DETENTION BASIN — An impoundment designed to collect and retard stormwater
runoff by temporarily storing the runoff and releasing it at a predetermined
rate. Detention basins are designed to drain completely shortly after any given
rainfall event and are dry until the next rainfall event.
   DEVELOPER — A person that seeks to undertake any regulated activities at a
project site in the municipality.
   DEVELOPMENT — Any human-induced change to improved or unimproved real
estate, whether public or private, including but not limited to land
development, construction, installation, or expansion of a building or other
structure, land division, street construction, drilling, and site alteration
such as embankments, dredging, grubbing, grading, paving, parking or storage
facilities, excavation, filling, stockpiling, or clearing. As used in this
Part, "development" encompasses both new development and redevelopment.
   DEVELOPMENT SITE — The specific tract of land where any regulated activities
in the municipality are planned, conducted or maintained.
   DIFFUSED DRAINAGE DISCHARGE — Drainage discharge not confined to a single
point location or channel, such as sheet flow or shallow concentrated flow.
   DISCHARGE —
   A.   (Verb) to release water from a project, site, aquifer, drainage basin
or other point of interest.
   B.   (Noun) the rate and volume of flow of water such as in a stream,
generally expressed in cubic feet per second (volume per unit of time). See
also "peak discharge."
   DISCHARGE POINT — The point of discharge for a stormwater facility.
   DISTURBED AREAS — Unstabilized land area where an earth disturbance activity
is occurring or has occurred.
   DITCH — An artificial waterway for irrigation or stormwater conveyance.
   DOWNSLOPE PROPERTY LINE — That portion of the property line of the lot,
tract, or parcels of land being developed located such that overland or pipe
flow from the site would be directed towards it.
   DRAINAGE CONVEYANCE FACILITY — A stormwater management facility designed to
transmit stormwater runoff and shall include channels, swales, pipes, conduits,
culverts, storm sewers, etc.
   DRAINAGE EASEMENT — A right granted by a landowner to a grantee, allowing
the use of private land for stormwater management purposes.
   DRAINAGE PERMIT — A permit issued by the municipal governing body after the
drainage plan has been approved.
   DRAINAGE PLAN — The documentation of the stormwater management system, if
any, to be used for a given development site, the contents of which are
established in §
505-143.
   EARTH DISTURBANCE ACTIVITY — A construction or other human activity which
disturbs the surface of land, including, but not limited to, clearing and
grubbing, grading, excavations, embankments, land development, agricultural
plowing or tilling, timber harvesting activities, road maintenance activities,
mineral extraction, and the moving, depositing, stockpiling, or storing of
soil, rock or earth materials.
   EMERGENCY SPILLWAY — A conveyance area that is used to pass peak discharge
greater than the maximum design storm controlled by the stormwater facility.
   ENCROACHMENT — A structure or activity that changes, expands or diminishes
the course, current or cross section of a watercourse, floodway or body of
water.
   EROSION — The process by which the surface of the land, including channels,
is worn away by water, wind, or chemical action.
   EROSION AND SEDIMENT CONTROL PLAN — A plan for a project site which
identifies BMPs to minimize accelerated erosion and sedimentation.
   EXCEPTIONAL VALUE WATERS — Surface waters of high quality which satisfy
Pennsylvania Code, Title 25, Environmental Protection, Chapter 93, Water
Quality Standards, § 93.4b(b) (relating to antidegradation).
   EXISTING CONDITIONS — The initial condition of a project site prior to the
proposed alteration. If the initial condition of the site is undeveloped land,
the land use shall be considered as "meadow" unless the natural land cover is
proven to generate lower curve numbers or Rational "C" value, such as forested
lands.
   FLOOD — A temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of land
areas from the overflow of streams, rivers, and other waters of this
commonwealth.
   FLOODPLAIN — Any land area susceptible to inundation by water from any
natural source or delineated by applicable Department of Housing and Urban
Development, Federal Insurance Administration Flood Hazard Boundary — Mapped as
being a special flood hazard area.
   FLOODWAY — The channel of the watercourse and those portions of the
adjoining floodplains, which are reasonably required to carry and discharge the
one-hundred-year frequency flood. Unless otherwise specified, the boundary of
the floodway is as indicated on maps and flood insurance studies provided by
FEMA. In an area where no FEMA maps or studies have defined the boundary of the
one-hundred-year frequency floodway, it is assumed, absent evidence to the
contrary, that the floodway extends from the stream to 50 feet from the top-of-
bank.
   FLUVIAL GEOMORPHOLOGY — The study of landforms associated with river
channels and the processes that form them.
   FOREST MANAGEMENT/TIMBER OPERATIONS — Planning and activities necessary for
the management of forest land with no change of land use proposed. These
include timber inventory and preparation of forest management plans,
silvicultural treatment, cutting budgets, logging road design and construction,
timber harvesting and reforestation.
   FREEBOARD — A vertical distance between the elevation of the design high-
water and the top of a dam, levee, tank, basin, swale, or diversion berm. The
space is required as a safety margin in a pond or basin.
   GRADE —
   A.   A slope, usually of a road, channel or natural ground specified in
percent and shown on plans as specified herein.
   B.   (To) grade: To finish the surface of a roadbed, top of embankment or
bottom of excavation.
   GRASSED WATERWAY — A natural or constructed waterway, usually broad and
shallow, covered with erosion-resistant grasses, used to convey surface water.
   GROUNDWATER — Water beneath the earth's surface, often between saturated
soil and rock that supplies wells and springs.
   GROUNDWATER RECHARGE — Replenishment of existing natural underground water
supplies without degrading groundwater quality.
   HEC-HMS — The U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, Hydrologic Engineering Center
(HEC) – Hydrologic Modeling System (HMS). This model was used for modeling
during the Act 167 Plan development and was the basis for the standards and
criteria of this Part.
   HIGH-QUALITY WATERS — Surface waters having quality which exceeds levels
necessary to support propagation of fish, shellfish, and wildlife and
recreation in and on the water by satisfying Pennsylvania Code, Title 25,
Environmental Protection, Chapter 93, Water Quality Standards, § 93.4b(a).
   HOTSPOTS — Areas where land use or activities generate highly contaminated
runoff, with concentrations of pollutants in excess of those typically found in
stormwater.
   HYDROGRAPH — A graph of discharge versus time for a selected point in the
drainage system.
   HYDROLOGIC REGIME (NATURAL) — The hydrologic cycle or balance that sustains
quality and quantity of stormwater, baseflow, storage, and groundwater supplies
under natural conditions.
   HYDROLOGIC SOIL GROUP — A classification of soils by the Natural Resources
Conservation Service, formerly the Soil Conservation Service, into four runoff
potential groups. The groups range from A soils, which are very permeable and
produce little runoff, to D soils, which are not very permeable and produce
much more runoff.
   IMPERVIOUS SURFACE — A surface that prevents the infiltration of water into
the ground. Impervious surface includes, but is not limited to, any roof,
parking or driveway areas, and any new streets and sidewalks. Any surface areas
designed to be gravel or crushed stone shall be assumed to be impervious
surfaces.
   IMPROVEMENTS AGREEMENT — An agreement made between the municipality and the
developer that an approved subdivision and land development plan will be
constructed according to the approved drawings and abide to specific conditions
specified in the agreement.
   IMPOUNDMENT — A retention or detention basin designed to retain stormwater
runoff and release it at a controlled rate.
   INFILL — Development that occurs on smaller parcels that remain undeveloped
but are within or very close proximity to urban areas. The development relies
on existing infrastructure and does not require an extension of water, sewer or
other public utilities.
   INFILTRATION — Movement of surface water into the soil, where it is absorbed
by plant roots, evaporated into the atmosphere, or percolates downward to
recharge groundwater.
   INFILTRATION STRUCTURES — A structure designed to direct runoff into the
underground water (e.g., french drains, seepage pits, seepage trench).
   INLET — The upstream end of any structure through which water may flow.
   INTERMITTENT STREAM — A stream that flows only part of the time. Flow
generally occurs for several weeks or months in response to seasonal
precipitation, due to groundwater discharge.
   LAND DEVELOPMENT — Any of the following activities:
   A.   The improvement of one lot or two or more contiguous lots, tracts, or
parcels of land for any purpose involving:
      (1)   A group of two or more residential or nonresidential buildings,
whether proposed initially or cumulatively, or a single nonresidential building
on a lot or lots, regardless of the number of occupants or tenure.
      (2)   The division or allocation of land or space, whether initially or
cumulatively, between or among two or more existing or prospective occupants by
means of, or for the purpose of streets, common areas, leaseholds,
condominiums, building groups, or other features.
   B.   A subdivision of land.
   C.   Development in accordance with § 503(1.1) of the Pennsylvania
Municipalities Planning Code.6
   LIMITING ZONE — A soil horizon or condition in the soil profile or
underlying strata which includes one of the following:
   A.   A seasonal high water table, whether perched or regional, determined by
direct observation of the water table or indicated by soil mottling.
   B.   A rock with open joints, fracture or solution channels, or masses of
loose rock fragments, including gravel, with insufficient fine soil to fill the
voids between the fragments.
   C.   A rock formation, other stratum or soil condition which is so slowly
permeable that it effectively limits downward passage of water.
   LOT — A designated parcel, tract or area of land established by a plat or
otherwise as permitted by law and to be used, developed or built upon as a
unit.
   MAIN STEM (MAIN CHANNEL) — Any stream segment or other runoff conveyance
facility used as a reach in the hydrologic model.
   MANNING EQUATION (MANNING FORMULA) — A method for calculation of velocity of
flow (e.g., feet per second) and flow rate (e.g., cubic feet per second) in
open channels based upon channel shape, roughness, depth of flow and slope.
"Open channels" may include closed conduits so long as the flow is not under
pressure.
   MUNICIPAL ENGINEER — A professional engineer licensed as such in the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, duly appointed as the engineer for a
municipality, planning agency or joint planning commission or his designee.
   MUNICIPALITY — City of Reading, Berks County, Pennsylvania.
   NATURAL CONDITION — Existing conditions.
   NATURAL HYDROLOGIC REGIME — See "hydrologic regime."
   NATURAL RECHARGE AREA — Undisturbed surface area or depression where
stormwater collects, and a portion of which infiltrates and replenishes the
underground and groundwater.
   NONPOINT SOURCE POLLUTION — Pollution that enters a water body from diffuse
origins in the watershed and does not result from discernible, confined, or
discrete conveyances.
   NONSTORMWATER DISCHARGES — Water flowing in stormwater collection
facilities, such as pipes or swales, which is not the result of a rainfall
event or snowmelt.
   NONSTRUCTURAL BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES (BMPs) — Methods of controlling
stormwater runoff quantity and quality, such as innovative site planning,
impervious area and grading reduction, protection of natural depression areas,
temporary ponding on site and other techniques.
   NPDES — National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System, the federal
government's system for issuance of permits under the Clean Water Act, which is
delegated to DEP in Pennsylvania.
   NRCS — Natural Resource Conservation Service (previously SCS).
   OUTFALL — "Point source" as described in 40 CFR 122.2 at the point where the
municipality's storm sewer system discharges to surface waters of the
commonwealth.
   OUTLET — Points of water disposal to a stream, river, lake, tidewater or
artificial drain.
   PARENT TRACT — The parcel of land from which a land development or
subdivision originates, determined from the date of municipal adoption of this
Part.
   PARKING LOT STORAGE — Involves the use of parking areas as temporary
impoundments with controlled release rates during rainstorms.
   PEAK DISCHARGE — The maximum rate of stormwater runoff from a specific storm
event.
   PENN STATE RUNOFF MODEL — The computer-based hydrologic model developed at
the Pennsylvania State University.
   PIPE — A culvert, closed conduit, or similar structure (including
appurtenances) that conveys stormwater.
   PLANNING COMMISSION — The Planning Commission of the City of Reading.
   POINT SOURCE — Any discernible, confined and discrete conveyance including,
but not limited to, any pipe, ditch, channel, tunnel, or conduit from which
stormwater is or may be discharged, as defined in state regulations at 25 Pa.
Code § 92a.2. 7
   POSTCONSTRUCTION — Period after construction where disturbed areas are
stabilized, stormwater controls are in place and functioning and all proposed
improvements in the approved land development plan are completed.
   PRETREATMENT — Techniques employed in stormwater BMPs to provide storage or
filtering to trap coarse materials and other pollutants before they enter the
system, but not necessarily meet the water quality volume requirements of §
505-126.
   PROJECT SITE — The specific area of land where any regulated earth
disturbance activities in the municipality are planned, conducted or
maintained.
   RATIONAL FORMULA — A rainfall-runoff relation used to estimate peak flow.
   RECHARGE — The replenishment of groundwater through the infiltration of
rainfall, other surface waters, or land application of water or treated
wastewater.
   RECONSTRUCTION — Demolition of and subsequent rebuilding of impervious
surface.
   RECORD DRAWINGS — Original documents revised to suit the as-built conditions
and subsequently provided by the design professional to the municipality. The
design professional takes the contractor's as-builts, reviews them in detail
with his/her own records for completeness, then either turns these over to the
client or transfers the information to a set of reproducibles, hard copy, and
electronic format in the current City standard format, in both cases for the
municipality's permanent records. See also "as-built drawings."
   REDEVELOPMENT — The demolition, construction, reconstruction, alteration, or
improvement exceeding 2,000 square feet of land disturbance performed on sites
where existing land use is commercial, industrial, institutional, or
multifamily residential. Maintenance activities such as top-layer grinding and
repaving are not considered to be redevelopment. Interior remodeling projects
and tenant improvements are also not considered to be redevelopment. Utility
trenches in streets are not considered redevelopment unless more than 50% of
the street width is removed and repaved.
   REGULATED ACTIVITIES — Actions or proposed actions that have an impact on
stormwater runoff quality or quantity and that are specified in §
505-105 of this Part.
   REGULATED EARTH DISTURBANCE ACTIVITY — Earth disturbance activity one acre
or more with a point source discharge to surface waters or the municipality's
storm sewer system, or five acres or more regardless of the planned runoff.
This includes earth disturbance on any portion of, part, or during any stage
of, a larger common plan of development.
   RELEASE RATE — The percentage of existing conditions peak rate of runoff
from a site or subarea to which the proposed conditions peak rate of runoff
must be reduced to protect downstream areas.
   REPAVING — Replacement of the impervious surface that does not involve
reconstruction of an existing paved (impervious) surface.
   REPLACEMENT PAVING — Reconstruction of and full replacement of an existing
paved (impervious) surface.
   RETENTION BASIN — A structure in which stormwater is stored and not released
during the storm event. Retention basins do not have an outlet other than
recharge and must infiltrate stored water in no more than 4 days.
   RETURN PERIOD — The average interval, in years, within which a storm event
of a given magnitude can be expected to recur. For example, the twenty-five-
year return period rainfall would be expected to recur on the average of once
every 25 years.
   RISER — A vertical pipe extending from the bottom of a pond that is used to
control the discharge rate from the pond for a specified design storm.
   ROAD MAINTENANCE — Earth disturbance activities within the existing road
cross section, such as grading and repairing existing unpaved road surfaces,
cutting road banks, cleaning or clearing drainage ditches and other similar
activities.
   ROOF DRAINS — A drainage conduit or pipe that collects water runoff from a
roof and leads it away from the structure.
   ROOFTOP DETENTION — Temporary ponding and gradual release of stormwater
falling directly onto flat roof surfaces by incorporating controlled-flow roof
drains into building designs.
   RUNOFF — Any part of precipitation that flows over the land surface. SALDO —
Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance [
Chapter 515].
   SEDIMENT BASIN — A barrier, dam, retention or detention basin located and
designed to retain rock, sand, gravel, silt, or other material transported by
water during construction.
   SEDIMENT POLLUTION — The placement, discharge or any other introduction of
sediment into the waters of the commonwealth.
   SEDIMENTATION — The process by which mineral or organic matter is
accumulated or deposited by the movement of water or air.
   SEEPAGE PIT/SEEPAGE TRENCH — An area of excavated earth filled with loose
stone or similar coarse material, into which surface water is directed for
infiltration into the underground water.
   SEPARATE STORM SEWER SYSTEM — A conveyance or system of conveyances
(including roads with drainage systems, municipal streets, catch basins, curbs,
gutters, ditches, man-made channels or storm drains) primarily used for
collecting and conveying stormwater runoff.
   SHALLOW CONCENTRATED FLOW — Stormwater runoff flowing in shallow, defined
ruts prior to entering a defined channel or waterway.
   SHEET FLOW — A flow process associated with broad, shallow water movement on
sloping ground surfaces that is not channelized or concentrated.
   SOIL-COVER COMPLEX METHOD — A method of runoff computation developed by the
NRCS that is based on relating soil type and land use/cover to a runoff
parameter called curve number (CN).
   SOURCE WATER PROTECTION AREAS (SWPA) — The zone through which contaminants,
if present, are likely to migrate and reach a drinking water well or surface
water intake.
   SPECIAL GEOLOGIC FEATURES — Carbonate bedrock features including, but not
limited to, closed depressions, existing sinkholes, fracture traces,
lineaments, joints, faults, caves and pinnacles, which may exist and must be
identified on a site when stormwater management BMPs are being considered.
   SPECIAL PROTECTION SUBWATERSHEDS — Watersheds for which the receiving waters
are exceptional value (EV) or high-quality (HQ) waters.
   SPILLWAY — A conveyance that is used to pass the peak discharge of the
maximum design storm controlled by the stormwater facility.
   STATE WATER QUALITY REQUIREMENTS — As defined under state regulations,
protection of designated and existing uses (see 25 Pa. Code, Chapters 93 and
96), including:
   A.   Each stream segment in Pennsylvania has a designated use, such as "cold
water fishery" or "potable water supply," which are listed in Chapter 93. These
uses must be protected and maintained, under state regulations.
   B.   "Existing uses" are those attained as of November 1975, regardless
whether they have been designated in Chapter 93. Regulated earth disturbance
activities must be designed to protect and maintain existing uses and maintain
the level of water quality necessary to protect those uses in all streams, and
to protect and maintain water quality in special protection streams.
   C.   Water quality involves the chemical, biological and physical
characteristics of surface water bodies. After regulated earth disturbance
activities are complete, these characteristics can be impacted by addition of
pollutants such as sediment, and changes in habitat through increased flow
volumes and/or rates as a result of changes in land surface area from those
activities. Therefore, permanent discharges to surface waters must be managed
to protect the stream bank, streambed and structural integrity of the waterway,
to prevent these impacts.
   STORAGE INDICATION METHOD — A reservoir routing procedure based on solution
of the continuity equation (inflow minus outflow equals the change in storage)
with outflow defined as a function of storage volume and depth.
   STORM FREQUENCY — The number of times that a given storm "event" occurs or
is exceeded on the average in a stated period of years. See "return period."
   STORM SEWER — A system of pipes and/or open channels that convey intercepted
runoff and stormwater from other sources, but excludes domestic sewage and
industrial wastes.
   STORMWATER — The surface runoff generated by precipitation reaching the
ground surface.
   STORMWATER MANAGEMENT DISTRICT — Those subareas in which some type of
detention is required to meet the plan requirements and the goals of Act 167.
   STORMWATER MANAGEMENT FACILITY — Any structure, natural or man-made, that,
due to its condition, design, or construction, conveys, stores, or otherwise
affects stormwater runoff quality, rate or quantity. Typical stormwater
management facilities include, but are not limited to, detention and retention
basins, open channels, storm sewers, pipes, and infiltration structures.
   STORMWATER MANAGEMENT PLAN — The plan for managing those land use activities
that will influence stormwater runoff quality and quantity and that would
impact the Tulpehocken Creek and Schuylkill River Watersheds in the City of
Reading adopted by Berks County as required by the Act of October 4, 1978, P.L.
864 (Act 167), and known as the "Tulpehocken Creek Watershed Act 167 Stormwater
Management Plan" and the "Schuylkill River Watershed Act 167 Stormwater
Management Plan."
   STORMWATER MANAGEMENT SITE PLAN — The plan prepared by the applicant or
developer or his representative indicating how stormwater runoff will be
managed at the particular site of interest according to this Part.
   STREAM — A natural watercourse.
   STREAM BUFFER — The land area adjacent to each side of a stream, essential
to maintaining water quality. See "buffer."
   STREAM ENCLOSURE — A bridge, culvert or other structure in excess of 100
feet in length upstream to downstream which encloses a regulated water of this
commonwealth.
   SUBAREA (SUBWATERSHED) — The smallest drainage unit of a watershed for which
stormwater management criteria have been established in the stormwater
management plan.
   SUBDIVISION — The division or redivision of a lot, tract, or parcel of land
by any means into two or more lots, tracts, parcels or other divisions of land,
including changes in existing lot lines for the purpose, whether immediate or
future, of lease, partition by the court for distribution to heirs or devisees,
transfer of ownership, or building or lot development; provided, however, that
the subdivision by lease of land for agricultural purposes into parcels of more
than 10 acres, not involving any new street or easement of access or any
residential dwelling, shall be exempted.
   SURFACE WATERS OF THE COMMONWEALTH — Any and all rivers, streams, creeks,
rivulets, ditches, watercourses, storm sewers, lakes, dammed water, wetlands,
ponds, springs, and all other bodies or channels of conveyance of surface, or
parts thereof, whether natural or artificial, within or on the boundaries of
this commonwealth.
   SWALE — A low-lying stretch of land which gathers or carries surface water
runoff.
   TIMBER OPERATIONS — See "forest management."
   TIME-OF-CONCENTRATION (TC) — The time for surface runoff to travel from the
hydraulically most distant point of the watershed to a point of interest within
the watershed. This time is the combined total of overland flow time and flow
time in pipes or channels, if any.
   TOP-OF-BANK — Highest point of elevation in a stream channel cross section
at which a rising water level just begins to flow out of the channel and over
the floodplain.
   VERNAL POND — Seasonal depressional wetlands that are covered by shallow
water for variable periods from winter to spring, but may be completely dry for
most of the summer and fall.
   WATERCOURSE — A channel or conveyance of surface water having defined bed
and banks, whether natural or artificial, with perennial or intermittent flow.
   WATERS OF THE COMMONWEALTH — Any and all rivers, streams, creeks, rivulets,
ditches, watercourses, storm sewers, lakes, dammed water, wetlands, ponds,
springs, and all other bodies or channels of conveyance of surface and
underground water, or parts thereof, whether natural or artificial, within or
on the boundaries of this commonwealth.
   WATERSHED — Region or area drained by a river, watercourse or other body of
water, whether natural or artificial.
   WELLHEAD —
   A.   A structure built over a well.
   B.   The source of water for a well.
   WELLHEAD PROTECTION AREA — The surface and subsurface area surrounding a
water supply well, well field, spring or infiltration gallery supplying a
public water system, through which contaminants are reasonably likely to move
toward and reach the water source.
   WET BASIN — Pond for urban runoff management that is designed to detain
urban runoff and always contains water.
   WETLAND — Those areas that are inundated or saturated by surface or
groundwater at a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and that under
normal circumstances do support, a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted
for life in saturated soil conditions, including swamps, marshes, bogs, fens,
and similar areas.
5.   Editor's Note: See 32 P.S. § 680.1 et seq.
6.   Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10503(1.1).
7.   Editor's Note: Amended during codification (see
Ch. 1, General Provisions, Part 2).
C   Stormwater Management
§ 505-121. General requirements.
   A.   Applicants proposing regulated activities in the City of Reading which
do not fall under the exemption criteria shown in §
505-142 shall submit a drainage plan consistent with the applicable (Schuylkill
River or Tulpehocken Creek) stormwater management plan to the municipality for
review. These criteria shall apply to the total proposed development even if
development is to take place in stages.
   B.   The applicant is required to evaluate practicable alternatives to the
surface discharge of stormwater, the creation of impervious surfaces and the
degradation of waters of the commonwealth, and must maintain as much as
possible the natural hydrologic regime.
   C.   The drainage plan must be designed consistent with the sequencing
provisions of §
505-124 to ensure maintenance of the natural hydrologic regime and to promote
groundwater recharge where appropriate and to protect groundwater and surface
water quality and quantity. The drainage plan designer must proceed
sequentially in accordance with Subpart C of this Part.
   D.   Stormwater drainage systems shall be provided in order to permit
unimpeded flow along natural watercourses, except as modified by stormwater
management facilities or open channels consistent with this Part.
   E.   Existing points of concentrated drainage that discharge onto adjacent
property shall not be altered in any manner which could cause property damage
without permission of the affected property owner(s) and shall be subject to
any applicable discharge criteria specified in this Part.
   F.   Areas of existing diffused drainage discharge shall be subject to any
applicable discharge criteria in the general direction of existing discharge,
whether proposed to be concentrated or maintained as diffused drainage areas,
except as otherwise provided by this Part. If diffused drainage discharge is
proposed to be concentrated and discharged onto adjacent property, the
applicant must document that adequate downstream conveyance facilities exist to
safely transport the concentrated discharge, or otherwise prove that no
erosion, sedimentation, flooding or other impacts will result from the
concentrated discharge.
   G.   Where a development site is traversed by existing watercourses,
drainage easements shall be provided conforming to the line of such
watercourses. The terms of the easement shall conform to the stream buffer
requirements contained in §
505-126B(6) of this Part.
   H.   Any stormwater management facilities regulated by this Part that would
be located in or adjacent to waters of the commonwealth or wetlands shall be
subject to approval by PaDEP through the joint permit application process, or,
where deemed appropriate by PaDEP, the general permit process. When there is a
question whether wetlands may be involved, it is the responsibility of the
applicant or his agent to show that the land in question cannot be classified
as wetlands; otherwise, approval to work in the area must be obtained from
PaDEP.
   I.   Any stormwater management facilities regulated by this Part that would
be located on state highway rights-of-way shall be subject to approval by the
Pennsylvania Department of Transportation (PennDOT).
   J.   Minimization of impervious surfaces and infiltration of runoff through
seepage beds, infiltration trenches, etc., are encouraged, where soil
conditions permit, to reduce the size or eliminate the need for detention
facilities or other structural BMPs.
   K.   Roof drains shall not be connected to streets, sanitary or storm sewers
or roadside ditches in order to promote overland flow and infiltration/
percolation of stormwater where advantageous to do so. When it is more
advantageous to connect directly to streets or storm sewers, then it shall be
permitted on a case-by-case basis by the municipality.
   L.   All stormwater runoff shall be pretreated for water quality prior to
discharge to surface or groundwater.
   M.   All regulated earth disturbance activities within the municipality
shall be designed, implemented, operated and maintained to meet the purposes of
this Part, through these two elements:
      (1)   Erosion and sediment control during the earth disturbance
activities (e.g., during construction).
      (2)   Water quality protection measures after completion of earth
disturbance activities (i.e., after construction), including operations and
maintenance.
   N.   No regulated earth disturbance activities within the municipality shall
commence until the requirements of this Part are met.
   O.   Postconstruction water quality protection shall be addressed as
required by §
505-126.
   P.   Operations and maintenance of permanent stormwater BMPs shall be
addressed as required by Subpart G.
   Q.   All best management practices (BMPs) used to meet the requirements of
this Part shall conform to the state water quality requirements, and any more
stringent requirements as determined by the municipality.
   R.   Techniques described in Appendix E of this Part (Low-Impact
Development) 8  are encouraged, because they reduce the costs of complying with
the requirements of this Part and the state water quality requirements.
   S.   In selecting the appropriate BMPs or combinations thereof, the
applicant shall consider the following:
      (1)   Total contributing area.
      (2)   Permeability and infiltration rate of the site soils.
      (3)   Slope and depth to bedrock.
      (4)   Seasonal high water table.
      (5)   Proximity to building foundations and wellheads.
      (6)   Erodibility of soils.
      (7)   Land availability and configuration of the topography.
      (8)   Peak discharge and required volume control.
      (9)   Stream bank erosion.
      (10)   Efficiency of the BMPs to mitigate potential water quality
problems.
      (11)   The volume of runoff that will be effectively treated.
      (12)   The nature of the pollutant(s) being removed.
      (13)   Maintenance requirements.
      (14)   Creation/protection of aquatic and wildlife habitat.
      (15)   Recreational value.
   T.   Transference of runoff from one DEP designated Act 167 watershed to
another shall be prohibited.
8.   Editor's Note: Appendix E is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 505-122. Permit requirements by other government entities.
The following permit requirements may apply to certain regulated earth
disturbance activities, and must be met prior to commencement of regulated
earth disturbance activities, as applicable:
   A.   All regulated earth disturbance activities subject to permit
requirements by DEP under regulations at 25 Pa. Code, Chapter 102.
   B.   Work within natural drainageways subject to permit by DEP under 25 Pa.
Code, Chapter 105.
   C.   Any stormwater management facility that would be located in or adjacent
to surface waters of the commonwealth, including wetlands, subject to permit by
DEP under 25 Pa. Code, Chapter 105.
   D.   Any stormwater management facility that would be located on a state
highway right- of-way, or require access from a state highway, shall be subject
to approval by the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation (PennDOT).
   E.   Culverts, bridges, storm sewers or any other facilities which must pass
or convey flows from the tributary area and any facility which may constitute a
dam subject to permit by DEP under 25 Pa. Code, Chapter 105.
§ 505-123. Erosion and sediment control during regulated earth disturbance
activities.
   A.   No regulated earth disturbance activities within the municipality shall
commence until the municipality receives or the municipality receives notice of
an approval from the Conservation District of an erosion and sediment control
plan for construction activities.
   B.   DEP has regulations that require an erosion and sediment control plan
for any earth disturbance activity of 5,000 square feet or more, under 25 Pa.
Code § 102.4(b).
   C.   In addition, under 25 Pa. Code, Chapter 92a, a DEP "NPDES construction
activities" permit is required for regulated earth disturbance activities. 9
   D.   Evidence of any necessary permit(s) for regulated earth disturbance
activities from the appropriate DEP regional office or County Conservation
District must be provided to the municipality. The issuance of an NPDES
construction permit (or permit coverage under the statewide general permit
(PAG-2) satisfies the requirements Subsection A.
   E.   A copy of the erosion and sediment control plan and any required
permit, as required by DEP regulations, shall be available at the project site
at all times.
   F.   Additional erosion and sediment control design standards and criteria
are recommended to be applied where infiltration BMPs are proposed shall
include the following:
      (1)   Areas proposed for infiltration BMPs shall be protected from
sedimentation and compaction during the construction phase to maintain maximum
infiltration capacity.
      (2)   Infiltration BMPs shall not be constructed nor receive runoff until
the entire contributory drainage area to the infiltration BMP has achieved
final stabilization.
9.   Editor's Note: Amended during codification (see
Ch. 1, General Provisions, Part 2).
§ 505-124. Nonstructural project design (sequencing to minimize stormwater
impacts).
   A.   The design of all regulated activities shall include the following
steps in sequence to minimize stormwater impacts:
      (1)   The applicant is required to evaluate practicable alternatives to
the surface discharge of stormwater, the creation of impervious surfaces and
the degradation of waters of the commonwealth, and must maintain as much as
possible the natural hydrologic regime of the site.
      (2)   An alternative is practicable if it is available and capable of
being done after taking into consideration cost, existing technology and
logistics in light of overall project purposes, and other municipal
requirements.
      (3)   All practicable alternatives to the discharge of stormwater are
presumed to have less adverse impact on quantity and quality of waters of the
commonwealth unless otherwise demonstrated.
   B.   The applicant shall demonstrate that they designed the regulated
activities in the following sequence to minimize the increases in stormwater
runoff and impacts to water quality:
      (1)   Prepare an existing resource and site analysis map (ERSAM), showing
environmentally sensitive areas including, but not limited to, steep slopes,
ponds, lakes, streams, wetlands, hydric soils, vernal pools, floodplains,
stream buffer zones, hydrologic soil groups A and B (areas conducive to
infiltration), special geologic features, any existing recharge areas and any
other requirements outlined in
Chapter 515, Subdivision and Land Development.
      (2)   Establish appropriate buffers for each of the delineated
environmentally sensitive areas per Chapter 600, Zoning. (See §
505-126B(6) for stream buffers and §
505-130K for special geologic feature buffers.)
      (3)   Prepare a draft project layout avoiding sensitive areas identified
in Subsection B(1).
      (4)   Identify site specific existing conditions drainage areas,
discharge points, recharge areas and hydrologic soil groups A and B.
      (5)   Evaluate nonstructural stormwater management alternatives.
         (a)   Minimize earth disturbance.
         (b)   Minimize impervious surfaces.
         (c)   Break up large impervious surfaces.
      (6)   Satisfy infiltration objective (§
505-125) and provide for stormwater pretreatment prior to infiltration.
Pretreatment may not be necessary for rooftop runoff which enters the
infiltration facility directly from a roof leader.
      (7)   Satisfy water quality (§
505-126) and stream bank erosion protection objective (§
505-127).
      (8)   Determine what management district the site falls into (Appendix D)
and conduct an existing conditions runoff analysis.
      (9)   Prepare final project design to maintain existing conditions
drainage areas and discharge points, to minimize earth disturbance and
impervious surfaces, and to the maximum extent possible, to ensure the
remaining site development has no surface or point discharge.
      (10)   Conduct a proposed conditions runoff analysis based on the final
design and to meet the release rate and in turn the overbank flow and extreme
event requirements (§
505-128).
      (11)   Manage any remaining runoff through treatment prior to discharge,
as part of detention, bioretention, direct discharge or other structural
control.
§ 505-125. Groundwater recharge (infiltration; recharge; bioretention).
   A.   The requirements for groundwater recharge differ for the Schuylkill
River watershed and the Tulpehocken Creek watershed. The applicant shall apply
the appropriate regulations based on the location of a proposed site within the
Schuylkill River or Tulpehocken Creek watersheds.
   B.   Groundwater recharge for the Schuylkill River watershed.
      (1)   Maximizing the groundwater recharge capacity of the area being
developed is required. Design of the infiltration stormwater management
facilities shall give consideration to providing groundwater recharge to
compensate for the reduction in the percolation that occurs when the ground
surface is disturbed or impervious surface is created. It is recommended that
roof runoff be directed to infiltration BMPs, which can be over-designed to
compensate for the infiltration losses due to parking areas. It is recommended
that roof runoff be directed to infiltration BMPs which may be designed to
compensate for the runoff from parking areas. These measures are required to be
consistent with §
505-103 and take advantage of utilizing any existing recharge areas.
      (2)   Infiltration may not be feasible on every site due to site-specific
limitations such as soil type. If it cannot be physically accomplished, due to
seasonal high water table, soil permeability rate, soil depth or setback
distances from special geologic features, then the design professional shall be
responsible to show that this cannot be physically accomplished. If it can be
physically accomplished, then the volume of runoff to be infiltrated shall be
determined from Subsection B(3)(c) depending on demonstrated site conditions
and shall be the greater of the two volumes.
      (3)   Infiltration BMPs within the Schuylkill River Watershed shall meet
the following minimum requirements:
         (a)   Infiltration requirements.
            [1]   Regulated activities will be required to infiltrate, where
site conditions permit, a portion of the runoff created by the development as
part of an overall stormwater management plan designed for the site. The volume
of runoff to be infiltrated shall be determined from Subsection B(3)(c)[1] or
[2], depending upon demonstrated site conditions.
         (b)   Infiltration BMPs intended to receive runoff from developed
areas shall be selected based on suitability of soils and site conditions and
shall be constructed on soils that have the following characteristics:
            [1]   A minimum depth of 36 inches between the bottom of the BMP
and the limiting zone.
            [2]   An infiltration and/or percolation rate sufficient to accept
the additional stormwater load and drain completely as determined by field
tests conducted by the applicant's design professional.
            [3]   The infiltration facility shall be capable of completely
infiltrating the required retention (infiltration) volume within four days (96
hours).
            [4]   Pretreatment shall be provided prior to infiltration.
         (c)   The size of the infiltration facility within the Schuylkill
River watershed shall be based upon the following volume criteria:
            [1]   NRCS curve number equation.
               [a]   The NRCS runoff equation shall be utilized to calculate
infiltration requirements (I) in inches.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/6541e9c0b130f7197f9155a8a6441bb6dc5ca83c/
IMAGES/0-0-0-56.png]
Where:
   CN   =   SCS (NRCS) curve number of existing conditions contributing to the
infiltration facility
               [b]   This equation is displayed graphically in, and the
infiltration requirement can be determined from Figure 505-125.1.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/6541e9c0b130f7197f9155a8a6441bb6dc5ca83c/
IMAGES/0-0-0-58.png]
Figure 505-125.1 Infiltration requirement based upon NRCS Curve Number.
The retention (infiltration) volume (Rev) required to meet the infiltration
requirement would therefore be computed as:
Rev = I * impervious area (square feet)/(12 in/ft) = Cubic Feet Eqn: 505-125.2
Where:
I   =   infiltration requirements (in inches)
            [2]   Annual recharge — water budget approach.
               [a]   It has been determined that infiltrating 0.46 inch of
runoff from the impervious areas will aid in maintaining the hydrologic regime
of the Schuylkill River Watershed. If the goals of §
505-125B(3)(c)[1] cannot be achieved, then 0.46 inch of rainfall shall be
infiltrated from all impervious areas, up to an existing site conditions curve
number of 81. Above a curve number of 81, Equation 505-125.1 or the curve in
Figure 505-125.1 should be used to determine the infiltration requirement.
               [b]   The retention (infiltration) volume (Rev) required again
would therefore be computed as:
Rev = I * impervious area (square feet)/(12 in/ft) = Cubic Feet Eqn: 505-125.2
   C.   Groundwater recharge for the Tulpehocken Creek Watershed.
      (1)   The ability to retain and maximize the groundwater recharge
capacity of the area being developed is encouraged. Design of the infiltration/
recharge stormwater management facilities shall give consideration to providing
groundwater recharge to compensate for the reduction in the percolation that
occurs when the ground surface is paved and roofed over.
      (2)   These measures are encouraged, particularly in hydrologic soil
groups A and B and should be utilized wherever feasible. Soils used for the
construction of basins shall have low-erodibility factors ("K" factors).
      (3)   Infiltration BMPs shall meet the following minimum requirements:
         (a)   Infiltration BMPs intended to receive runoff from developed
areas shall be selected based on suitability of soils and site conditions and
shall be constructed on soils that have the following characteristics:
            [1]   A minimum depth of 48 inches between the bottom of the
facility and the seasonal high water table and/or bedrock (limiting zones).
            [2]   An infiltration and/or percolation rate sufficient to accept
the additional stormwater load and drain completely as determined by field
tests conducted by the owner's professional designer.
         (b)   Infiltration BMPs receiving only roof runoff may be placed in
soils having a minimum depth of 24 inches between the bottom of the facility
and the limiting zone.
         (c)   The size of the recharge facility within the Tulpehocken Creek
Watershed shall be based upon the following equation:
Rev = [(S)(Rv)(A)]/12   Eqn: 505-125.4
Where:
Rev = Recharge volume (acre-feet)
S = Soil-specific recharge factor (inches)
Rv = Volumetric runoff coefficient
A = Site area contributing to the recharge facility (acres)
And:
Rv   =   0.05 + 0.009 (I)
Where:
I   =   Percent impervious area
And:
S shall be obtained based upon hydrologic soil group based upon the table
below:
 
Hydrologic Soil Group Soil Specific Recharge Factor (S)
A 0.38 inch
B 0.25 inch
C 0.13 inch
D 0.06 inch
 
If more than one hydrologic soil group (HSG) is present at a site, a composite
recharge volume shall be computed based upon the proportion of total site area
within each HSG.
         (d)   The recharge volume provided at the site shall be directed to
the most permeable HSG available.
         (e)   The recharge facility shall be capable of completely
infiltrating the impounded water within 48 hours.
         (f)   The recharge facility shall be capable of completely
infiltrating the impounded water within 48 hours.
   D.   Groundwater recharge for the Schuylkill River and Tulpehocken Creek
Watersheds.
      (1)   Soils. A detailed soils evaluation of the project site shall be
required where practicable to determine the suitability of infiltration
facilities. The evaluation shall be performed by a qualified design
professional, and at a minimum, address soil permeability, depth to bedrock and
subgrade stability. The general process for designing the infiltration BMP
shall be:
         (a)   Analyze hydrologic soil groups as well as natural and man-made
features within the site to determine general areas of suitability for
infiltration practices. In areas where development on fill material is under
consideration, conduct geotechnical investigations of subgrade stability;
infiltration is not permitted to be ruled out without conducting these tests.
         (b)   Provide field tests such as double ring infiltrometer or
hydraulic conductivity tests (at the level of the proposed infiltration
surface) to determine the appropriate hydraulic conductivity rate. Percolation
tests are not recommended for design purposes.
         (c)   Design the infiltration structure for the required retention
(Rev) volume based on field determined capacity at the level of the proposed
infiltration surface.
         (d)   If on-lot infiltration structures are proposed by the
applicant's design professional, it must be demonstrated to the municipality
that the soils are conducive to infiltrate on the lots identified.
      (2)   Carbonate areas.
         (a)   The applicant is required to investigate the ability of all
areas on the site which are not underlain by carbonate rock to meet the
infiltration requirements of Subsection B(3) or C(3), as applicable. If this
investigation proves infeasible, infiltration can occur on areas underlain by
carbonate rock by following the recommended procedure below in conjunction with
Figure B-2 in Appendix B. 10  However, the applicant is not required to use
infiltration in carbonate areas even if the site falls into the "Recommended"
range on Figure B-2 in Appendix B. If infiltration is not proposed, the
calculated infiltration volume [Subsection B(3) or Subsection C(3)] shall be
treated by an acceptable BMP by a facility which prevents the required volume
of runoff from being discharged off-site. Acceptable methods for treating this
volume are storage and reuse, bioretention, wet ponds, and soil composting.
Other methods may be acceptable and all methods should generally follow the
design guidelines outlined in the Pennsylvania Stormwater Best Management
Practice Manual, latest edition.
         (b)   Infiltration BMP loading rate percentages in Figure B-2 in
Appendix B shall be calculated as follows:
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/6541e9c0b130f7197f9155a8a6441bb6dc5ca83c/
IMAGES/0-0-0-60.png]
         (c)   The area tributary to the infiltration BMP shall be weighted as
follows:
 
Area Description                         Weighting
All disturbed area to be made impervious 100%
All disturbed areas to be made pervious  50%
All undisturbed impervious areas         100%
All undisturbed pervious areas           0%
         (d)   Soil thickness is to be measured from the bottom of any proposed
infiltration BMP. The effective soil thickness in Figure B-4 in Appendix B is
the measured soil thickness multiplied by the thickness factor based on soil
permeability, as follows:
 
Permeability Range      Thickness Factor
6.0 to 12.0 inches/hour 0.8
2.0 to 6.0 inches/hour  1.0
1.0 to 2.0 inches/hour  1.4
0.75 to 1.0 inch/hour   1.2
0.5 to 0.75 inch/hour   1.0
         (e)   Whenever a basin will be located in an area underlain by
limestone, a geological evaluation of the proposed location shall be conducted
to determine susceptibility to sinkhole formations. The design of all
facilities over limestone formations shall include measures to prevent
groundwater contamination and, where necessary, sinkhole formation.
         (f)   It shall be the developer's responsibility to verify if the site
is underlain by limestone. The following note shall be attached to all drainage
plans and signed and sealed by the developer's engineer/surveyor/landscape/
architect/geologist:
_________________________, certify that the proposed detention basin (circle
one) is/is not underlain by limestone.
      (3)   Stormwater hotspots:
         (a)   Following is a list of examples of designated hotspots. If a
site is designated as a hotspot, it has important implications for how
stormwater is managed. First and foremost, untreated stormwater runoff from
hotspots shall not be allowed to recharge into groundwater where it may
contaminate water supplies. Therefore, the Rev requirement shall not be applied
to development sites that fit into the hotspot category (the entire WQv must
still be treated). Second, a greater level of stormwater treatment shall be
considered at hotspot sites to prevent pollutant washoff after construction.
EPA's NPDES stormwater program requires some industrial sites to prepare and
implement a stormwater pollution prevention plan.
         (b)   Examples of hotspots:
            [1]   Vehicle salvage yards and recycling facilities.
            [2]   Vehicle fueling stations.
            [3]   Vehicle service and maintenance facilities.
            [4]   Vehicle and equipment cleaning facilities.
            [5]   Fleet storage areas (bus, truck, etc.).
            [6]   Industrial sites (based on Standard Industrial Codes).
            [7]   Marinas (service and maintenance).
            [8]   Outdoor liquid container storage.
            [9]   Outdoor loading/unloading facilities.
            [10]   Public works storage areas.
            [11]   Facilities that generate or store hazardous materials.
            [12]   Commercial container nursery.
            [13]   Other land uses and activities as designated by an
appropriate review authority.
         (c)   The following land uses and activities are not normally
considered hotspots:
            [1]   Residential streets and rural highways.
            [2]   Residential development.
            [3]   Institutional development.
            [4]   Office developments.
            [5]   Nonindustrial rooftops.
            [6]   Pervious areas, except golf courses and nurseries [which may
need an integrated pest management (IPM) plan].
         (d)   While large highways [average daily traffic volume (ADT) greater
than 30,000] are not designated as a stormwater hotspot; however, it is
important to ensure that highway stormwater management plans adequately protect
groundwater.
      (4)   Extreme caution shall be exercised where infiltration is proposed
in source water protection areas as defined by the local municipality or water
authority.
      (5)   Infiltration facilities shall be used in conjunction with other
innovative or traditional BMPs, stormwater control facilities, and
nonstructural stormwater management alternatives.
      (6)   Extreme caution shall be exercised where salt or chloride
(municipal salt storage) would be a pollutant, since soils do little to filter
this pollutant and it may contaminate the groundwater. The qualified design
professional shall evaluate the possibility of groundwater contamination from
the proposed infiltration facility and perform a hydrogeologic justification
study if necessary.
      (7)   The infiltration requirement in high-quality or exceptional value
waters shall be subject to the Department's Chapter 93 antidegradation
regulations.
      (8)   An impermeable liner will be required in detention basins where the
possibility of groundwater contamination exists. A detailed hydrogeologic
investigation may be required by the municipality.
      (9)   The municipality shall require the applicant to provide safeguards
against groundwater contamination for land uses that may cause groundwater
contamination should there be a mishap or spill.
      (10)   Unless otherwise specified in
Chapter 600, Zoning, the following setbacks for infiltration facilities shall
apply:
         (a)   One hundred feet from water supply wells.
         (b)   Ten feet downslope or 100 feet upslope from building
foundations.
         (c)   Fifty feet from septic system drainfields.
         (d)   Fifty feet from a geologic contact with carbonate bedrock,
unless a preliminary site investigation is done in the carbonate bedrock to
show the absence of special geologic features within 50 feet of the proposed
infiltration area.
         (e)   One hundred feet from the property line unless documentation is
provided to show all setbacks from wells, foundations and drainfields on the
neighboring property will be met.
      (11)   Where pervious pavement is permitted for parking lots,
recreational facilities, nondedicated streets, or other areas, pavement
construction specifications shall be noted on the plan.
10.   Editor's Note: Appendix B is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 505-126. Water quality requirements.
   A.   The applicant shall comply with the following water quality
requirements of this section.
   B.   No regulated earth disturbance activities within the municipality shall
commence until approval by the municipality of a plan which demonstrates
compliance with state water quality requirements postconstruction is complete.
      (1)   The BMPs shall be designed, implemented and maintained to meet
state water quality requirements, and any other more stringent requirements as
determined by the municipality.
      (2)   To control postconstruction stormwater impacts from regulated earth
disturbance activities, state water quality requirements can be met by BMPs,
including site design, which provide for replication of preconstruction
stormwater infiltration and runoff conditions, so that postconstruction
stormwater discharges do not degrade the physical, chemical or biological
characteristics of the receiving waters. As described in the DEP Comprehensive
Stormwater Management Policy (#392-0300-002, September 28, 2002), this may be
achieved by the following:
         (a)   Infiltration: replication of preconstruction stormwater
infiltration conditions.
         (b)   Treatment: use of water quality treatment BMPs to ensure
filtering out of the chemical and physical pollutants from the stormwater
runoff.
         (c)   Stream bank and streambed protection: management of volume and
rate of postconstruction stormwater discharges to prevent physical degradation
of receiving waters (e.g., from scouring).
      (3)   Developed areas shall provide adequate storage and treatment
facilities necessary to capture and treat stormwater runoff. The infiltration
volume computed under §
505-125 may be a component of the water quality volume if the applicant chooses
to manage both components in a single facility. If the infiltration volume is
less than the water quality volume, the remaining water quality volume may be
captured and treated by methods other than infiltration BMPs. The required
water quality volume (WQv) is the storage capacity needed to capture and treat
a portion of stormwater runoff from the developed areas of the site. To achieve
this goal, the following criterion is established:
         (a)   The following calculation formula is to be used to determine the
water quality storage volume, (WQv), in acre-feet of storage for the watershed:
   WQv   =   [(P)(Rv)(A)]/12   Eqn: 505-126.1
   WQv = Water quality volume (acre-feet)
P = 1 inch
A = Total contributing drainage area to the water quality BMP (acres)
Rv = 0.05 + 0.009(I), where I is the percent of the area that is impervious
surface [(impervious area/A)*100]
         (b)   This volume requirement can be accomplished by the permanent
volume of a wet basin or the detained volume from other BMPs.
         (c)   Release of water can begin at the start of the storm (i.e., the
invert of the water quality orifice is at the invert of the facility). The
design of the facility shall provide for protection from clogging and unwanted
sedimentation.
      (4)   For areas within defined special protection subwatersheds which
include exceptional value (EV) and high-quality (HQ) waters, the temperature
and quality of water and streams shall be maintained through the use of
temperature-sensitive BMPs and stormwater conveyance systems.
      (5)   To accomplish the above, the applicant shall submit original and
innovative designs to the Municipal Engineer for review and approval. Such
designs may achieve the water quality objectives through a combination of BMPs
(best management practices).
      (6)   If a perennial or intermittent stream passes through the site, the
applicant shall create a stream buffer extending a minimum of 50 feet to either
side of the top-of-bank of the channel. The buffer area shall be maintained
with and encouraged to use appropriate native vegetation (refer to Appendix H
of Pennsylvania Handbook of Best Management Practices for Developing Area for
plant lists). If the applicable rear or side yard setback is less than 50 feet,
the buffer width may be reduced to 25% of the setback, to a minimum of 10 feet.
If an existing buffer is legally prescribed (i.e., deed, covenant, easement,
etc.) and it exceeds the requirements of this Part, the existing buffer shall
be maintained. (The municipality may select a smaller or larger buffer width if
desired, but the selected buffer may not be less than 10 feet). This does not
include lakes or wetlands.
      (7)   Evidence of any necessary permit(s) for regulated earth disturbance
activities from the appropriate DEP regional office must be provided to the
municipality. The issuance of an NPDES construction permit [or permit coverage
under the statewide general permit (PAG-2) satisfies the requirements of
Subsection B(1)].
§ 505-127. Stream bank erosion requirements.
   A.   In addition to control of the water quality volume, in order to
minimize the impact of stormwater runoff on downstream stream bank erosion, the
primary requirement is to design a BMP to detain the proposed conditions two-
year, twenty-four-hour design storm to the existing conditions one-year flow
using the SCS Type II distribution. Additionally, provisions shall be made
(such as adding a small orifice at the bottom of the outlet structure) so that
the proposed conditions one-year storm takes a minimum of 24 hours to drain
from the facility from a point where the maximum volume of water from the one-
year storm is captured (i.e., the maximum water surface elevation is achieved
in the facility). Release of water can begin at the start of the storm (i.e.,
the invert of the water quality orifice is at the invert of the facility).
   B.   The minimum orifice size in the outlet structure to the BMP shall be a
three-inch diameter orifice and a trash rack shall be installed to prevent
clogging. On sites with small contributing drainage areas to this BMP that do
not provide enough runoff volume to allow a twenty-four-hour attenuation with
the three-inch orifice, the calculations shall be submitted showing this
condition. Orifice sizes less than three inches can be utilized provided that
the design will prevent clogging of the intake.
   C.   In "no detention" areas (District C) only (see §
505-128), the objective is not to attenuate the storms greater than the two-
year recurrence interval. This can be accomplished by configuring the outlet
structure not to control the larger storms, or by a bypass channel that diverts
only the two-year stormwater runoff into the basin, or conversely, diverts
flows in excess of the two-year storm away from the basin.
§ 505-128. Stormwater management districts.
   A.   The City of Reading is comprised of two watersheds: Tulpehocken Creek
and Schuylkill River. Additionally, each of these watersheds has been divided
into stormwater management districts as shown on the Management District Map in
Appendix D. 11
      (1)   In addition to the requirements specified in Table 505-128.1 below,
the groundwater recharge (§505-125 ), water quality (§
505-126), and stream bank erosion control (§
505-127), requirements shall be implemented.
      (2)   Standards for managing runoff from each subarea in the Schuylkill
River Watershed for the two-year through one-hundred-year design storms are
shown in Tables 505-128.1 and 505-128.2. Development sites located in each of
the districts must control proposed conditions runoff rates to existing
conditions runoff rates for the design storms in accord with Tables 505-128.1
and 505-128.2.
Table 505-128.1
Water Quantity Requirements for Areas in the Schuylkill River Watershed
Management District Proposed Condition  Existing Condition Equivalent Release
                    Design Storm        Design Storm       Rate
Management Proposed Condition           Existing Condition Equivalent Release
District   Design Storm                 Design Storm       Rate
A          2-year             Reduce to 1-year             —
           5-year                       5-year             100%
           10-year                      10-year            100%
           25-year                      25-year            100%
           50-year                      50-year            100%
           100-year                     100-year           100%
B          2-year             Reduce to 1-year             —
           5-year                       2-year             30%
           10-year                      5-year             75%
           25-year                      10-year            75%
           50-year                      25-year            75%
           100-year                     50-year            75%
C          2-year             Reduce to 2-year             —
           5-year                       5-year             100%
           10-year                      10-year            100%
           25-year                      25-year            100%
           50-year                      50-year            100%
           100-year                     100-year           100%
 
Table 505-128.2
Water Quantity Requirements for Areas in the Tulpehocken Creek Watershed
Management District Design Storm Post-  Design Storm Pre- Development
                    Development
Management District Design Storm Post-           Design Storm Pre- Development
                    Development
A                   2-year             Reduce to 1-year
                    5-year                       5-year
                    10-year                      10-year
                    25-year                      25-year
B1                  2-year             Reduce to 1-year
                    5-year                       2-year
                    10-year                      5-year
                    25-year                      10-year
B2                  2-year             Reduce to 1-year
                    5-year                       2-year
                    10-year                      5-year
                    25-year                      10-year
                    100-year                     100-year
C                   2-year             Reduce to 1-year
                    5-year                       2-year
 
      (3)   For any site which proposes direct discharge, the site may only
utilize any available capacity in the downstream conveyance system which is
equivalent to the ratio of the proposed development site acreage to the total
watershed acreage to the downstream conveyance system. Therefore, if the
proposed development site is 10% of the total watershed area, the increase in
runoff may only use up 10% of the documented available downstream, capacity at
peak flow.
      (4)   All areas which propose direct discharge to the main stem or to an
existing stormwater drainage system must still meet the requirements of the
groundwater recharge criteria (§
505-125), water quality criteria (§
505-126), and stream bank erosion criteria (§
505-127).
   B.   General. Proposed condition rates of runoff from any regulated activity
shall not exceed the peak release rates of runoff prior to development for the
design storms specified on the Stormwater Management District Watershed Map
(Appendix D) and §
505-128, of this Part.
   C.   District boundaries. The boundaries of the stormwater management
districts are shown on an Official Map that is available for inspection at the
municipal office. A copy of the Official Map at a reduced scale is included in
the Appendix D. The exact location of the stormwater management district
boundaries as they apply to a given development site shall be determined by
mapping the boundaries using the two-foot topographic contours (or most
accurate data required) provided as part of the drainage plan.
   D.   Sites located in more than one district. For a proposed development
site located within two or more stormwater management district category
subareas, the peak discharge rate from any subarea shall meet the management
district criteria for which the discharge is located, as indicated in §
505-128. The calculated peak discharges shall apply regardless of whether the
grading plan changes the drainage area by subarea. An exception to the above
may be granted if discharges from multiple subareas recombine in proximity to
the discharge site. In this case, peak discharge in any direction shall follow
Management District A criteria, provided that the overall site discharge meets
the management district criteria for which the discharge is located.
   E.   Off-site areas. Off-site areas that drain through a proposed
development site are not subject to release rate criteria when determining
allowable peak runoff rates. However, on-site drainage facilities shall be
designed to safely convey off-site flows through the development site.
   F.   Site areas. Where the site area to be impacted by a proposed
development activity differs significantly from the total site area, only the
proposed impact area utilizing stormwater management measures shall be subject
to the management district criteria. In other words, unimpacted areas bypassing
the stormwater management facilities would not be subject to the management
district criteria.
   G.   "No harm" option. For any proposed development site not located in a
provisional direct discharge district, the applicant has the option of using a
less-restrictive runoff control (including no detention) if the applicant can
prove that "no harm" would be caused by discharging at a higher runoff rate
than that specified by the stormwater management plan. The "no harm" option is
used when an applicant can prove that the proposed condition hydrographs can
match existing conditions hydrographs, or if it can be proved that the proposed
conditions will not cause increases in peaks at all points downstream. Proof of
"no harm" must be shown based upon the following downstream impact evaluation,
which shall include a downstream hydraulic capacity analysis consistent with
Subsection H to determine if adequate hydraulic capacity exists. The applicant
shall submit to the municipality this evaluation of the impacts due to
increased downstream stormwater flows in the watershed.
      (1)   The hydrologic regime of the site must be maintained.
      (2)   The downstream impact evaluation shall include hydrologic and
hydraulic calculations necessary to determine the impact of hydrograph timing
modifications due to the proposed development upon a dam, highway, structure,
natural point of restricted streamflow or any stream channel section,
established with the concurrence of the municipality.
      (3)   The evaluation shall continue downstream until the increase in flow
diminishes due to additional flow from tributaries and/or stream attenuation.
      (4)   The peak flow values to be used for downstream areas for the design
return period storms (two-, five-, ten-, twenty-five-, fifty-, and one-hundred-
year) shall be the values from the calibrated model for the applicable
(Schuylkill River or Tulpehocken Creek) watershed. These flow values can be
obtained from the original Act 167 watershed stormwater management plans.
      (5)   Applicant-proposed runoff controls which would generate increased
peak flow rates at storm drainage problem areas would, by definition, be
precluded from successful attempts to prove "no harm," except in conjunction
with proposed capacity improvements for the problem areas consistent with §
505-128H.
      (6)   A financial distress shall not constitute grounds for the
municipality to approve the use of the no-harm option.
      (7)   Capacity improvements may be provided as necessary to implement the
no-harm option, which proposes specific capacity improvements to provide that a
less stringent discharge control would not create any harm downstream.
      (8)   Any no-harm justifications shall be submitted by the applicant as
part of the drainage plan submission per Subpart D.
   H.   Downstream hydraulic capacity analysis. Any downstream capacity
hydraulic analysis conducted in accordance with this Part shall use the
following criteria for determining adequacy for accepting increased peak flow
rates:
      (1)   Natural or man-made channels or swales must be able to convey the
increased runoff associated with a two-year return period event within their
banks at velocities consistent with protection of the channels from erosion.
Acceptable velocities shall be based upon criteria included in the DEP Erosion
and Sediment Pollution Control Program Manual.
      (2)   Natural or man-made channels or swales must be able to convey the
increased twenty- five-year return period runoff without creating any hazard to
persons or property.
      (3)   Culverts, bridges, storm sewers or any other facilities which must
pass or convey flows from the tributary area must be designed in accordance
with DEP Chapter 105 regulations (if applicable) and, at minimum, pass the
increased twenty-five-year return period runoff.
   I.   Regional detention alternatives. For certain areas within the study
area, it may be more cost-effective to provide one control facility for more
than one development site than to provide an individual control facility for
each development site. The initiative and funding for any regional runoff
control alternatives are the responsibility of the prospective applicants. The
design of any regional control basins must incorporate reasonable development
of the entire upstream watershed. The peak outflow of a regional basin would be
determined on a case-by-case basis using the hydrologic model of the watershed
consistent with protection of the downstream watershed areas. "Hydrologic
model" refers to the calibrated model as developed for the stormwater
management plan.
   J.   Hardship option. The municipality may hear requests for waivers where
it is alleged that the provisions of this (Act 167) Part inflict unnecessary
hardship upon the applicant. The waiver request shall be in writing and
accompanied by the requisite fee based upon a fee schedule adopted by the
municipality. A copy of the waiver request shall be provided to each of the
following: municipality, Municipal Engineer, Municipal Solicitor and Berks
County Planning Commission. The request shall fully document the nature of the
alleged hardship. The municipality may grant a waiver, provided that all of the
following findings are made in a given case:
      (1)   That there are unique physical circumstances or conditions,
including irregularity of lot size or shape, or exceptional topographical or
other physical conditions peculiar to the particular property, and that the
unnecessary hardship is due to such conditions, and not the circumstances or
conditions generally created by the provisions of this Part in the stormwater
management district in which the property is located.
      (2)   That because of such physical circumstances or conditions, there is
no possibility that the property can be developed in strict conformity with the
provisions of this Part, including the no-harm provisions, and that the
authorization of a waiver is therefore necessary to enable the reasonable use
of the property.
      (3)   That such unnecessary hardship has not been created by the
applicant.
      (4)   That the waiver, if authorized, will represent the minimum waiver
that will afford relief and will represent the least modification possible of
the regulation in issue.
      (5)   That financial hardship is not the criteria for granting of a
hardship waiver. In granting any waiver, the municipality may attach such
conditions and safeguards as it may deem necessary to implement the purposes of
Act 167 and this Part. If a hardship waiver is granted, the applicant must
still manage the quantity, velocity, direction and quality of resulting storm
runoff as is necessary to prevent injury to health, safety or other property.
         (a)   For regulated activities in §
505-105D(1) and (2), the Planning Commission shall hear requests for and decide
on hardship waiver requests on behalf of the municipality.
         (b)   For regulated activities in §
505-105D(4), (5), (6), (7) and (8), the Municipal Engineer shall hear requests
for and decide on hardship waiver requests on behalf of the municipality.
         (c)   The municipality shall not waive the water quality provisions of
this Part.
11.   Editor's Note: Appendix D is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 505-129. Calculation methodology.
   A.   Stormwater runoff from all development sites with a drainage area of
greater than 200 acres shall be calculated using a generally accepted
calculation technique that is based on the NRCS Soil Cover Complex Method.
Table 505-129.1 summarizes acceptable computation methods and the method
selected by the design professional shall be based on the individual
limitations and suitability of each method for a particular site. The
municipality may allow the use of the Rational Method to estimate peak
discharges from drainage areas that contain less than 200 acres. The Soil
Complex Method shall be used for drainage areas greater than 200 acres.
Table 505-129.1
Acceptable Computation Methodologies for Stormwater Management Plans
 
Method                      Method Developed by   Applicability
TR-20 (or commercial                              Applicable where use of full
computer package based on   USDA NRCS             hydrology computer model is
TR-20)                                            desirable or necessary.
TR-55 (or commercial                              Applicable for land
computer package based on   USDA NRCS             development plans within
TR-55)                                            limitations described in TR-
                                                  55.
                            U.S. Army Corps of    Applicable where use of full
HEC-1/HEC-HMS               Engineers             hydrologic computer model is
                                                  desirable or necessary.
                                                  Applicable where use of a
PSRM                        Penn State University hydrologic computer model is
                                                  desirable or necessary;
                                                  simpler than TR-20 or HEC-1.
                                                  For sites less than 200
                                                  acres and with time of
Rational method (or                               concentration less than 60
commercial computer package Emil Kuichling (1889) minutes (Tc < 60 min.), or
based on Rational Method)                         as approved by the
                                                  municipality and/or
                                                  Municipal Engineer.
                                                  Other computation
Other methods               Varies                methodologies approved by
                                                  the municipality and/or
                                                  Municipal Engineer.
 
   B.   All calculations consistent with this Part using the Soil Cover Complex
Method shall use the appropriate design rainfall depths for the various return
period storms according to the region in which they are located as presented in
Table B-1 in Appendix B of this Part. 12  If a hydrologic computer model such
as PSRM or HEC-1/HEC-HMS is used for stormwater runoff calculations, then the
duration of rainfall shall be 24 hours. The SCS "S" curve shown in Figure B-1,
Appendix B of this Part shall be used for the rainfall distribution.
   C.   For the purposes of existing conditions flow rate determination,
undeveloped land shall be considered as "meadow" in good condition, unless the
natural ground cover generates a lower curve number or Rational "C" value
(i.e., forest), as listed in Table B-2 or Table B-3 in Appendix B of this Part.
13
   D.   All calculations using the Rational Method shall use rainfall
intensities consistent with appropriate times-of-concentration for overland
flow and return periods from the design storm curves from Pennsylvania
Department of Transportation Design Rainfall Curves (1986) (Figures B-2 to B-
4). Times of concentration for overland flow shall be calculated using the
methodology presented in Chapter 3 of Urban Hydrology for Small Watersheds,
NRCS, TR-55 (as amended or replaced from time to time by NRCS). Times of
concentration for channel and pipe flow shall be computed using Manning's
equation.
   E.   Runoff curve numbers (CN) for both existing and proposed conditions to
be used in the Soil Cover Complex Method shall be obtained from Table B-2 in
Appendix B of this Part. 14
   F.   Runoff coefficients (c) for both existing and proposed conditions for
use in the Rational Method shall be obtained from Table B-3 in Appendix B of
this Part.
   G.   Where uniform flow is anticipated, the Manning equation shall be used
for hydraulic computations, and to determine the capacity of open channels,
pipes, and storm sewers. Values for Manning's roughness coefficient (n) shall
be consistent with Table B-4 in Appendix B of this Part.
   H.   Outlet structures for stormwater management facilities shall be
designed to meet the performance standards of this Part using any generally
accepted hydraulic analysis technique or method.
   I.   The design of any stormwater detention facilities intended to meet the
performance standards of this Part shall be verified by routing the design
storm hydrograph through these facilities using the Storage-Indication Method.
For drainage areas greater than 200 acres in size, the design storm hydrograph
shall be computed using a calculation method that produces a full hydrograph
(i.e., TR-20, TR-55, HEC-1, PSRM). The municipality may approve the use of any
generally accepted full hydrograph approximation technique that shall use a
total runoff volume that is consistent with the volume from a method that
produces a full hydrograph.
12.   Editor's Note: Appendix B is included at the end of this chapter.
13.   Editor's Note: Appendix B is included at the end of this chapter.
14.   Editor's Note: Appendix B is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 505-130. Other requirements.
   A.   Any stormwater facility located on state highway rights-of-way shall be
subject to approval by the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation (PennDOT).
   B.   Pretreatment shall be provided prior to infiltration.
   C.   All wet basin designs shall incorporate biologic controls consistent
with the West Nile Guidance found in Appendix F. 15
   D.   Any stormwater management facility (i.e., detention basin) designed to
store runoff and requiring a berm or earthen embankment required or regulated
by this Part shall be designed to provide an emergency spillway to handle flow
up to and including the one-hundred-year proposed conditions. The height of
embankment must provide a minimum 1.0 foot of freeboard above the maximum pool
elevation computed when the facility functions for the one-hundred-year
proposed conditions inflow. Should any stormwater management facility require a
dam safety permit under PaDEP Chapter 105, the facility shall be designed in
accordance with Chapter 105 and meet the regulations of Chapter 105 concerning
dam safety which may be required to pass storms larger than the one-hundred-
year event.
   E.   Any facilities that constitute water obstructions (e.g., culverts,
bridges, outfalls, or stream enclosures), and any work involving wetlands
governed by PaDEP Chapter 105 regulations (as amended or replaced from time to
time by PaDEP), shall be designed in accordance with Chapter 105 and will
require a permit from PaDEP.
   F.   Any other drainage conveyance facility that does not fall under Chapter
105 regulations must be able to convey, without damage to the drainage
structure or roadway, runoff from the twenty-five-year design storm with a
minimum 1.0 foot of freeboard measured below the lowest point along the top of
the roadway. Any facility that constitutes a dam as defined in PaDEP Chapter
105 regulations may require a permit under dam safety regulations. Any facility
located within a PennDOT right-of-way must meet PennDOT minimum design
standards and permit submission requirements.
   G.   Any drainage conveyance facility and/or channel not governed by Chapter
105 regulations, must be able to convey, without damage to the drainage
structure or roadway, runoff from the twenty-five-year design storm. Conveyance
facilities to or exiting from stormwater management facilities (i.e., detention
basins) shall be designed to convey the design flow to or from that structure.
Roadway crossings located within designated floodplain areas must be able to
convey runoff from a one-hundred-year design storm. Any facility located within
a PennDOT right-of-way must meet PennDOT minimum design standards and permit
submission requirements.
   H.   Storm sewers must be able to convey proposed conditions runoff from a
twenty-five-year design storm without surcharging inlets, where appropriate.
   I.   Adequate erosion protection shall be provided along all open channels,
and at all points of discharge.
   J.   The design of all stormwater management facilities shall incorporate
sound engineering principles and practices. The municipality reserves the right
to disapprove any design that would result in the construction in or
continuation of a stormwater problem area.
   K.   No stormwater detention facility shall be placed within 50 feet of a
special geologic feature. No stormwater conveyance facility shall be
constructed within 50 feet of a special geologic feature, unless it is
constructed of concrete pipe utilizing watertight joints, or an approved equal.
15.   Editor's Note: Appendix F is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 505-131. NPDES requirements.
Federal regulations approved October 1999, require operators of small municipal
separate storm sewer systems (MS4s) to obtain NPDES Phase II permits from DEP
by March 2003. (NPDES II is an acronym for the National Pollutant Discharge
Elimination System Phase II Stormwater Permitting Regulations.) This program
affects all municipalities in "urbanized areas" of the state. Therefore, these
identified municipalities will be subject to the NPDES Phase II requirements
mandated by the Federal Clean Water Act as administered by DEP. For more
information on NPDES II requirements, contact the DEP Regional Office.
D   Drainage Plan Requirements
§ 505-141. General requirements.
For any of the activities regulated by this Part, the preliminary or final
approval of subdivision and/or land development plans, the issuance of any
building or occupancy permit, or the commencement of any earth disturbance
activity may not proceed until the property owner or applicant or his/her agent
has received written approval of a drainage plan from the municipality and an
adequate erosion and sediment control plan review by the Conservation District.
§ 505-142. Exemptions.
   A.   General exemptions. The following land use activities are exempt from
the drainage plan submission requirements of this Part:
      (1)   Use of land for gardening for home consumption.
      (2)   Agriculture when operated in accordance with a conservation plan or
erosion and sediment control plan (E & S) found adequate by the Conservation
District.
      (3)   Forest management operations which are following the Department of
Environmental Protection's management practices contained in its publication
"Soil Erosion and Sedimentation Control Guidelines for Forestry" and are
operating under an approved E & S plan and must comply with stream buffer
requirements in §
505-126B(6). A copy of the approved E & S plan shall be submitted to the
municipality to prove exemption from the requirements of the stormwater
ordinance.
   B.   Stormwater quantity control exemption.
      (1)   Any regulated activity that meets the impervious area exemption
criteria in Table 505-142.1 or Table 505-142.2 shall not be required to submit
a drainage plan implementing the stormwater quantity controls, specified in §
505-128 of this Part. These criteria shall apply to the total development even
if development is to take place in phases. The date of the municipal ordinance
adoption shall be the starting point from which to consider tracts as "parent
tracts" in which future subdivisions and respective impervious area
computations shall be cumulatively considered. Impervious areas existing on the
parent tract prior to adoption of this Part shall not be considered in
cumulative impervious area calculations for exemption purposes.
Table 505-142.1
Impervious Area Exemption Criteria for Schuylkill River Watershed
Total Parcel Size Impervious Area Exemption
(acres)           (square feet)
Total Parcel Size Impervious Area Exemption
(acres)           (square feet)
0 to < 0.125      1,000
0.125 to < 0.5    2,500
0.5 to < 1        5,000
1 to < 2          7,500
2 to < 3          10,000
3 to < 4          12,500
≥ 4             15,000
 
Table 505-142.2
Impervious Area Exemption Criteria for Tulpehocken Creek Watershed
 
Total Parcel Size Impervious Area Exemption
(acres)           (square feet)
0 to 0.25         2,500
0.25 to 1         5,000
1 to 2            10,000
2 to 5            15,000
> 5               20,000
 
      (2)   Applicants whose activities are exempted under Subsection B above
shall still be required to meet the groundwater recharge (§
505-125), water quality (§
505-126), and stream bank erosion (§
505-127) controls of this Part. Drainage plans in accordance with §§
505-143A(2),
505-143B(7), (8), (11), (15) and (22) and
505-143D(2) must still be submitted. Any exemption must first be approved by
the municipality.
   C.   Additional exemption criteria.
      (1)   Exemption responsibilities. An exemption shall not relieve the
applicant from implementing such measures as are necessary to protect the
public health, safety, and property. An exemption shall not relieve the
applicant from providing adequate stormwater management for regulated
activities to meet the purpose of this Part; however, drainage plans will not
have to be submitted to the municipality.
      (2)   HQ and EV streams. This exemption shall not relieve the applicant
from meeting the special requirements for watersheds draining to high quality
(HQ) or exceptional value (EV) waters, identified and source water protection
areas (SWPA) and requirements for nonstructural project design sequencing (§
505-124), groundwater recharge (§
505-125), water quality (§
505-126), and stream bank erosion (§
505-127).
      (3)   Drainage problems. If a drainage problem is documented or known to
exist downstream of, or expected from the proposed activity, then the
Municipality may require a drainage plan submittal.
      (4)   All regulated activities occurring in drainage areas tributary to
waters designated HQ/ EV pursuant to 25 Pa. Code, Chapter 93, shall not change
any biological, chemical, or physical characteristics, including volume, rate,
velocity, course, current, cross section, or temperature of the waters, unless
the activity is specifically permitted in accordance with the environmental
laws of the commonwealth.
§ 505-143. Drainage plan contents.
The drainage plan shall consist of a general description of the project
including sequencing items described in §
505-124, calculations, maps and plans. A note on the maps shall refer to the
associated computations and erosion and sediment control plan by title and
date. The cover sheet of the computations and erosion and sediment control plan
shall refer to the associated maps by title and date. All drainage plan
materials shall be submitted to the municipality in a format that is clear,
concise, legible, neat, and well organized; otherwise, the drainage plan shall
not be accepted for review and shall be returned to the applicant. The
following items shall be included in the drainage plan:
   A.   General.
      (1)   General description of the project including those areas described
in §
505-124.
      (2)   General description of permanent stormwater management techniques,
including construction specifications of the materials to be used for
stormwater management facilities.
      (3)   Complete hydrologic, hydraulic, and structural computations for all
stormwater management facilities.
      (4)   An erosion and sediment control plan, including all reviews and
approvals by the Conservation District.
      (5)   A general description of nonpoint source pollution controls.
   B.   Maps. Map(s) of the project area shall be submitted on twenty-four-
inch-by-thirty-six-inch sheets and/or shall be prepared in a form that meets
the requirements for recording at the offices of the Recorder of Deeds of Berks
County. If
Chapter 515, Subdivision and Land Development (SALDO), has more stringent
criteria, then the more stringent criteria shall apply. The contents of the map
(s) shall include, but not be limited to:
      (1)   The location of the project relative to highways, municipalities or
other identifiable landmarks.
      (2)   Existing contours at intervals of two feet. In areas of steep
slopes (greater than 15%), five-foot contour intervals may be used.
      (3)   Existing streams, lakes, ponds or other waters of the commonwealth
within the project area.
      (4)   Other physical features including flood hazard boundaries, stream
buffers, existing drainage courses, areas of natural vegetation to be
preserved, and the total extent of the upstream area draining through the site.
      (5)   The locations of all existing and proposed utilities, sanitary
sewers, and water lines within 50 feet of property lines.
      (6)   An overlay showing soil names and boundaries.
      (7)   Limits of earth disturbance, including the type and amount of
impervious area that would be added.
      (8)   Proposed structures, roads, paved areas, and buildings.
      (9)   Final contours at intervals of two feet. In areas of steep slopes
(greater than 15%), five-foot contour intervals may be used. The Municipal
Engineer may require contours at less than the above based upon site-specific
conditions.
      (10)   The name of the development, the name and address of the owner of
the property, and the name of the individual or firm preparing the plan.
      (11)   The date of submission.
      (12)   A graphic and written scale of one inch equals no more than 50
feet; for tracts of 20 acres or more, the scale shall be one inch equals no
more than 100 feet.
      (13)   A North arrow.
      (14)   The total tract boundary and size with distances marked to the
nearest foot and bearings to the nearest degree.
      (15)   Existing and proposed land use(s).
      (16)   A key map showing all existing man-made features beyond the
property boundary that would be affected by the project.
      (17)   Location of all open channels.
      (18)   Overland drainage patterns and swales.
      (19)   A minimum fifteen-foot wide access easement surrounding all sides
of all stormwater management facilities that would provide ingress to and
egress from a public right- of-way.
      (20)   The location of all erosion and sediment control facilities.
      (21)   A note on the plan indicating the location and responsibility for
maintenance of stormwater management facilities that would be located on/off-
site. All on/off-site facilities shall meet the performance standards and
design criteria specified in this Part.
      (22)   A statement, signed by the landowner, acknowledging that any
revision to the approved drainage plan must be approved by the municipality and
the Conservation District.
      (23)   The following signature block for the design engineer:
"I, (Design Engineer), on this date (date of signature), hereby certify that
the drainage plan meets all design standards and criteria of the applicable
(Schuylkill River or Tulpehocken Creek) Watershed Act 167 Stormwater Management
Ordinance."
   C.   Supplemental information.
      (1)   A written description of the following information shall be
submitted:
         (a)   The overall stormwater management concept for the project
designed in accordance with §
505-124.
         (b)   Stormwater runoff computations as specified in this Part.
         (c)   Stormwater management techniques to be applied both during and
after development.
         (d)   Expected project time schedule.
         (e)   Development stages (project phases) if so proposed.
         (f)   An operation and maintenance plan in accordance with §
505-172 of this Part.
      (2)   An erosion and sediment control plan.
      (3)   The effect of the project (in terms of runoff volumes and peak
flows) on adjacent properties and on any existing municipal stormwater
collection system that may receive runoff from the project site.
      (4)   A declaration of adequacy and highway occupancy permit from the
PennDOT District Office when utilization of a PennDOT storm drainage system is
proposed.
   D.   Stormwater management facilities.
      (1)   All stormwater management facilities must be located on a plan and
described in detail.
      (2)   When infiltration facilities such as seepage pits, beds or trenches
are used, the locations of existing and proposed septic tank infiltration areas
and wells must be shown.
      (3)   All calculations, assumptions, and criteria used in the design of
the stormwater management facilities must be shown.
§ 505-144. Plan submission.
   A.   The municipality shall require receipt of a complete plan, as specified
in this Part.
   B.   For any activities that require an NPDES permit for stormwater
discharges from construction activities, a PaDEP joint permit application, a
PennDOT highway occupancy permit, or any other permit under applicable state or
federal regulations are regulated under Chapter 105 (Dam Safety and Waterway
Management) or Chapter 106 (Floodplain Management) of PaDEP's rules and
regulations, or, the proof of application for said permit(s) or approvals shall
be part of the plan. The plan shall be coordinated with the state and federal
permit process and the municipal SALDO review process.
      (1)   For projects which require SALDO approval, the drainage plan shall
be submitted by the applicant as part of the preliminary plan submission where
applicable for the regulated activity.
      (2)   For these regulated activities that do not require SALDO approval,
see §
505-141, General requirements.
      (3)   Six copies of the drainage plan shall be submitted and distributed
as follows:
         (a)   Two copies to the municipality accompanied by the requisite
municipal review fee, as specified in this Part.
         (b)   Two copies to the Conservation District.
         (c)   One copy to the Municipal Engineer.
         (d)   One copy to the County Planning Commission/Department.
§ 505-145. Drainage plan review.
   A.   The Municipal Engineer shall review the drainage plan for consistency
with the adopted applicable (Schuylkill River or Tulpehocken Creek) Watershed
Act 167 Stormwater Management Plan. Any found incomplete shall not be accepted
for review and shall be returned to the applicant.
   B.   The Municipal Engineer shall review the drainage plan for any
subdivision or land development against
Chapter 515, Subdivision and Land Development, provisions not superseded by
this Part.
   C.   The County Conservation District shall review and approve the E & S
plan for consistency with PaDEP's Chapter 102 regulations.
   D.   For activities regulated by this Part, the Municipal Engineer shall
notify the applicant and the municipality in writing, within 45 calendar days,
whether the drainage plan is consistent with the stormwater management plan.
      (1)   Should the drainage plan be determined to be consistent with the
stormwater management plan, the Municipal Engineer shall forward an approval
letter to the applicant.
      (2)   Should the drainage plan be determined to be inconsistent with the
stormwater management plan, the Municipal Engineer shall forward a disapproval
letter to the applicant. The disapproval letter shall cite the reason(s) and
specific ordinance sections for the disapproval. Disapproval may be due to
inadequate information to make a reasonable judgment as to compliance with the
stormwater management plan. Any disapproved drainage plans may be revised by
the applicant and resubmitted consistent with this Part.
   E.   For regulated activities specified in §
505-105 of this Part which require a building permit, the Municipal Engineer
shall notify the Chief Building Official in writing, within a time frame
consistent with the International Building Code [
Chapter 180, Part 9] as adopted by the City of Reading and/or
Chapter 515, Subdivision and Land Development, whether the drainage plan is
consistent with the stormwater management plan and forward a copy of the
approval/disapproval letter to the applicant. Any disapproved drainage plan may
be revised by the applicant and resubmitted consistent with this Part.
   F.   For regulated activities under this Part that require an NPDES permit
application, the applicant shall forward a copy of the Municipal Engineer's
letter stating that the drainage plan is consistent with the stormwater
management plan to the Conservation District. PaDEP and the Conservation
District may consider the Municipal Engineer's review comments in determining
whether to issue a permit.
   G.   The municipality shall not grant approval or grant preliminary approval
to any subdivision or land development for regulated activities specified in §
505-105 of this Part if the drainage plan has been found to be inconsistent
with the stormwater management plan, as determined by the Municipal Engineer.
All required permits from PaDEP must be obtained prior to approval of any
subdivision or land development.
   H.   No building permits shall be issued for any regulated activity
specified in §
505-105 of this Part if the drainage plan has been found to be inconsistent
with the stormwater management plan, as determined by the Municipal Engineer,
or without considering the comments of the Municipal Engineer. All required
permits from PaDEP must be obtained prior to issuance of a building permit.
   I.   The applicant shall be responsible for completing record drawings of
all stormwater management facilities included in the approved drainage plan.
The record drawings and an explanation of any discrepancies with the design
plans shall be submitted to the Municipal Engineer for final approval. In no
case shall the municipality approve the record drawings until the municipality
receives a copy of an approved declaration of adequacy and/or highway occupancy
permit from the PennDOT District Office, NPDES permit, and any other applicable
permits or approvals, from PaDEP or the Conservation District. The above
permits and approvals must be based on the record drawings.
   J.   The municipality's approval of a drainage plan shall be valid for a
period not to exceed five years commencing on the date that the municipality
signs the approved drainage plan. If stormwater management facilities included
in the approved drainage plan have not been constructed, or if constructed, and
record drawings of these facilities have not been approved within this five-
year time period, then the municipality may consider the drainage plan
disapproved and may revoke any and all permits. Drainage plans that are
considered disapproved by the municipality shall be resubmitted in accordance
with §
505-147 of this Part.
§ 505-146. Modification of plans.
   A.   A modification to a drainage plan under review by the municipality for
a development site that involves a change in stormwater management facilities
or techniques, or that involves the relocation or redesign of stormwater
management facilities, or that is necessary because soil or other conditions
are not as stated on the drainage plan as determined by the Municipal Engineer,
shall require a resubmission of the modified drainage plan consistent with §
505-144 of this Part and be subject to review as specified in §
505-145 of this Part.
   B.   A modification to an already approved or disapproved drainage plan
shall be submitted to the municipality, accompanied by the applicable municipal
review and inspection fee. A modification to a drainage plan for which a formal
action has not been taken by the municipality shall be submitted to the
municipality, accompanied by the applicable municipal review and inspection
fee.
§ 505-147. Resubmission of disapproved drainage plans.
A disapproved drainage plan may be resubmitted, with the revisions addressing
the Municipal Engineer's concerns documented in writing and addressed to the
Municipal Secretary in accordance with §
505-144 of this Part and distributed accordingly and be subject to review as
specified in §
505-145 of this Part. The applicable municipal review and inspection fee must
accompany a resubmission of a disapproved drainage plan.
E   Inspections
§ 505-151. Schedule of inspections.
   A.   The Municipal Engineer or his designee shall inspect all phases of the
installation of the permanent stormwater management facilities as deemed
appropriate by the Municipal Engineer.
   B.   During any stage of the work, if the Municipal Engineer or his
municipal designee determines that the permanent stormwater management
facilities are not being installed in accordance with the approved stormwater
management plan, the municipality shall revoke any existing building permits
and issue a cease-and-desist order until a revised drainage plan is submitted
and approved, as specified in this Part.
   C.   A final inspection of all stormwater management facilities shall be
conducted by the Municipal Engineer or his municipal designee and to confirm
compliance with the approved drainage plan prior to the issuance of any
occupancy permit.
F   Fees and Expenses
§ 505-161. Municipality drainage plan review and inspection fee.
   A.   Fees shall be established by the municipality to defray plan review and
construction inspection costs incurred by the municipality. All fees shall be
paid by the applicant at the time of drainage plan submission. Review and
inspection fee schedule shall be as follows based on the size of the regulated
activity and based on the municipality's costs for reviewing drainage plans and
conducting inspections pursuant to §
505-151. The municipality shall periodically update the review and inspection
fee schedule to ensure that review costs are adequately reimbursed.
   B.   All fees in excess of the applicable filing fee, incurred for the
review of plans and reports thereon by the Municipal Engineer or designee will
be billed in accordance with the ordinary and customary charges of the
Municipal Engineer and designee. The applicant shall, prior to the
municipality's approval of the stormwater management report and plans, pay the
municipality the excess amount expended in the reviewing of the plans/reports.
Any unused portion of the total fee charged to any applicant will be returned
to the applicant. This refund will be made only after plan approval by the
municipality. No development or subdivision shall be approved unless all fees
have been paid in full.
   C.   Stormwater management reports and drainage plans included with
submission under
Chapter 515, Subdivision and Land Development. The filing and review fee for
reports and plans prepared to demonstrate compliance with this Part is included
in the plan review fee established by resolution from time to time for
submissions made under
Chapter 515, Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance.
D.   Fees for the following shall be as provided in
Chapter 212, Fees.16
      (1)   Filing fee.
      (2)   Review of documentation in support of exemption.
      (3)   Review of stormwater management report and drainage plan.
      (4)   Construction observations. The fee associated with construction
observations will be made part of the improvements agreements established for
the construction project.
16.   Editor's Note: Amended during codification (see
Ch. 1, General Provisions, Part 2).
§ 505-162. Expenses covered by fees.
The fees required by this Part shall at a minimum cover:
   A.   Administrative costs.
   B.   The review of the drainage plan by the municipality and the Municipal
Engineer.
   C.   The site inspections.
   D.   The inspection of stormwater management facilities and drainage
improvements during construction.
   E.   The final inspection upon completion of the stormwater management
facilities and drainage improvements presented in the drainage plan.
   F.   Any additional work required to enforce any permit provisions regulated
by this Part, correct violations, and assure proper completion of stipulated
remedial actions.
G   Maintenance Responsibilities
§ 505-171. Performance guarantee.
   A.   For subdivisions and land developments the applicant shall provide a
financial guarantee to the municipality for the timely installation and proper
construction of all stormwater management controls as: required by the approved
drainage plan equal to or greater than the full construction cost of the
required controls; or in the amount and method of payment provided for in
Chapter 515, Subdivision and Land Development.
   B.   For other regulated activities, the municipality may require a
financial guarantee from the applicant.
   C.   At the completion of the project, and as a prerequisite for the release
of the performance guarantee, the applicant or his representatives shall:
      (1)   Provide a certification of completion from an engineer, architect,
surveyor or other qualified person verifying that all permanent facilities have
been constructed according to the plans and specifications and approved
revisions thereto.
      (2)   Provide a set of record drawings in the form required by §
505-112.
   D.   After the municipality receives the certification, a final inspection
shall be conducted by the Municipal Engineer or designee to certify compliance
with this Part.
§ 505-172. Responsibilities for operations and maintenance of stormwater
controls and BMPs.
   A.   No regulated earth disturbance activities within the municipality shall
commence until approval by the municipality of a stormwater control and BMP
operations and maintenance plan which describes how the permanent (e.g.,
postconstruction) stormwater controls and BMPs will be properly operated and
maintained.
   B.   The following items shall be included in the stormwater control and BMP
operations and maintenance plan:
      (1)   Map(s) of the project area, in a form that meets the requirements
for recording at the offices of the Recorder of Deeds of Berks County, and
shall be submitted on twenty- four-inch-by-thirty-six-inch sheets. The contents
of the map(s) shall include, but not be limited to:
         (a)   Clear identification of the location and nature of permanent
stormwater controls and BMPs.
         (b)   The location of the project site relative to highways, municipal
boundaries or other identifiable landmarks.
         (c)   Existing and final contours at intervals of two feet, or others
as appropriate.
         (d)   Existing streams, lakes, ponds, or other bodies of water within
the project site area.
         (e)   Other physical features including flood hazard boundaries,
sinkholes, streams, existing drainage courses, and areas of natural vegetation
to be preserved.
         (f)   The locations of all existing and proposed utilities, sanitary
sewers, and water lines within 50 feet of property lines of the project site.
         (g)   Proposed final changes to the land surface and vegetative cover,
including the type and amount of impervious area that would be added.
         (h)   Proposed final structures, roads, paved areas, and buildings.
         (i)   A minimum fifteen-foot wide access easement surrounding all
sides of all stormwater controls and BMPs that would provide ingress to and
egress from a public right-of-way.
      (2)   A description of how each permanent stormwater control and BMP will
be operated and maintained, and the identity of the person(s) responsible for
operations and maintenance.
      (3)   The name of the project site, the name and address of the owner of
the property, and the name of the individual or firm preparing the plan.
      (4)   A statement, signed by the landowner, acknowledging that the
stormwater controls and BMPs are fixtures that can be altered or removed only
after approval by the municipality.
   C.   The stormwater control and BMP operations and maintenance plan for the
project site shall establish responsibilities for the continuing operation and
maintenance of all permanent stormwater controls and BMPs, as follows:
      (1)   If a plan includes structures or lots which are to be separately
owned and in which streets, sewers and other public improvements are to be
dedicated to the municipality, stormwater controls and BMPs may also be
dedicated to and maintained by the municipality at the municipality's sole
discretion.
      (2)   If a plan includes operations and maintenance by a single
ownership, or if sewers and other public improvements are to be privately owned
and maintained, then the operation and maintenance of stormwater controls and
BMPs shall be the responsibility of the owner or private management entity.
   D.   The municipality shall make the final determination on the continuing
operations and maintenance responsibilities. The municipality reserves the
right to accept or reject the operations and maintenance responsibility for any
or all of the stormwater controls and BMPs.
§ 505-173. Municipality review of stormwater control and BMP operations and
maintenance plan.
   A.   The municipality shall review the stormwater control and BMP operations
and maintenance plan for consistency with the purposes and requirements of this
Part, and any permits issued by DEP.
   B.   The municipality shall notify the applicant, in writing, whether the
stormwater control and BMP operations and maintenance plan is approved.
   C.   The municipality requires submission of a "record drawing" of all
stormwater controls and BMPs, and an explanation of any discrepancies with the
operations and maintenance plan. This must be completed in the same manner as
defined in §
505-112.
§ 505-174. Adherence to approved stormwater control and BMP operations and
maintenance plan.
It shall be unlawful to alter or remove any permanent stormwater control and
BMP required by an approved stormwater control and BMP operations and
maintenance plan, or to allow the property to remain in a condition which does
not conform to an approved stormwater control and BMP operations and
maintenance plan.
§ 505-175. Operations and maintenance agreement for privately owned stormwater
controls and BMPs.
   A.   The property owner shall sign an operations and maintenance agreement
with the municipality covering all stormwater controls and BMPs that are to be
privately owned. The agreement shall be substantially the same as the agreement
in Appendix A of this Part. 17
   B.   Other items may be included in the agreement where determined necessary
to guarantee the satisfactory operation and maintenance of all permanent
stormwater controls and BMPs. The agreement shall be subject to the review and
approval of the municipality.
17.   Editor's Note: Appendix A is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 505-176. Stormwater management easements.
   A.   Stormwater management easements are required for all areas used for
off-site stormwater control, unless a waiver is granted by the Municipal
Engineer.
   B.   Stormwater management easements shall be provided by the property owner
if necessary for: access for inspections and maintenance; or preservation of
stormwater runoff conveyance, infiltration, and detention areas and other
stormwater controls and BMPs, by persons other than the property owner. The
purpose of the easement shall be specified in any agreement under §
505-176.
§ 505-177. Maintenance agreement for privately owned stormwater facilities.
   A.   Prior to final approval of the site's drainage plan, the applicant
shall sign and record the maintenance agreement contained in Appendix A which
is attached and made part hereof, covering all stormwater control facilities
that are to be privately owned.
   B.   Other items may be included in the agreement where determined necessary
to guarantee the satisfactory maintenance of all facilities. The maintenance
agreement shall be subject to the review and approval of the Municipal
Solicitor and Municipal Engineer, or their designees.
§ 505-178. Recording of approved stormwater control and BMP operations and
maintenance plan and related agreements.
   A.   The owner of any land upon which permanent stormwater controls and BMPs
will be placed, constructed or implemented, as described in the stormwater
control and BMP operations and maintenance plan, shall record the following
documents in the Office of the Recorder of Deeds for Berks County, within 15
days of approval of the stormwater control and BMP operations plan by the
municipality:
      (1)   The operations and maintenance plan, or a summary thereof.
      (2)   Operations and maintenance agreements under §
505-175.
      (3)   Easements under §
505-176.
   B.   The municipality may suspend or revoke any approvals granted or deny
any and all permit subsequent issuance for the project site upon discovery of
the failure of the owner to comply with this section.
§ 505-179. Municipal stormwater control and BMP operation and maintenance fund.
   A.   Persons installing stormwater controls or BMPs shall be required to pay
a specified amount to the Municipal stormwater control and BMP operation and
maintenance fund to help defray costs of periodic inspections and maintenance
expenses. The amount of the deposit shall be determined as follows:
      (1)   If the stormwater control or BMP is to be privately owned and
maintained, the deposit shall cover the cost of periodic inspections performed
by the municipality for a period of 10 years, as estimated by the Municipal
Engineer. After that period of time, inspections will be performed at the
expense of the municipality.
      (2)   If the stormwater control or BMP is to be owned and maintained by
the municipality, the deposit shall cover the estimated costs for maintenance
and inspections for 10 years. The Municipal Engineer will establish the
estimated costs utilizing information submitted by the applicant.
      (3)   The amount of the deposit to the fund shall be converted to present
worth of the annual series values. The Municipal Engineer shall determine the
present worth equivalents, which shall be subject to the approval of the
governing body.
   B.   If a stormwater control or BMP is proposed that also serves as a
recreation facility (e.g., ballfield, lake), the municipality may reduce or
waive the amount of the maintenance fund deposit based upon the value of the
land for public recreation purpose.
   C.   If at some future time a stormwater control or BMP (whether publicly or
privately owned) is eliminated due to the installation of storm sewers or other
storage facility, the unused portion of the maintenance fund deposit will be
applied to the cost of abandoning the facility and connecting to the storm
sewer system or other facility. Any amount of the deposit remaining after the
costs of abandonment are paid will be returned to the depositor.
   D.   If stormwater controls or BMPs are accepted by the municipality for
dedication, the municipality may require persons installing stormwater controls
or BMPs to pay a specified amount to the municipal stormwater control and BMP
operation and maintenance fund, to help defray costs of operations and
maintenance activities. The amount may be determined as follows:
      (1)   If the stormwater control or BMP is to be owned and maintained by
the municipality, the amount shall cover the estimated costs for operations and
maintenance for 10 years, as determined by the municipality.
      (2)   The amount shall then be converted to present worth of the annual
series values.
   E.   If a stormwater control or BMP is proposed that also serves as a
recreation facility (e.g., ballfield, lake), the municipality may adjust the
amount due accordingly.
   F.   Long-term maintenance. The municipality shall require applicants to pay
a fee to the municipal stormwater maintenance fund to cover long-term
maintenance of stormwater control and best management practices.
   G.   Stormwater-related problems. The municipality may require applicants to
pay a fee to the municipal stormwater maintenance fund to cover stormwater-
related problems which may arise from the land development and earth
disturbance. The municipality and/or any adversely impacted property owners may
institute the appropriate legal, equitable or otherwise action to prevent,
restrain, correct or abate problems and seek restitution and/ or damages
resulting from stormwater problems emanating from the land development or earth
disturbance activities.
H   Prohibitions
§ 505-181. Prohibited discharges.
   A.   No person in the municipality shall allow, or cause to allow,
stormwater discharges into the municipality's separate storm sewer system which
are not composed entirely of stormwater, except: as provided in Subsection B
below; and discharges allowed under a state or federal permit.
   B.   Discharges which may be allowed based on a finding by the municipality
that the discharge(s) do not significantly contribute to pollution to surface
waters of the commonwealth, are:
      (1)   Discharges from firefighting activities.
      (2)   Potable water sources including dechlorinated water line and fire
hydrant flushings.
      (3)   Irrigation drainage.
      (4)   Routine external building washdown (which does not use detergents
or other compounds).
      (5)   Air-conditioning condensate.
      (6)   Water from individual residential car washing.
      (7)   Spring water from crawl space pumps.
      (8)   Uncontaminated water from foundation or from footing drains.
      (9)   Flows from riparian habitats and wetlands.
      (10)   Lawn watering.
      (11)   Pavement washwaters where spills or leaks of toxic or hazardous
materials have not occurred (unless all spill material has been removed) and
where detergents are not used.
      (12)   Dechlorinated swimming pool discharges.
      (13)   Uncontaminated groundwater.
   C.   In the event that the municipality determines that any of the
discharges identified in Subsection B significantly contribute to pollution of
waters of the commonwealth, or is so notified by DEP, the municipality will
notify the responsible person to cease the discharge.
   D.   Upon notice provided by the municipality under Subsection C, the
discharger will have a reasonable time, as determined by the municipality, to
cease the discharge consistent with the degree of pollution caused by the
discharge.
   E.   Nothing in this section shall affect a discharger's responsibilities
under state law.
§ 505-182. Prohibited connections.
The following connections are prohibited, except as provided in §
505-181B above:
   A.   Any drain or conveyance, whether on the surface or subsurface, which
allows any nonstormwater discharge including sewage, process wastewater, and
wash water, to enter the separate storm sewer system, and any connections to
the storm drain system from indoor drains and sinks.
   B.   Any drain or conveyance connected from a commercial or industrial land
use to the separate storm sewer system which has not been documented in plans,
maps, or equivalent records, and approved by the municipality.
§ 505-183. Roof drains.
   A.   Roof drains shall not be connected to streets, sanitary or storm sewers
or roadside ditches in order to promote overland flow and infiltration/
percolation of stormwater where advantageous to do so. When it is more
advantageous to connect directly to streets or storm sewers, then it shall be
permitted on a case-by-case basis by the municipality.
   B.   When it is more advantageous to connect directly to streets or storm
sewers, connections of roof drains to streets or roadside ditches may be
permitted by the municipality.
   C.   Roof drains shall discharge to infiltration areas or vegetative BMPs to
the maximum extent practicable.
§ 505-184. Alteration of BMPs.
   A.   No person shall modify, remove, fill, landscape or alter any existing
stormwater control or BMP, unless it is part of an approved maintenance
program, without the written approval of the municipality.
   B.   No person shall place any structure, fill, landscaping or vegetation
into a stormwater control or BMP or within a drainage easement, which would
limit or alter the functioning of the stormwater control or BMP, without the
written approval of the municipality.
I   Enforcement and Penalties
§ 505-191. Right of entry.
   A.   Upon presentation of proper credentials, duly authorized
representatives of the municipality may enter at reasonable times upon any
property within the municipality to inspect the implementation, condition, or
operation and maintenance of the stormwater controls or BMPs in regard to any
aspect governed by this Part.
   B.   Stormwater control and BMP owners and operators shall allow persons
working on behalf of the municipality ready access to all parts of the premises
for the purposes of determining compliance with this Part.
   C.   Persons working on behalf of the municipality shall have the right to
temporarily locate on any stormwater control or BMP in the municipality such
devices as are necessary to conduct monitoring and/or sampling of the
discharges from such stormwater control or BMP.
   D.   Unreasonable delays in allowing the municipality access to a stormwater
control or BMP is a violation of this Part.
§ 505-192. Public nuisance.
   A.   The violation of any provision of this Part is hereby deemed a public
nuisance.
   B.   Each day that a violation continues shall constitute a separate
violation.
§ 505-193. Enforcement generally.
   A.   Whenever the municipality finds that a person has violated a
prohibition or failed to meet a requirement of this Part, the municipality may
order compliance by written notice to the responsible person. Such notice may
require, without limitation:
      (1)   The performance of monitoring, analyses, and reporting.
      (2)   The elimination of prohibited connections or discharges.
      (3)   Cessation of any violating discharges, practices, or operations.
      (4)   The abatement or remediation of stormwater pollution or
contamination hazards and the restoration of any affected property.
      (5)   Payment of a fine to cover administrative and remediation costs.
      (6)   The implementation of stormwater controls and BMPs.
      (7)   Operation and maintenance of stormwater controls and BMPs.
      (8)   Such notification shall set forth the nature of the violation(s)
and establish a time limit for correction of these violation(s). Said notice
may further advise that, if applicable, should the violator fail to take the
required action within the established deadline, the work will be done by the
municipality or designee and the expense thereof shall be charged to the
violator.
   B.   Failure to comply within the time specified shall also subject such
person to the penalty provisions of this Part. All such penalties shall be
deemed cumulative and shall not prevent the municipality from pursuing any and
all other remedies available in law or equity.
§ 505-194. Suspension and revocation of permits and approvals.
   A.   Any building, land development or other permit or approval issued by
the municipality may be suspended or revoked by the municipality for:
      (1)   Noncompliance with or failure to implement any provision of the
permit.
      (2)   A violation of any provision of this Part.
      (3)   The creation of any condition or the commission of any act during
construction or development which constitutes or creates a hazard or nuisance,
pollution or which endangers the life or property of others.
   B.   A suspended permit or approval shall be reinstated by the municipality
when:
      (1)   The Municipal Engineer or designee has inspected and approved the
corrections to the stormwater controls and BMPs, or the elimination of the
hazard or nuisance.
      (2)   The municipality is satisfied that the violation of the ordinance,
law, or rule and regulation has been corrected.
   C.   A permit or approval which has been revoked by the municipality at its
discretion cannot be reinstated. The applicant may apply for a new permit under
the procedures outlined in this Part.
§ 505-195. Violations and penalties.
   A.   Any person violating the provisions of this Part shall be subject to a
fine of not less than $100 nor more than $1,000 for each violation, recoverable
with costs, or imprisonment for not more than 90 days, or both. Each day that
the violation continues shall constitute a separate offense and the applicable
fines are cumulative.
   B.   In addition, the municipality, through its Solicitor, may institute
injunctive, mandamus or any other appropriate action or proceeding at law or in
equity for the enforcement of this Part. Any court of competent jurisdiction
shall have the right to issue restraining orders, temporary or permanent
injunctions, mandamus or other appropriate forms of remedy or relief.
§ 505-196. Notification.
In the event that a person fails to comply with the requirements of this Part,
or fails to conform to the requirements of any permit issued hereunder, the
municipality shall provide written notification of the violation. Such
notification shall set forth the nature of the violation(s) and establish a
time limit for correction of these violation(s). Failure to comply within the
time specified shall subject such person to the penalty provisions of this
Part. All such penalties shall be deemed cumulative and shall not prevent the
municipality from pursuing any and all remedies. It shall be the responsibility
of the owner of the real property on which any regulated activity is proposed
to occur, is occurring, or has occurred, to comply with the terms and
conditions of this Part.
§ 505-197. Enforcement.
The municipal governing body is hereby authorized and directed to enforce all
of the provisions of this Part. All inspections regarding compliance with the
drainage plan shall be the responsibility of the Municipal Engineer or his
designee.
   A.   A set of design plans approved by the municipality shall be on file at
the site throughout the duration of the construction activity. Periodic
inspections may be made by the municipality or designee during construction.
   B.   Adherence to approved plan. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm
or corporation to undertake any regulated activity under §
505-105 on any property except as provided for in the approved drainage plan
and pursuant to the requirements of this Part. It shall be unlawful to alter or
remove any control structure required by the drainage plan pursuant to this
Part or to allow the property to remain in a condition which does not conform
to the approved drainage plan.
   C.   At the completion of the project, and as a prerequisite for the release
of the performance guarantee, the owner or his representatives shall:
      (1)   Provide a certification of completion from an engineer, architect,
surveyor or other qualified person verifying that all permanent facilities have
been constructed according to the plans and specifications and approved
revisions thereto.
      (2)   Provide a set of as-built (record) drawings.
   D.   After receipt of the certification by the municipality, a final
inspection shall be conducted by the Municipal Engineer or designated
representative to certify compliance with this Part.
   E.   Prior to revocation or suspension of a permit and at the request of the
applicant, the governing body will schedule a hearing to discuss the
noncompliance if there is no immediate danger to life, public health or
property. The expense of a hearing shall be the owner's responsibility.
   F.   Occupancy permit. An occupancy permit shall not be issued unless the
certification of completion pursuant to Subsection C(1) has been secured and a
final inspection performed pursuant to Subsection D. The occupancy permit shall
be required for each lot owner and/ or applicant for all subdivisions and land
development in the municipality.
   G.   The municipality and/or any adversely impacted property owners may
institute the appropriate legal, equitable or otherwise action to prevent,
restrain, correct or abate problems and seek restitution and/or damages
resulting from stormwater problems emanating from the land development or earth
disturbance activities.
§ 505-198. Appeals.
   A.   Any person aggrieved by any action of the City of Reading or its
designee may appeal to City Council within 30 days of that action.
   B.   Any person aggrieved by any decision of City Council may appeal to the
Berks County Court of Common Pleas in the County where the activity has taken
place within 30 days of the municipal decision.
Appendix A
Stormwater Controls and Best Management Practices
Operations and Maintenance Agreement
THIS AGREEMENT, made and entered into this _________ day of _____, 20___, by
and between ________________________, (hereinafter the “Landowner”), and the
City of Reading, Berks County, Pennsylvania, (hereinafter “Municipality”);
   WITNESSETH
WHEREAS, the Landowner is the owner of certain real property as recorded by
deed in the land records of Berks County, Pennsylvania, Deed Book _________ at
Page ______, (hereinafter “Property”).
WHEREAS, the Landowner is proceeding to build and develop the Property; and
WHEREAS, the Stormwater Controls and BMP Operations and Maintenance Plan
approved by the Municipality (hereinafter referred to as the “Plan”) for the
property identified herein, which is attached hereto as Appendix A and made
part hereof, as approved by the Municipality, provides for management of
stormwater within the confines of the Property through the use of best
management practices (BMPs); and
WHEREAS, the Municipality, and the Landowner, his successors and assigns, agree
that the health, safety, and welfare of the residents of the Municipality and
the protection and maintenance of water quality require that on-site stormwater
best management practices be constructed and maintained on the Property; and
WHEREAS, for the purposes of this agreement, the following definitions shall
apply:
   BMP - best management practice — Activities, facilities, designs, measures
or procedures used to manage stormwater impacts from land development, to
protect and maintain water quality and groundwater recharge and to otherwise
meet the purposes of the Municipal Stormwater Management Ordinance including,
but not limited to, infiltration trenches, seepage pits, filter strips,
bioretention, wet ponds, permeable paving, rain gardens, grassed swales,
forested buffers, sand filters and detention basins.
• Infiltration trench — A BMP surface structure designed, constructed, and
maintained for the purpose of providing infiltration or recharge of stormwater
into the soil and/or groundwater aquifer;
• Seepage pit — An underground BMP structure designed, constructed, and
maintained for the purpose of providing infiltration or recharge of stormwater
into the soil and/or groundwater aquifer;
• Rain garden — A BMP overlain with appropriate mulch and suitable vegetation
designed, constructed, and maintained for the purpose of providing infiltration
or recharge of stormwater into the soil and/or underground aquifer; and
WHEREAS, the Municipality requires, through the implementation of the Plan,
that stormwater management BMPs as required by said Plan and the Municipal
Stormwater Management Ordinance be constructed and adequately operated and
maintained by the Landowner, his successors and assigns; and
NOW, THEREFORE, in consideration of the foregoing promises, the mutual
covenants contained herein, and the following terms and conditions, the parties
hereto agree as follows:
1. The BMPs shall be constructed by the Landowner in accordance with the plans
and specifications identified in the Plan.
2. The Landowner shall operate and maintain the BMP(s) as shown on the Plan in
good working order acceptable to the Municipality and in accordance with the
specific maintenance requirements noted on the Plan.
3. The Landowner hereby grants permission to the Municipality, its authorized
agents and employees, to enter upon the property, at reasonable times and upon
presentation of proper identification, to inspect the BMP(s) whenever it deems
necessary. Whenever possible, the Municipality shall notify the Landowner prior
to entering the property.
4. In the event the Landowner fails to operate and maintain the BMP(s) as shown
on the Plan in good working order acceptable to the Municipality, the
Municipality or its representatives may enter upon the Property and take
whatever action is deemed necessary to maintain said BMP(s). This provision
shall not be construed to allow the Municipality to erect any permanent
structure on the land of the Landowner. It is expressly understood and agreed
that the Municipality is under no obligation to maintain or repair said
facilities, and in no event shall this Agreement be construed to impose any
such obligation on the Municipality.
5. In the event the Municipality, pursuant to this Agreement, performs work of
any nature, or expends any funds in performance of said work for labor, use of
equipment, supplies, materials, and the like, the Landowner shall reimburse the
Municipality for all expenses (direct and indirect) incurred within 10 days of
receipt of invoice from the Municipality.
6. The intent and purpose of this Agreement is to ensure the proper maintenance
of the on-site BMP(s) by the Landowner; provided, however, that this Agreement
shall not be deemed to create or affect any additional liability of any party
for damage alleged to result from or be caused by stormwater runoff.
7. The Landowner, its executors, administrators, assigns, and other successors
in interests, shall release the Municipality’s employees and designated
representatives from all damages, accidents, casualties, occurrences or claims
which might arise or be asserted against said employees and representatives
from the construction, presence, existence, or maintenance of the BMP(s) by the
Landowner or Municipality. In the event that a claim is asserted against the
Municipality, its designated representatives or employees, the Municipality
shall promptly notify the Landowner and the Landowner shall defend, at his own
expense, any suit based on the claim. If any judgment or claims against the
Municipality’s employees or designated representatives shall be allowed, the
Landowner shall pay all costs and expenses regarding said judgment or claim.
8. The Municipality shall inspect the BMP(s) at a minimum of once every three
years to ensure their continued functioning.
This Agreement shall be recorded at the Office of the Recorder of Deeds of
Berks County, Pennsylvania, and shall constitute a covenant running with the
property and/or equitable servitude, and shall be binding on the Landowner, his
administrators, executors, assigns, heirs and any other successors in
interests, in perpetuity.
   ATTEST:
   WITNESS the following signatures and seals:
(SEAL) For the Municipality:
_____________________________
(SEAL) For the Landowner:
_____________________________
   ATTEST:
______________________________ (City, Borough, Township)
County of ______________________, Pennsylvania
I, ___________________________, a Notary Public in and for the County and State
aforesaid, whose commission expires on the ______________ day of ____________,
20____, do hereby certify that whose name(s) is/are signed to the foregoing
Agreement bearing date of the ____________ day of ___________, 20______, has
acknowledged the same before me in my said County and State.
GIVEN UNDER MY HAND THIS ____________ day of ___________, 20______.
   NOTARY PUBLIC   (SEAL)
Appendix B
Stormwater Management Design Criteria
Table B-1
Point Precipitation Frequency Estimates from NOAA Atlas 14
Reading WB City, Pennsylvania (36-7318) 40.3333° N, 75.9667° W, 298 feet
Source: “Precipitation-Frequency Atlas of the United States” NOAA Atlas 14,
Volume 2, Version 3 G.M. Bonnin, D. Martin, B. Lin, T. Parzybok, M. Yekta, and
D. Riley NOAA, National Weather Service, Silver Spring, Maryland, 2004
Extracted: Fri Jun 13 2008.
Precipitation Frequency Estimates
(inches)
ARI*    5   10  15  30  60  120 3  6  12 24 48 4   7   10  20  30  45  60
(years) min min min min min min hr hr hr hr hr day day day day day day day
Precipitation Frequency Estimates
(inches)
ARI*    5    10   15   30   60   120  3    6    12   24    48    4     7     10    20    30    45    60
(years) min  min  min  min  min  min  hr   hr   hr   hr    hr    day   day   day   day   day   day   day
1       0.34 0.53 0.66 0.90 1.12 1.36 1.49 1.87 2.29 2.65  3.08  3.43  4.03  4.62  6.24  7.77  9.80  11.76
2       0.40 0.63 0.79 1.09 1.36 1.65 1.81 2.25 2.77 3.19  3.72  4.13  4.83  5.51  7.40  9.15  11.50 13.77
5       0.47 0.74 0.94 1.32 1.69 2.05 2.26 2.81 3.46 4.00  4.68  5.14  5.96  6.71  8.81  10.65 13.21 15.70
10      0.52 0.82 1.03 1.49 1.93 2.37 2.60 3.25 4.04 4.68  5.46  5.97  6.89  7.67  9.93  11.82 14.50 17.13
25      0.57 0.90 1.14 1.68 2.22 2.79 3.08 3.89 4.89 5.67  6.57  7.16  8.23  9.03  11.44 13.36 16.14 18.95
50      0.61 0.96 1.22 1.81 2.45 3.14 3.46 4.41 5.61 6.50  7.49  8.14  9.34  10.12 12.63 14.54 17.36 20.28
100     0.65 1.02 1.29 1.95 2.68 3.49 3.85 4.97 6.39 7.41  8.49  9.18  10.51 11.26 13.83 15.70 18.52 21.52
200     0.68 1.07 1.35 2.08 2.90 3.86 4.26 5.57 7.25 8.40  9.55  10.29 11.78 12.45 15.05 16.86 19.64 22.70
500     0.72 1.13 1.42 2.23 3.18 4.37 4.83 6.42 8.52 9.84  11.07 11.88 13.58 1.116 16.71 18.37 21.03 24.15
1,000   0.75 1.17 1.46 2.34 3.39 4.77 5.28 7.12 9.59 11.04 12.33 13.18 15.06 15.45 17.99 19.50 22.04 25.19
 
* These precipitation frequency estimates are based on a partial duration
series. ARI is the “average recurrence interval.”
Precipitation Intensity Estimates
(inches/hour)
ARI*    5   10  15  30  60  120 3  6  12 24 48 4   7   10  20  30  45  60
(years) min min min min min min hr hr hr hr hr day day day day day day day
Precipitation Intensity Estimates
(inches/hour)
ARI*    5    10   15   30   60   120  3    6    12   24   48   4    7    10   20   30   45   60
(years) min  min  min  min  min  min  hr   hr   hr   hr   hr   day  day  day  day  day  day  day
1       4.02 3.19 2.65 1.81 1.12 0.68 0.50 0.31 0.19 0.11 0.06 0.04 0.02 0.02 0.01 0.01 0.01 0.01
2       4.78 3.80 3.17 2.18 1.36 0.82 0.60 0.38 0.23 0.13 0.08 0.04 0.03 0.02 0.02 0.01 0.01 0.01
5       5.59 4.45 3.74 2.64 1.69 1.02 0.75 0.47 0.29 0.17 0.10 0.05 0.04 0.03 0.02 0.01 0.01 0.01
10      6.20 4.91 4.13 2.97 1.93 1.18 0.87 0.54 0.34 0.20 0.11 0.06 0.04 0.03 0.02 0.02 0.01 0.01
25      6.86 5.42 4.56 3.35 2.22 1.40 1.03 0.65 0.41 0.24 0.14 0.07 0.05 0.04 0.02 0.02 0.01 0.01
50      7.32 5.77 4.86 3.63 2.45 1.57 1.15 0.74 0.47 0.27 0.16 0.08 0.06 0.04 0.03 0.02 0.02 0.01
100     7.78 6.12 5.15 3.90 2.68 1.75 1.28 0.83 0.53 0.31 0.18 0.10 0.06 0.05 0.03 0.02 0.02 0.01
200     8.21 6.43 5.39 4.15 2.90 1.93 1.42 0.93 0.60 0.35 0.20 0.11 0.07 0.05 0.03 0.02 0.02 0.02
500     8.66 6.77 5.67 4.46 3.18 2.18 1.61 1.07 0.71 0.41 0.23 0.12 0.08 0.06 0.03 0.03 0.02 0.02
1,000   8.99 7.00 5.85 4.67 3.39 2.38 1.76 1.19 0.80 0.46 0.26 0.14 0.09 0.06 0.04 0.03 0.02 0.02
 
* These precipitation frequency estimates are based on a partial duration
series. ARI is the “average recurrence interval.”
Figure B-1
NRCS (SCS) Type II Rainfall Distribution – S Curve
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/6541e9c0b130f7197f9155a8a6441bb6dc5ca83c/
IMAGES/0-0-0-62.png]
Table B-2
Runoff Curve Numbers
(From NRCS (SCS) TR-55)
Land Use Description Hydrologic Soil Group
                     A B C D
Land Use Description                               Hydrologic Soil Group
                                                   A     B  C D
Open space                                         44 65 77 82
Meadow/orchard                                     30 58 71 78
Agricultural                                       59 71 79 83
Forest                                             36 60 73 79
Commercial        (85% impervious)                 89 92 94 95
Industrial        (72% impervious)                 81 88 91 93
Institutional     (50% impervious)                 71 82 88 90
Residential
Average lot size  % impervious
1/8 acre or less* 65                               77 85 90 92
1/8 – 1/3 acre  34                               59 74 82 87
1/3 – 1 acre    23                               53 69 80 85
1-4 acres         12                               46 66 78 82
Farmstead                                          59 74 82 86
Smooth surfaces (concrete, asphalt, gravel or bare 98 98 98 98
compacted soil)
Water                                              98 98 98 98
Mining/newly graded areas                          77 86 91 94
(Pervious areas only)
* Includes multifamily housing unless justified lower density can be provided.
NOTE: Existing site conditions of bare earth or follow ground shall be
considered as meadow when choosing a CN value.
Table B-3
Rational Runoff Coefficients
By Hydrologic Soils Group and Overland Slope (%)
Land Use A             B             C             D
         0-2% 2-6% 6%+ 0-2% 2-6% 6%+ 0-2% 2-6% 6%+ 0-2% 2-6% 6%+
Land Use          A               B              C              D
                  0-2%  2-6% 6%+  0-2% 2-6% 6%+  0-2% 2-6% 6%+  0-2% 2-6% 6%+
Cultivated land   0.08a 0.13 0.16 0.11 0.15 0.21 0.14 0.19 0.26 0.18 0.23 0.31
                  0.14b 0.18 0.22 0.16 0.21 0.28 0.20 0.25 0.34 0.24 0.29 0.41
Pasture           0.12  0.20 0.30 0.18 0.28 0.37 0.24 0.34 0.44 0.30 0.40 0.50
                  0.15  0.25 0.37 0.23 0.34 0.45 0.30 0.42 0.52 0.37 0.50 0.62
Meadow            0.10  0.16 0.25 0.14 0.22 0.30 0.20 0.28 0.36 0.24 0.30 0.40
                  0.14  0.22 0.30 0.20 0.28 0.37 0.26 0.35 0.44 0.30 0.40 0.50
Forest            0.05  0.08 0.11 0.08 0.11 0.14 0.10 0.13 0.16 0.12 0.16 0.20
                  0.08  0.11 0.14 0.10 0.14 0.18 0.12 0.16 0.20 0.15 0.20 0.25
Residential
Lot size 1/8 acre 0.25  0.28 0.31 0.27 0.30 0.25 0.30 0.33 0.38 0.33 0.36 0.42
                  0.33  0.37 0.40 0.35 0.39 0.44 0.38 0.42 0.49 0.41 0.45 0.54
Lot size 1/4 acre 0.22  0.26 0.29 0.24 0.29 0.33 0.27 0.31 0.36 0.30 0.34 0.40
                  0.30  0.34 0.37 0.33 0.37 0.42 0.36 0.40 0.47 0.38 0.42 0.52
Lot size 1/3 acre 0.19  0.23 0.26 0.22 0.26 0.30 0.25 0.29 0.34 0.28 0.32 0.39
                  0.28  0.32 0.35 0.30 0.35 0.39 0.33 0.38 0.45 0.36 0.40 0.50
Lot size 1/2 acre 0.16  0.20 0.24 0.19 0.23 0.28 0.22 0.27 0.32 0.26 0.30 0.37
                  0.25  0.29 0.32 0.28 0.32 0.36 0.31 0.35 0.42 0.34 0.38 0.48
Lot size 1 acre   0.14  0.19 0.22 0.17 0.21 0.26 0.20 0.25 0.31 0.24 0.29 0.35
                  0.22  0.26 0.29 0.24 0.28 0.34 0.28 0.32 0.40 0.31 0.35 0.46
Industrial        0.67  0.68 0.68 0.68 0.68 0.69 0.68 0.69 0.69 0.69 0.69 0.70
                  0.85  0.85 0.86 0.85 0.86 0.86 0.86 0.86 0.87 0.86 0.86 0.88
Commercial        0.71  0.71 0.72 0.71 0.72 0.72 0.72 0.72 0.72 0.72 0.72 0.72
                  0.88  0.88 0.89 0.89 0.89 0.89 0.89 0.89 0.90 0.89 0.89 0.90
Streets           0.70  0.71 0.71 0.71 0.72 0.74 0.72 0.73 0.76 0.73 0.75 0.78
                  0.76  0.77 0.79 0.80 0.82 0.84 0.84 0.85 0.89 0.89 0.91 0.95
Open space        0.05  0.10 0.14 0.08 0.13 0.19 0.12 0.17 0.24 0.16 0.21 0.28
                  0.11  0.16 0.20 0.14 0.19 0.26 0.18 0.23 0.32 0.22 0.27 0.39
Parking           0.85  0.86 0.87 0.85 0.86 0.87 0.85 0.86 0.87 0.85 0.86 0.87
                  0.95  0.96 0.97 0.95 0.96 0.97 0.95 0.96 0.97 0.95 0.96 0.97
a Runoff coefficients for storm recurrence intervals less than 25 years.
b Runoff coefficients for storm recurrence intervals 25 years or more.
Source: Rawls, W.J., S.L. Wong and R.H. McCuen, 1981, “Comparison of Urban
Flood Frequency Procedures,” Preliminary Draft, U.S. Department of Agriculture,
Soil Conservation Service, Baltimore, MD.
Table B-4
Manning Roughness Coefficients
Roughness Coefficients (Manning’s “n”) for Overland Flow
(U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, HEC-1 User’s Manual)
Surface Description N
Surface Description                       N
Dense growth                              0.4. – 0.5
Pasture                                   0.3 – 0.4
Lawns                                     0.2 – 0.3
Bluegrass sod                             0.2 – 0.5
Short grass prairie                       0.1 – 0.2
Sparse vegetation                         0.05 – 0.13
Bare clay-loam soil (eroded)              0.01 – 0.03
Concrete/asphalt
Very shallow depths (less than 1/4 inch)  0.10 – 0.15
Small depths (1/4 inch to several inches) 0.05 – 0.10
Roughness Coefficients (Manning’s “n”) for Channel Flow
Reach Description N
Reach Description                                             N
Natural stream, clean, straight, no rifts or pools            0.03
Natural stream, clean, winding, some pools or shoals          0.04
Natural stream, winding, pools, shoals, stony with some weeds 0.05
Natural stream, sluggish deep pools and weeds                 0.07
Natural stream or swale, very weedy or with timber underbrush 0.10
Concrete pipe, culvert or channel                             0.012
Corrugated metal pipe                                         0.012-0.027(1)
High-density polyethylene (HDPE) pipe
Corrugated                                                    0.021-0.029(2)
Smooth-lined                                                  0.012-0.020(2)
   NOTES:
(1) Depending upon type, coating and diameter.
(2) Values recommended by the American Concrete Pipe Association, check
manufacturer’s recommended value.
Figure B-2
Recommendation Chart for Infiltration Stormwater Management BMPs in Carbonate
Bedrock
 
        Geology Type Carbonate Bedrock
        Effective    Less than 2
Site    Soil         Feet           2 to 4 Feet                                Over 4 Feet to 8 Feet                     Over 8 Feet
Risk    Thickness
Factors Special      Low/Medium/
        Geologic     High Buffer    Low Buffer    Medium Buffer High Buffer    Low Buffer    Medium Buffer High Buffer   Low Buffer    Medium Buffer High Buffer
        Features*
Site Investigation   (Unacceptable) Preliminary   Preliminary   Preliminary    Preliminary   Preliminary   Preliminary   Preliminary   Preliminary   Preliminary
Recommended
        Infiltration                0-  100- 300- 0-                      300- 0-  100- 300- 0-  100- 300- 0-  100- 300- 0-  100- 300- 0-  100- 300- 0-  100- 300-
Design  Loading      (Unacceptable) 100 300  500  100 100- 300- 0-   100- 500  100 300  500  100 300  500  100 300  500  100 300  500  100 300  500  100 300  500
Factors Rates (%                    %   %    %    %   300% 500% 100% 300% %    %   %    %    %   %    %    %   %    %    %   %    %    %   %    %    %   %    %
        increase)**
Program Summary                                   1   1                   1    2                                    1    2                      1
Ordinance***
 
Recommended
 
 
Not Recommended
 
*   Special geologic feature buffer widths are as follows: Low buffer is less
than 50 feet.
Medium buffer is 50 feet to 100 feet.
High buffer is greater than 100 feet.
**   Rates greater than 500% not recommended.
*** Assumes adequately permeable soils and lack of natural constraints as
required for all infiltration systems.
1 Infiltration systems may be allowed at the determination of the engineer and/
or geologist, provided that a detailed site investigation is undertaken which
confirms nature of rock, location of special geologic features, and adequacy of
the buffer between the SGF and the proposed stormwater system(s).
2 In these special geologic features low buffer situations, infiltration
systems may be allowed at the determination of the engineer and/or geologist,
provided that a detailed site investigation is undertaken and a twenty- five-
foot buffer from SGFs is maintained.
Source: Little Lehigh Creek Watershed ACT 167 – Stormwater Management
Ordinance, May 2004.
Appendix C
Sample Drainage Plan Application
(To be attached to the “land subdivision plan or development plan review
application" or “minor land subdivision plan review application.”)
Application is hereby made for review of the Stormwater Management and Erosion
and Sedimentation Control Plan and related data as submitted herewith in
accordance with the City of Reading Stormwater Management and Earth Disturbance
Ordinance.
______ Final Plan   ______ Preliminary Plan   ______ Sketch Plan
Date of Submission _______________________________________
Submission No. _______________________________________
1. Name of subdivision or development _______________________________________
2. Name of Applicant _______________________________________
Telephone No. _______________________________________
(if corporation, list the corporation’s name and the names of two officers of
the corporation)
_______________________________________ Officer 1
_______________________________________ Officer 2
Address
______________________________________________________________________________
Zip _______________________________________
Applicant’s interest in subdivision or development
(if other than property owner, give owner’s name and address)
3. Name of property owner _______________________________________
Telephone No. _______________________________________
Address
______________________________________________________________________________
Zip _______________________________________
4. Name of Engineer or Surveyor
Telephone No. _______________________________________
Address
______________________________________________________________________________
Zip _______________________________________
5. Type of subdivision or development proposed:
___ Single-family lots
___ Two-family lots
___ Multifamily lots
___ Cluster-type lots
___ Planned residential development
___ Townhouses
___ Garden apartments
___ Mobile home park
___ Campground
___ Other ( _____________________________)
___ Commercial (multi-lot)
___ Commercial (one-lot)
___ Industrial (multi-lot)
___ Industrial (one-lot)
6. Lineal feet of new road proposed __________________________________ L.F.
7. Area of proposed and existing impervious area on entire tract.
A. Existing (to remain)   ___________ S.F. _______________% of Property
B. Proposed   ___________ S.F. _______________% of Property
8. Stormwater
A. Does the peak rate of runoff from proposed conditions exceed that flow which
occurred for existing conditions for the designated design storm?
_____________________
B. Design storm utilized (on-site conveyance systems) (24-hour)
No. of Subarea ______________________________________
Watershed Name ______________________________________
Explain:
__________________________________________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________________________________________
C. Does the submission and/or district meet the release rate criteria for the
applicable subarea? _____________________________________________
D. Number of subarea(s) from Appendix D of the Watershed Stormwater Management
Plan. _____________________________________________
E. Type of proposed runoff control
_____________________________________________
F. Does the proposed stormwater control criteria meet the requirements/
guidelines of the Stormwater Ordinance?
_____________________________________________
If not, what variances/waivers are requested?
_____________________________________________
Reasons
__________________________________________________________________________________________
G. Does the plan meet the requirements of Subpart C of the Stormwater
Ordinances? ___________________________
If not, what variances/waivers are requested?
_____________________________________________
Reasons Why
__________________________________________________________________________________________
H. Was TR-55, June 1986, utilized in determining the time of concentration?
_____________________________________________
I. What hydrologic method was used in the stormwater computations?
_____________________________________________
J. Is a hydraulic routing through the stormwater control structure submitted?
_____________________________________________
K. Is a construction schedule or staging attached?
_____________________________________________
L. Is a recommended maintenance program attached?
_____________________________________________
9. Erosion and Sediment Pollution Control (E&S):
A. Has the stormwater management and E&S plan, supporting documentation and
narrative been submitted to the Berks County Conservation District?
__________________________
B. Total area of earth disturbance
_____________________________________________ S.F.
10. Wetlands.
A. Have the wetlands been delineated by someone trained in wetland delineation?
_____________________________________________
B. Have the wetland lines been verified by a state or federal permitting
authority? _____________________________________________
C. Have the wetland lines been surveyed?
_____________________________________________
D. Total acreage of wetland within the property
_____________________________________________
E. Total acreage of wetland disturbed
_____________________________________________
F. Supporting documentation _____________________________________________
11. Filing
A. Has the required fee been submitted?
_____________________________________________
Amount _____________________________________________
B. Has the proposed schedule of construction inspection to be performed by the
applicant’s engineer been submitted?
_____________________________________________
C. Name of individual who will be making the inspections
_____________________________________________
D. General comments about stormwater management at the development
__________________________________________________________________________________________
   CERTIFICATE OF OWNERSHIP AND ACKNOWLEDGMENT OF APPLICATION: COMMONWEALTH OF
PENNSYLVANIA
   COUNTY OF  [County Name]  .
On this the ________ day of ___, 20___, before me, the undersigned officer,
personally appeared ______________________ who being duly sworn, according to
law, deposes and says that __________________ owners of the property described
in this application and that the application was made with
_________________________ knowledge and/or direction and does hereby agree with
the said application and to the submission of the same.
_____________________________________________ Property Owner
My Commission Expires ___________________________________20 ______
Notary Public _____________________________________________
I hereby certify that to the best of my knowledge and belief the information
and statements given above are true and correct. I make this verification
subject to the penalties of 18 Pa.C.S.A. § 4904 relating to unsworn
falsification to authorities.
   SIGNATURE OF APPLICANT _____________________________________________
///////////////////////////////////////////////////////////////////////////////
/////////////////////////////////////////////////
(Information below this line to be completed by the municipality)
_____________________________________________ (Name of Municipality) official
submission receipt:
Date complete application received
_____________________________________________
Plan Number _____________________________________________
Fees _____________________________________________
date fees paid _____________________________________________
received by _____________________________________________
Official submission receipt date _____________________________________________
Received by _____________________________________________
Municipality
Appendix D
Stormwater Management District Watershed Map
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/6541e9c0b130f7197f9155a8a6441bb6dc5ca83c/
IMAGES/0-0-0-64.png]
Appendix E
Low-Impact Development (LID) Practices
Alternative Approach for Managing Stormwater Runoff
Natural hydrologic conditions may be altered radically by poorly planned
development practices, such as introducing unneeded impervious surfaces,
destroying existing drainage swales, constructing unnecessary storm sewers, and
changing local topography. A traditional drainage approach of development has
been to remove runoff from a site as quickly as possible and capture it in a
detention basin. This approach leads ultimately to the degradation of water
quality as well as expenditure of additional resources for detaining and
managing concentrated runoff at some downstream location.
The recommended alternative approach is to promote practices that will minimize
proposed conditions runoff rates and volumes, which will minimize needs for
artificial conveyance and storage facilities. To simulate predevelopment
hydrologic conditions, infiltration is often necessary to offset the loss of
infiltration by creation of impervious surfaces. The ability of the ground to
infiltrate depends upon the soil types and its conditions.
Preserving natural hydrologic conditions requires careful alternative site
design considerations. Site design practices include preserving natural
drainage features, minimizing impervious surface area, reducing the hydraulic
connectivity of impervious surfaces, and protecting natural depression storage.
A well-designed site will contain a mix of all those features. The following
describes various techniques to achieve the alternative approach:
• Preserving natural drainage features. Protecting natural drainage features,
particularly vegetated drainage swales and channels, is desirable because of
their ability to infiltrate and attenuate flows and to filter pollutants.
However, this objective is often not accomplished in land development. In fact,
commonly held drainage philosophy encourages just the opposite pattern –
streets and adjacent storm sewers typically are located in the natural
headwater valleys and swales, thereby replacing natural drainage functions with
a completely impervious system. As a result, runoff and pollutants generated
from impervious surfaces flow directly into storm sewers with no opportunity
for attenuation, infiltration, or filtration. Developments designed to fit site
topography also minimizes the amount of grading on site.
• Protecting natural depression storage areas. Depressional storage areas have
no surface outlet, or drain very slowly following a storm event. They can be
commonly seen as ponded areas in farm fields during the wet season or after
large runoff events. Traditional development practices eliminate these
depressions by filling or draining, thereby obliterating their ability to
reduce surface runoff volumes and trap pollutants. The volume and release- rate
characteristics of depressions should be protected in the design of the
development site. The depressions can be protected by simply avoiding the
depression or by incorporating its storage as additional capacity in required
detention facilities.
• Avoiding introduction of impervious areas. Careful site planning should
consider reducing impervious coverage to the maximum extent possible. Building
footprints, sidewalks, driveways and other features producing impervious
surfaces should be evaluated to minimize impacts on runoff.
• Reducing the hydraulic connectivity of impervious surfaces. Impervious
surfaces are significantly less of a problem if they are not directly connected
to an impervious conveyance system (such as storm sewer). Two basic ways to
reduce hydraulic connectivity are routing of roof runoff over lawns and
reducing the use of storm sewers. Site grading should promote increasing travel
time of stormwater runoff, and should help reduce concentration of runoff to a
single point in the development.
• Routing roof runoff over lawns. Roof runoff can be easily routed over lawns
in most site designs. The practice discourages direct connections of downspouts
to storm sewers or parking lots. The practice also discourages sloping
driveways and parking lots to the street. By routing roof drains and crowning
the driveway to run off to the lawn, the lawn is essentially used as a filter
strip.
• Reducing the use of storm sewers. By reducing use of storm sewers for
draining streets, parking lots, and back yards, the potential for accelerating
runoff from the development can be greatly reduced. The practice requires
greater use of swales and may not be practical for some development sites,
especially if there are concerns for areas that do not drain in a “reasonable”
time. The practice requires educating local citizens and public works
officials, who expect runoff to disappear shortly after a rainfall event.
• Reducing street widths. Street widths can be reduced by either eliminating
on-street parking or by reducing roadway widths. Municipal planners and traffic
designers should encourage narrower neighborhood streets which ultimately could
lower maintenance.
• Limiting sidewalks to one side of the street. A sidewalk on one side of the
street may suffice in low-traffic neighborhoods. The lost sidewalk could be
replaced with bicycle/recreational trails that follow back-of-lot lines. Where
appropriate, backyard trails should be constructed using pervious materials.
• Using permeable paving materials. These materials include permeable
interlocking concrete paving blocks or porous bituminous concrete. Such
materials should be considered as alternatives to conventional pavement
surfaces, especially for low use surfaces such as driveways, overflow parking
lots, and emergency access roads.
• Reducing building setbacks. Reducing building setbacks reduces driveway and
entry walks and is most readily accomplished along low-traffic streets where
traffic noise is not a problem.
• Constructing cluster developments. Cluster developments can also reduce the
amount of impervious area for a given number of lots. The biggest savings is in
street length, which also will reduce costs of the development. Cluster
development clusters the construction activity onto less-sensitive areas
without substantially affecting the gross density of development.
In summary, a careful consideration of the existing topography and
implementation of a combination of the abovementioned techniques may avoid
construction of costly stormwater control measures. Other benefits include
reduced potential of downstream flooding, water quality degradation of
receiving streams/water bodies and enhancement of aesthetics and reduction of
development costs. Beneficial results include more stable baseflows in
receiving streams, improved groundwater recharge, reduced flood flows, reduced
pollutant loads, and reduced costs for conveyance and storage.
Appendix F
West Nile Virus Guidance
(This source is from the Monroe County, PA Conservation District who researched
the potential of West Nile Virus problems from BMPs due to a number of calls
they were receiving.)
Monroe County Conservation District Guidance: Stormwater Management and West
Nile Virus
Source: Brodhead McMichaels Creeks Watershed Act 167 Stormwater
Management Ordinance 2-23-2004
The Monroe County Conservation District recognizes the need to address the
problem of nonpoint source pollution impacts caused by runoff from impervious
surfaces. The new stormwater policy being integrated into Act 167 Stormwater
Management regulations by the PA Department of Environmental Protection (DEP)
will make nonpoint pollution controls an important component of all future
plans and updates to existing plans. In addition, to meet postconstruction
antidegradation standards under the State National Pollution Discharge
Elimination System (NPDES) permitting program, applicants will be required to
employ best management practices (BMPs) to address nonpoint pollution concerns.
Studies conducted throughout the United States have shown that wet basins and,
in particular, constructed wetlands, are effective in traditional stormwater
management areas such as channel stability and flood control, and are one of
the most effective ways to remove stormwater pollutants (United States
Environmental Protection Agency 1991, Center for Watershed Protection 2000).
From Maryland to Oregon, studies have shown that as urbanization and impervious
surface increase in a watershed, the streams in those watersheds become
degraded (CWP 2000). Although there is debate over the threshold of impervious
cover when degradation becomes apparent (some studies show as little as 6%
while others show closer to 20%), there is agreement that impervious surfaces
cause nonpoint pollution in urban and urbanizing watersheds, and that
degradation is ensured if stormwater BMPs are not implemented.
Although constructed wetlands and ponds are desirable from a water quality
perspective, there may be concerns about the possibility of these stormwater
management structures becoming breeding grounds for mosquitoes. The
Conservation District feels that although it may be a valid concern,
municipalities should not adopt ordinance provisions prohibiting wet basins for
stormwater management.
Mosquitoes
The questions surrounding mosquito production in wetlands and ponds have
intensified in recent years by the outbreak of the mosquito-borne West Nile
Virus. As is the case with all vector-borne maladies, the life cycle of West
Nile Virus is complicated, traveling from mosquito to bird, back to mosquito
and then to other animals, including humans. Culex pipiens was identified as
the vector species in the first documented cases from New York in 1999. This
species is still considered the primary transmitter of the disease across its
range. Today there are some 60 species of mosquitoes that inhabit Pennsylvania.
Along with C. pipiens, three other species have been identified as vectors of
West Nile Virus while four more have been identified as potential vectors.
The four known vectors in NE Pennsylvania are Culex pipiens, C. restuans, C.
salinarius and Ochlerotatus japonicus. All four of these species prefer, and
almost exclusively use, artificial containers (old tires, rain gutters,
birdbaths, etc.) as larval habitats. In the case of C. pipiens, the most
notorious of the vector mosquitoes, the dirtier the water, the better they like
it. The important factor is that these species do not thrive in functioning
wetlands where competition for resources and predation by larger aquatic and
terrestrial organisms is high.
The remaining four species, Aedes vexans, Ochlerotatus canadensis, O.
triseriatus and O. trivittatus are currently considered potential vectors due
to laboratory tests (except the O. trivittatus, which did have one confirmed
vector pool for West Nile Virus in Pennsylvania during 2002). All four of these
species prefer vernal habitats and ponded woodland areas following heavy summer
rains. These species may be the greatest threat of disease transmission around
stormwater basins that pond water for more than four days. This can be
mitigated, however, by establishing ecologically functioning wetlands.
Stormwater Facilities
If a stormwater wetland or pond is constructed properly and a diverse
ecological community develops, mosquitoes should not become a problem. Wet
basins and wetlands constructed as stormwater management facilities should be
designed to attract a diverse wildlife community. If a wetland is planned,
proper hydrologic soil conditions and the establishment of hydrophytic
vegetation will promote the population of the wetland by amphibians and other
mosquito predators. In natural wetlands, predatory insects and amphibians are
effective at keeping mosquito populations in check during the larval stage of
development while birds and bats prey on adult mosquitoes.
The design of a stormwater wetland must include the selection of hydrophytic
plant species for their pollutant uptake capabilities and for not contributing
to the potential for vector mosquito breeding. In particular, species of
emergent vegetation with little submerged growth are preferable. By limiting
the vegetation growing below the water surface, larvae lose protective cover
and there is less chance of anaerobic conditions occurring in the water.
Stormwater ponds can be designed for multiple purposes. When incorporated into
an open space design, a pond can serve as a stormwater management facility and
a community amenity. Aeration fountains and stocked fish should be added to
keep larval mosquito populations in check.
Publications from the PA Department of Health and the Penn State Cooperative
Extension concerning West Nile Virus identify aggressive public education about
the risks posed by standing water in artificial containers (tires, trash cans,
rain gutters, and bird baths) as the most effective method to control vector
mosquitoes.
Conclusion
The Conservation District understands the pressure faced by municipalities when
dealing with multifaceted issues such as stormwater management and encourages
the incorporation of water quality management techniques into stormwater
designs. As Monroe County continues to grow, conservation design, groundwater
recharge and constructed wetlands and ponds should be among the preferred
design options to reduce the impacts of increases in impervious surfaces. When
designed and constructed appropriately, the runoff mitigation benefits to the
community from these design options will far outweigh their potential to become
breeding grounds for mosquitoes.
Appendix G
References
BMP Manuals
California
California Stormwater BMP Handbook: New Development and Redevelopment (January
2003); separate file available at http://www.cabmphandbooks.org/Development.asp
Georgia
Georgia Stormwater Management Manual Volume 2: Technical Handbook (August 2001)
separate file ( http://www.georgiastormwater.com/)
Maryland
2000 Maryland Stormwater Design Manual- http://www.mde.state.md.us/Programs/
Waterprograms/SedimentandStormwater/stormwater design/index.asp
Massachusetts
Stormwater Management, Volume Two: Stormwater Technical Handbook
(Massachusetts, 1997); separate file available at http://www.state.ma.us/dep/
brp/stormwtr/stormpub.htm
Minnesota
Minnesota Urban Small Sites BMP Manual: Stormwater Best Management Practices
for Cold Climates (July 2001); http://www.metrocouncil.org/environment/
Watershed/BMP/manual.htm
New Jersey
Revised Manual for New Jersey: Best Management Practices for Control of
Nonpoint Source Pollution from Stormwater (Fifth Draft May 2000);  http://
www.state.nj.us/dep/watershedmgt/bmpmanual.htm
New York
New York State Stormwater Management Design Manual (2001); http://
www.dec.state.ny.us/website/dow/swmanual/swmanual.html
Pennsylvania
Pennsylvania Association of Conservation Districts, Pennsylvania Handbook of
Best Management Practices for Developing Areas, November 14, 1997.
Washington
Stormwater Management Manual for Western Washington (August 2001); http://
www.ecy.wa.gov/programs/wq/stormwater/manual.html
Federal
Stormwater Best Management Practices in an Ultra-Urban Setting: Selection and
Monitoring (FHWA); http://www.fhwa.dot.gov/environment/ultraurb/3fs1.htm
   USEPA Infiltration Trench Fact Sheet (September 1999); http://cfpub.epa.gov/
npdes/stormwater/menuofbmps/index.cfm
Riparian Buffer References
Alliance for the Chesapeake Bay, Pennsylvania Department of Environmental
Protection, September 2000. Forest Buffer Toolkit, Stream ReLeaf Program.
Penn State College of Agricultural Sciences, 1996. Establishing Vegetative
Buffer Strips Along Streams to Improve Water Quality. Publication #AGRS-67.
Fike, Jean, June 1999. Terrestrial and Palustrine Plant Communities of
Pennsylvania, Pennsylvania Natural Diversity Inventory, The Nature Conservancy,
Western Pennsylvania Conservancy, and Pennsylvania Department of Conservation
and Natural Resources.
Pennsylvania Association of Conservation Districts, Inc., Keystone Chapter,
Soil and Water Conservation Society, Pennsylvania Department of Environmental
Protection, Natural Resources Conservation Service, 1998. Pennsylvania Handbook
of Best Management Practices for Developing Areas. Prepared by CH2M Hill.
Palone, R. S. and A. H. Todd (eds.), 1997. Chesapeake Bay Riparian Handbook: A
Guide for Establishing and Maintaining Riparian Forest Buffers. Chesapeake Bay
Program and Northeastern Area State and Private Forestry. Natural Resources
Conservation Service Cooperative State Research Education and Extension
Services.
The Federal Interagency Stream Restoration Working Group (FISRWG, 10/1998).
Stream Corridor Restoration Principles, Processes, and Practices. GPO Item No.
0120-A; SuDocs No. A57.6/2:EN3/PT.653. ISBN-0-934213-59-3. Published October
1998. Revised August 2000.
Chapter 508
STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
Part 1
Levying Special Assessments for Public Works Projects
§
508-101.   Findings and purpose.
§
508-102.   Levy of assessments.
§
508-103.   Qualified costs.
§
508-104.   Purpose for levying an assessment.
§
508-105.   Director of Public Works report.
§
508-106.   Public hearing.
§
508-107.   Assessment ordinance.
§
508-108.   Cost estimates.
§
508-109.   Lots already served.
§
508-110.   Corner parcels.
§
508-111.   Double frontage parcels.
§
508-112.   Private alleys.
§
508-113.   Appeal.
§
508-114.   Waivers of notice and hearing.
§
508-115.   Definitions.
Part 2
Snow and Ice Removal
§
508-201.   Definitions.
§
508-202.   Snow and ice removal from sidewalks.
§
508-203.   Snow and ice removal from public transportation systems.
§
508-204.   Snow and ice removal from roofs.
§
508-205.   Depositing of snow and ice restricted.
§
508-206.   Noncompliance; work by City; cost recovery.
§
508-207.   Violations and penalties.
Part 3
Curb, Driveway, Sidewalk and Sidewalk Vault Standards and Fees
§
508-301.   Curb permit, survey and fees.
§
508-302.   Street restoration fees; waiver ahead of paving.
§
508-303.   Curb construction requirements.
§
508-304.   Building line survey permit and fees.
§
508-305.   Driveway permit and fees.
§
508-306.   Sidewalk vault permit, liability agreement and fee.
§
508-307.   Constructing, repairing or opening sidewalks.
§
508-308.   Excavations.
§
508-309.   Time limit and extension request.
§
508-310.   Notice of sidewalk opening to Department of Public Works.
§
508-311.   Work to conform to City requirements and standards.
§
508-312.   Adoption of construction plan standards.
§
508-313.   Violations and penalties.
Part 4
Commercial Parking Lots
§
508-401.   Definitions.
§
508-402.   Paving, grading and drainage regulations.
§
508-403.   License required; application and fee.
§
508-404.   Operation without license prohibited.
§
508-405.   Violations and penalties.
Part 5
Sidewalks and Curbs
§
508-501.   Permit required for curb and sidewalk work.
§
508-502.   Permit application.
§
508-503.   Sidewalk widths for public streets.
§
508-504.   Specifications for paving sidewalks and for curbing.
§
508-505.   Notice to recurb and relay sidewalks.
§
508-506.   Sidewalks for dedicated streets.
§
508-507.   Paving and repair of driveways required.
§
508-508.   Duty of owner to construct and repair at own expense.
§
508-509.   Work by City for failure to comply with notice.
§
508-510.   Cost collection by action at law or filing lien.
§
508-511.   Concrete curb specifications.
§
508-512.   Curb thickness and width.
§
508-513.   Radius curbs.
§
508-514.   Projecting porches, areaways or steps; cellar doors.
§
508-515.   Openings in sidewalk to be covered or guarded.
§
508-516.   Administration; violations and penalties.
Part 6
Radii of Curblines at Street Intersections
§
508-601.   Radii established.
§
508-602.   Conformance.
Part 7
Street Cut Permits
§
508-701.   Purpose.
§
508-702.   Application.
§
508-703.   Rejection of application.
§
508-704.   Permit issuance and schedule for construction of street cuts.
§
508-705.   Charged surface.
§
508-706.   Pavement cuts on recently paved streets.
§
508-707.   Special site conditions.
§
508-708.   Inspection.
§
508-709.   Other related permits and fees.
§
508-710.   Construction standards.
§
508-711.   Comprehensive general liability and indemnification.
§
508-712.   Violations and penalties.
[HISTORY: Adopted by the City Council of the City of Reading 4-28-2008 by Ord.
No. 35-2008 (Ch. 21 of the 2001 Code of Ordinances). Amendments noted where
applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Plumbing code — See
Ch. 180, Part 10.
Property maintenance — See
Ch. 180, Part 13.
Sidewalk cafes — See
Ch. 479.
Subdivision and land development — See
Ch. 515.
Trees — See
Ch. 555.
Zoning — See
Ch. 600.
STATE LAW REFERENCES
Sidewalk construction and repairs - See Third Class City Code, 11 Pa.C.S.
§§13001 et seq.
Power to regulate and license commercial parking lots - See Third Class City
Code, 11 Pa.C.S. § 12431.
Power to regulate projections and encroachments - See Third Class City Code, 11
Pa.C.S. § 12415.
Power to require sidewalk construction and repair - See Third Class City Code,
11 Pa.C.S. §§ 13001 et seq.
City to construct on failure of owner - See Third Class City Code, 11 Pa.C.S. §
13002.
Emergency repairs - See Third Class City Code, 11 Pa.C.S. § 13003.
Part 1
Levying Special Assessments For Public Works Projects
§ 508-101. Findings and purpose.
   A.   Findings. The City of Reading has determined that there is a need for a
funding mechanism to install and rehabilitate City streets, sidewalks, curbs,
sewers, lights, water mains and alleys. A fair and equitable means to recover
the costs of public works improvements by the City using its police powers to
levy special assessments.
   B.   Purpose. It is declared to be the purpose of this Part to establish
procedures and guidelines for levying special assessments against benefitted
properties for the construction of public works improvements using the City's
police powers as established by state law.
§ 508-102. Levy of assessments.
Cost of installing or constructing any public work or improvement by the City
may be charged under this section in whole or in part to the property
benefitted by such work or improvement and the Council may make an assessment
against such benefitted property in the manner provided herein.
§ 508-103. Qualified costs.
   A.   Cost of any work or improvement to be paid in whole or in part by
special assessment on property may include the direct and indirect cost,
interest on bonds, a reasonable charge for services of administrative staff of
the City and the cost of engineering and legal services and any other terms of
direct or indirect costs which may be reasonably attributed to the proposed
work or improvement. The amount to be assessed against all property for any
such proposed work or improvement shall be apportioned among the individual
parcels in the manner designated by the City Council.
   B.   The amount assessed against any property for any work or improvement
which does not represent an exercise of the police power shall not exceed the
value of the benefits accruing to the property and for those representing an
exercise of police power, the assessment shall be upon a reasonable basis as
determined by City Council.
§ 508-104. Purpose for levying an assessment.
   A.   If the City determines that a proposed public works improvement must be
performed for the health, safety and welfare of the public, the City shall have
the power to levy special assessments to benefitted properties for the
improvements and services provided. The City shall include the proposed project
in the upcoming year's annual budget and capital improvement plan. The City may
not proceed with the project engineering until after the budget and capital
improvement plan is approved by the Council.
   B.   The City may levy a special assessment for public works improvement if
a simple majority of benefitted property owner's petition the City to perform a
public improvement. This shall apply to streets, sidewalks, curbs, private
alleys, streetlights, water mains and sewers.
   C.   For an alley improvement project to be included in the next budget
year, the request must be submitted to the City Clerk by July 1 prior to the
budget year. The alley projects shall be prioritized with other City projects
and will be the City's sole discretion to determine scheduling for such an
improvement.
§ 508-105. Director of Public Works report.
The Director of Public Works report shall consist of the following:
   A.   A copy of the preliminary or final plans and specifications of the
proposed work or improvement.
   B.   An estimate of the entire cost of the proposed work or improvement or
the actual cost based on contracts awarded.
   C.   A report that itemizes the estimated special assessment levy for each
benefitted property.
§ 508-106. Public hearing.
   A.   The City shall hold a public hearing prior to taking action on an
ordinance levying the special assessment. The Director of Public Works shall
present the Director of Public Works report to Council at the public hearing
outlining all costs and applicable assessments.
   B.   Once the Director of Public Works has completed the Director of Public
Works report and it is filed with the City Clerk, the Clerk shall set a hearing
date. To give notice of the scheduled hearing, the Clerk shall publish in the
official newspaper a notice that must contain:
      (1)   A statement containing the nature of the proposed work or
improvement.
      (2)   A description of the general boundary lines of the proposed area to
be assessed.
      (3)   The time and place where the report can be inspected and cost.
      (4)   The time and place at which interested parties, their agents or
attorneys may appear to be heard concerning the proposed project.
   C.   Copy of the notice shall be mailed to every interested person whose
post office address is known or can be ascertained with reasonable diligence at
least 10 days prior to the hearing date. This includes all benefitted
properties.
§ 508-107. Assessment ordinance.
   A.   After the hearing, Council may approve, disapprove or modify the
Director of Public Works report. After all modifications are complete, Council
will by ordinance approve the plans and specifications contained in the report
and authorize the following:
      (1)   A direction that the public work or improvement shall be performed
and special assessments shall be levied as indicated in the report or as
modified after the public hearing.
      (2)   The number and terms of any installment payments allowed, including
number of installments, interest rates and when payments are due.
      (3)   Provisions for collection of the assessment and any penalties to be
imposed for failure to timely pay the assessment for any installment.
      (4)   A statement that all assessments or installments if permitted which
are not paid by the date specified shall be extended on the tax roll as a
delinquent tax and collected in the same manner as delinquent real estate
taxes.
      (5)   Terms and conditions of any allowed deferral of any assessment
while no use are made of the improvement being financed thereby.
   B.   The ordinance shall be published in the official City newspaper and
mailed to each affected person whose address is known or can be ascertained
with reasonable diligence.
§ 508-108. Cost estimates.
   A.   The Director of Public Works will determine the special assessment for
each benefitting property. Costs shall be determined either by Engineer's
estimate or by receiving actual bids, depending on the situation. The actual
assessment levy by final ordinance of the Council shall establish maximum
assessment amounts to each individual property. If actual construction costs
are less, the actual assessment may be less.
   B.   The actual cost of any project after completion or after receipt of
bids is found to vary materially from the Engineer's estimates, the Council may
reopen the special assessment.
   C.   When an assessment is to be reopened, notice similar to the original
notice must be given and a public hearing conducted. After the hearing, the
Council must pass an ordinance amending, confirming or canceling the prior
assessment. The ordinance must be advertised once in official City newspaper
and mailed to all interested persons in the same manner as the original final
ordinance.
§ 508-109. Lots already served.
A parcel of lots which has been levied a special assessment for a similar
public works improvement upon which it abuts, shall be entitled to an exemption
for levying of a special assessment. Council may allow such an exemption from
special assessment if it has been previously installed and services the
property.
§ 508-110. Corner parcels.
   A.   For street improvement projects, when the special assessment are
determined on a front- foot basis and a corner parcel abuts the improvement,
the assessment against the parcel shall be determined by applying a full per-
foot assessment rate along the abutting side. When the improvement is installed
abutting both the long frontage side and the short frontage side of the corner
parcel, the assessment shall be determined by multiplying the full per-foot
assessment rate times the sum of the frontage of the short side, plus the
frontage of the long side less a deduction equal to 50 times the full per foot
assessment.
   B.   For storm sewers, sanitary sewers and water mains, if a corner property
abuts the improvement, but it cannot be connected to the main, then the
property should be exempt from paying assessment. If the property will benefit
from the improvement, then they shall pay an assessment, even if the property
has been or will be assessed for a similar improvement on the other frontage.
§ 508-111. Double frontage parcels.
   A.   When a special assessments are determined on a front-foot basis and an
improvement is installed along a frontage of a parcel which runs through an
entire block and has frontage on two different streets or public rights-of-way
and the Council, after investigation and report by the Director of Community
Development, determines that under the provisions of
Chapter 600, Zoning, it is possible to divide the parcel into two parcels on
fronting on each street, the parcels shall be subject to an assessment for each
frontage when the improvement abutting the frontage is installed. In such
cases, the second assessment against such parcels shall be determined and
treated as separate assessments.
   B.   If such parcel cannot be divided to create two parcels, there shall be
no assessment for the same benefit for the same type of improvement installed
abutting the second frontage.
§ 508-112. Private alleys.
   A.   Alley improvements may involve the removal and replacement of the
roadway surface, improvement of drainage facilities and storm sewer, and the
removal of trees and brush located within the easement area.
   B.   After the improvement is completed and the assessment is levied,
adjacent homeowners shall continue to be responsible for care and maintenance
of the improvement.
§ 508-113. Appeal.
Any person against where land is a special assessment is levied under this
section may appeal in a manner pursuant to 53 P.S. § 1722.
§ 508-114. Waivers of notice and hearing.
The Council may, without notice or hearing, levy and assess the whole or any
part of the cost of any public works improvement as a special assessment upon
the property benefitted whenever notice and hearing is waived in writing by all
property owners affected by such a special assessment.
§ 508-115. Definitions.
As used in this Part, certain terms are defined as follows:
   ASSESSMENT LEVY — An action by City Council ordinance to establish
assessments for benefitted properties and ordering the City to collect such
assessments.
   DIRECTOR OF PUBLIC WORKS — A professional engineer, registered in the State
of Pennsylvania, who has been appointed as the Director of Public Works or the
Director of Public Works authorized representative.
   FRONT-FOOT ASSESSMENT — The length of a parcel of land abutting an
improvement usually measured in feet or meters.
   PRIVATE ALLEYS — A right-of-way legally described by an easement for the
purpose of property access in the delivery of services. The property with which
the easement is overlaid is owned and maintained by the adjacent property
owners.
   PUBLIC WORKS IMPROVEMENT — Typical improvements projects for which special
assessments are levied include:
   A.   Street and alley construction.
   B.   Curb and gutter installation.
   C.   Sidewalk construction.
   D.   Sanitary sewer installation.
   E.   Storm sewer installation.
   F.   Water main installation.
   G.   Streetlights.
   SPECIAL ASSESSMENT — Charges levied by local government against real
property to defray the cost of public works improvements which benefit such
property.
Part 2
Snow And Ice Removal 1
1.   Editor's Note: Ord. No. 28-2010, Adopted 6-28-2010, Repealed This Part 2
To The Extent Inconsistent With Or In Direct Contrast To The Property
Maintenance Rules And Regulations, Enacted And Authorized By Ord. No. 28-2010 (
Ch. 180, Part 13).
§ 508-201. Definitions.
Except as herein otherwise defined, the terms used shall have the meanings
ascribed to them in the Pennsylvania Vehicle Code. 2  For the purpose of this
Part, the following definitions shall prevail:
   BUSINESS DAY — Any day not a Sunday or Christmas, Thanksgiving or New Year,
but all other holidays shall be considered business days.
   BUSINESS HOURS — The hours between 7:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m. on any business
day. DIRECTOR — The Director of Public Works.
   PERSON — Includes any person, partnership, copartnership, corporation, joint
stock company, syndicate, tenant, property owner, real and personal, occupant,
lessee or agent in control of any building.
   ROADWAY — That portion of a street or highway improved, designed or
ordinarily used for vehicular travel, exclusive of the berm shoulder.
   SIDEWALK — That portion of a street or highway between the curblines and the
adjacent property lines or where there is no curbing between the lateral lines
of the street or highway and the adjacent property lines.
   STREET or HIGHWAY — The entire width between curbs or boundary lines of
every way publicly maintained when any part thereof is open to the use of the
public for the vehicular travel.
2.   Editor's Note: See 75 Pa.C.S.A. § 101 et seq.
§ 508-202. Snow and ice removal from sidewalks.
   A.   Every person in charge or control of any building or lot of land within
the City fronting or abutting on a paved sidewalk, whether as owner, tenant,
occupant, lessee or otherwise, shall remove and clear away, or cause to be
removed and cleared away, snow and ice from a path of at least 36 inches in
width and from an area within 36 inches of every fire hydrant on every sidewalk
which is in front of or abuts on such building or lot of land; provided,
however, that when such sidewalk is located along Penn Street or along North
Fifth Street, North Sixth Street and North Ninth Street between Penn Street and
Washington Street, snow and ice shall be cleared from all of such sidewalks.
      (1)   Except as provided in Subsection B hereof, snow and ice shall be so
removed from sidewalks in all business districts within the City by two
business hours after the cessation of any fall of snow, sleet or freezing rain
or by the beginning of business hours of the next business day following such
fall, whichever period is shorter.
      (2)   Except as provided in Subsection B hereof, snow and ice shall be so
removed from all other sidewalks within the City on the same day of the
cessation of any fall of snow, sleet or freezing rain or within the first four
hours of daylight after the cessation of any such fall, whichever period is
longer.
   B.   However, in the event snow and ice on a sidewalk has become so hard
that it cannot be removed without likelihood of damage to the sidewalk, the
person charged with its removal shall, within the time mentioned in Subsection
A hereof, cause enough cinder or other abrasive to be put on the sidewalk to
make travel thereon reasonably safe; and shall then, as soon thereafter as
weather permits, cause a path in such sidewalk of at least 36 inches in width
to be thoroughly cleaned.
§ 508-203. Snow and ice removal from public transportation systems.
Every person operating a public transportation system within the City employing
motor buses, trackless trolleys, trains or street cars, shall remove and clear
away, or cause to be removed and cleared away, snow and ice from its passenger
loading and unloading areas and its tracks, if any. Snow and ice from its
passenger loading and unloading areas shall be removed and cleared away within
the first eight hours of daylight after the cessation of any fall of snow,
sleet or freezing rain, except that if the snow and ice has become so hard that
it cannot be removed without the likelihood of damage to the underlying
surface, such operator shall within the eight-hour period, cause enough sand or
other abrasive to be put on the passenger loading and unloading area to make
walking thereon reasonably safe. He shall then, as soon thereafter as weather
permits, cause such area to be thoroughly cleaned.
§ 508-204. Snow and ice removal from roofs.
Every person in charge or control of any building or other structure within the
City, whether as owner, tenant, occupant, lessee or otherwise, shall remove and
clear away, or cause to be removed and cleared away, any accumulation of snow
and ice on such building or other structure which is liable to fall on any
sidewalk, roadway or other public way. Such work shall be completed within a
reasonable time, but not later than the end of the first six hours of daylight
after the cessation of any fall of snow, sleet or freezing rain.
§ 508-205. Depositing of snow and ice restricted.
No person shall deposit or cause to be deposited any snow or ice on or against
a fire hydrant or on any sidewalk or roadway, or on any loading or unloading
area of a public transportation system, except that snow and ice may be
windrowed on public roadways, incident to the cleaning thereof or windrowed on
curbs incident to the cleaning of sidewalks.
§ 508-206. Noncompliance; work by City; cost recovery.
   A.   In the event of the failure of any person to clear away or treat with
abrasives and subsequently clear away any snow and ice from any sidewalk, as
herein provided, or cause this to be done, the Director may as soon as
practicable after such failure, cause such work to be done.
   B.   The Director shall ascertain and keep a record of the exact cost of all
work he causes to be done in accordance with this section on account of each
act or omission of each person, and he shall identify these persons with
particularity.
   C.   Each person whose act or omission makes it necessary that the Director
cause work to be done in accordance with this section shall be liable to the
City for the cost of such work plus any additional amount or penalty allowed by
law which may be in addition to any fine or penalty imposed under §
508-207. It shall be the duty of the City Solicitor to sue for these costs and
penalties or place a lien against such person or property as may be in the best
interests of the City.
§ 508-207. Violations and penalties.
Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any provision of this Part
shall be, upon conviction thereof, sentenced to a fine of not less than $100
nor more than $1,000 plus costs and, in default of payment of said fine and
costs, to a term of imprisonment not to exceed 30 days. Each day such violation
is committed or permitted to continue, shall constitute a separate offense and
shall be punishable as such hereunder.
Part 3
Curb, Driveway, Sidewalk And Sidewalk Vault Standards And Fees
§ 508-301. Curb permit, survey and fees.
   A.   Curb permit required. No person, firm or corporation shall set, reset
or construct any curb until an application made on City standard form shall
have been filed with the Department of Public Works, a permit issued, the
required regulation (survey) completed and the following fees paid. 3
   B.   Fees for curbline regulation (survey) shall be as provided in
Chapter 212, Fees. 4
   C.   The charges include the establishment of curbing alignment and
elevation.
3.   Editor's Note: Amended during codification (see
Ch. 1, General Provisions, Part 2).
4.   Editor's Note: Amended during codification (see
Ch. 1, General Provisions, Part 2).
§ 508-302. Street restoration fees; waiver ahead of paving.
   A.   Street restoration fees. Along with, and in addition to, the regulation
(survey) charge, the applicant shall pay a fee for each linear foot of curb
proposed to be constructed or reconstructed as payment for street surface
repair, as provided in
Chapter 212, Fees. Where both curb and a two-foot wide gutter are being
replaced with standard curb, the fee shall be per linear foot, as provided in
Chapter 212, Fees. Damage to the street surface extending more than one foot
into the cartway for standard curb construction, or two feet for curb and
gutter replacement shall be billed to the permittee on the basis of time and
material required. 5
   B.   Restoration fee waiver ahead of paving. Where a street is scheduled for
resurfacing or reconstruction in the current calendar year, the City may allow
the contractor to backfill the trench to the street surface, including the
application of two inches of compacted bituminous stockpile mix cover, and
maintain it until the City operation begins, in lieu of payment of the
restoration fee. To be eligible for the ahead of paving allowance, the
contractor shall complete all work and remove all forms and equipment prior to
the beginning of street resurfacing or reconstruction. Failure to properly
maintain the trench or remove all forms and equipment as required shall be
cause for the City filing street restoration charges and/or other damages
against the permittee/contractor as appropriate. Permits issued to include the
ahead of paving allowance will be so marked.
5.   Editor's Note: Amended during codification (see
Ch. 1, General Provisions, Part 2).
§ 508-303. Curb construction requirements.
   A.   When excavating for curb construction or replacement, the permittee
shall first cut a neat and straight line in the asphalt street paving, parallel
to the curbline, with a saw or jack hammer. After excavating and constructing
the curb, he shall immediately backfill the trench on the street side with 2A
modified stone compacted in six-inch layers to within six inches of the street
surface. The trench on the property side shall also be backfilled immediately
after construction but brought to grade and compacted with material similar to
that removed. The permittee shall then notify the City Department of Public
Works requesting inspection, and barricade the curb cut, including proper
lighting, until the City restores the street asphalt surface. 6
   B.   When replacing curb constructed as monolithic curb and gutter, the
contractor shall remove all curb and gutter encountered and backfill the street
as described above.
   C.   Where the contractor encounters and damages the concrete base of a
street when excavating for curb or curb and gutter construction, he shall
reestablish the concrete base and/or make other repairs as directed by the
Director of Public Works.
6.   Editor's Note: Amended during codification (see
Ch. 1, General Provisions, Part 2).
§ 508-304. Building line survey permit and fees.
   A.   Building line surveys. No person, firm or corporation shall erect any
building, structure or fence on the building line of any street on the
topographical survey of the City until an application made on City standard
form shall have been filed with the Department of Public Works, a permit
issued, a building line survey completed and the following fees have been paid.
7
B.   Fees for building line survey shall be as provided in
Chapter 212, Fees.8
      (1)   The above charges include the establishment of building line and
building line elevation.
      (2)   Note: The City does not establish or confirm property lines between
parcels of privately owned real estate.
7.   Editor's Note: Amended during codification (see
Ch. 1, General Provisions, Part 2).
8.   Editor's Note: Amended during codification (see
Ch. 1, General Provisions, Part 2).
§ 508-305. Driveway permit and fees.
   A.   Driveway permit. No person, firm or corporation shall construct or
reconstruct any driveway until an application made on City standard form
accompanied by three copies of a detailed construction plan shall have been
filed with the Department of Public Works, a permit issued and the following
fees paid. 9
B.   Fees for driveway permits for the following shall be as provided in
Chapter 212, Fees.10
      (1)   Fees.
         (a)   Residential use to 24 feet wide.
         (b)   Commercial/industrial use to 36 feet wide.
         (c)   Note: Where driveways span a property line and are intended for
the joint use of two abutting properties, a permit fee shall be charged to each
of the users.
      (2)   Reconstruction of driveways.
         (a)   Reconstruction of an existing driveway, no previous permits.
         (b)   Reconstruction of an existing driveway, previous permit on file.
9.   Editor's Note: Amended during codification (see
Ch. 1, General Provisions, Part 2).
10.   Editor's Note: Amended during codification (see
Ch. 1, General Provisions, Part 2).
§ 508-306. Sidewalk vault permit, liability agreement and fee.
   A.   Vaults under sidewalks; permit and liability agreement. No person,
firm, or corporation shall construct any vault, areaway; basement stairs or
other structure under the sidewalk area until an application made on City
standard form accompanied by two sets of construction plans shall have been
filed with the Department of Public Works, a liability agreement executed, a
permit issued and the following fee paid: 11
      (1)   Fee for each vault, areaway, basement stairs or structure shall be
as provided in
Chapter 212, Fees.
   B.   Plans required to accompany applications shall include all dimensions
and particulars of construction along with an analysis signed and sealed by a
registered professional engineer, licensed in the State of Pennsylvania,
confirming the bearing capacity and structural soundness of the sidewalk over
the vault, areaway, basement stairs or other structure.
   C.   The applicant is also required to enter into an agreement with the
City, as prepared by the City Solicitor, acknowledging the duties and
responsibilities of the permittee. The cost of recording such agreement to be
paid by the permittee.
11.   Editor's Note: Amended during codification (see
Ch. 1, General Provisions, Part 2).
§ 508-307. Constructing, repairing or opening sidewalks.
   A.   No person, firm or corporation shall construct, repair or open any
sidewalk until an application made on City standard form shall have been filed
with the Department of Public Works, a permit issued and the following fee has
been paid: 12
      (1)   Fee for reconstructing existing or constructing new sidewalk shall
be as provided in
Chapter 212, Fees.
   B.   Where in the opinion of the Director of Public Works, the existing curb
does not provide adequate control to define the horizontal location or
elevation of the proposed sidewalk, or on property where there is no curb
available to define sidewalk construction, the applicant shall also be required
to obtain a curb regulation as described in this Part.
   C.   Special attention is called to the Section of the Act of Assembly of
May 14, 1909, 13  adopted and confirmed here, which provides as follows:
"All buildings shall be provided with proper metallic leaders for conducting
water from the roofs in such manner as shall protect the walls and foundations
of such building from injury. In no case shall the water from such leaders be
allowed to flow upon the sidewalks, but the same shall be conducted by pipe or
pipes to the storm sewer. If there is no sewer in the street upon which such
building fronts, then the water from such leaders shall be conducted, by proper
pipe or pipes, below the surface of the sidewalk to the street gutter."
   D.   The construction, and installation of all rain leaders or stormwater
piping shall also comply with all requirements of the City Plumbing Code [
Chapter 180, Part 10].
12.   Editor's Note: Amended during codification (see
Ch. 1, General Provisions, Part 2).
13.    Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 4619.
§ 508-308. Excavations.
   A.   Pennsylvania Law Act No. 172, effective June 10,1987, 73 P.S. § 176 et
seq., places safety responsibilities on contractors when they excavate,
demolish or blast. The City requires that its permittees comply with this Act
as a condition of issuance of its permits.
   B.   All work shall be conducted so as not to interfere with the water
mains, sewers or their connection with houses until permission from the proper
authority shall have been obtained.
   C.   During construction, excavated material shall be so confined so as not
to impede traffic or be carried into any adjacent highways, and all surplus
materials must be removed at the earliest possible time.
§ 508-309. Time limit and extension request.
   A.   In case the work has not been completed before the date of expiration
shown on the permit, the Director of Public Works may arrange to complete the
work and charge the cost thereof against the permittee. If an extension of time
is requested for the completion of the work, written application for an
extension of time must be filed and, if an extension is granted, an additional
fee of shall be charged therefor, as provided in
Chapter 212, Fees. 14
   B.   The Director of Public Works reserves the right to refuse the issuance
of permits from November 1 to April 1, unless directed by Council to grant such
permits.
14.   Editor's Note: Amended during codification (see
Ch. 1, General Provisions, Part 2).
§ 508-310. Notice of sidewalk opening to Department of Public Works.
   A.   The Department of Public Works shall be notified when an opening in the
sidewalk is to be made, and shall be further notified when the opening is to be
backfilled and completed so that proper orders may be issued for the inspection
thereof. 15
   B.   The opening shall be properly barricaded, lighted and protected by the
permittee, who shall be liable for any injury or damage resulting from his
negligence.
   C.   In case of emergency, the Department of Public Works shall be notified
and work commenced immediately. The owner or responsible party shall file the
necessary permit application with the Department of Public Works within 48
hours of beginning work. 16
15.   Editor's Note: Amended during codification (see
Ch. 1, General Provisions, Part 2).
16.   Editor's Note: Amended during codification (see
Ch. 1, General Provisions, Part 2).
§ 508-311. Work to conform to City requirements and standards.
Work shall be done at such time and in such manner as shall be consistent with
the safety of the public and shall conform to all requirements and standards of
the City. If at any time it shall be found by the City that the work is not
being done, or has not been done as required, the permittee shall immediately
take the necessary steps, at his own expense, to place the work in condition to
conform to such requirements or standards. In case any dispute arises between
the permittee and the City Inspector, the City Inspector shall have the
authority to suspend work until the question at issue can be referred to and be
decided by the Director of Public Works.
§ 508-312. Adoption of construction plan standards.
   A.   The following City plans, including all drawing and written
specifications contained thereon, are hereby adopted as City construction
standards for the items described.
   B.   The City reserves the right to require that construction on public or
private sidewalks within the City conform to these standards.
Description Plan Number
Description                                      Plan Number
Plan of drive-in across sidewalk                 5371
12-inch trench drain                             5371A
Side outlet area drain                           5371B
8-inch tangent and circular cement concrete curb 5389A
Cement concrete sidewalk                         5389C
Construct or reset granite curb                  5389G
Construct or reset brick sidewalk                5389H
Pedestrian curb ramp                             5442A
Pedestrian curb ramp                             5442B
 
§ 508-313. Violations and penalties.
Any person, firm or corporation who breaks or cuts in any manner the surface of
any sidewalk, removes curbing and/or sidewalk or does construction between the
building and curbline of any street in the City without having first obtained
the proper permit, or who violates any of the requirements of this Part, shall
upon conviction of a summary offense thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of not
less than $100 and not more than $1,000 plus costs or, in default of payment of
said fine and costs, to a term of imprisonment not to exceed 30 days. Each day
in which a violation shall occur or continue may be deemed a separate offense.
In addition to the penalties provided herein, the City may recover attorney's
fees, court costs and other expenses of litigation by appropriate suit at law
against the person found to have violated this Part or the orders, rules,
regulations and permits issued hereunder. The City, at its discretion, may seek
to recover any expenses it incurred to correct any violation of this Part by
restitution as part of prosecution of any person, firm or corporation as a
summary offense under this provision or through the commencement of the
appropriate alternative legal action to recover such expenses including, but
not limited to, filing of a lien.
Part 4
Commercial Parking Lots
§ 508-401. Definitions.
As used in this Part, certain terms are defined as follows:
   COMMERCIAL PARKING LOT — Sometimes referred to hereinafter as an "off-street
parking facility," means an area of vacant land set aside or used for off-
street parking of automobiles or other vehicles on any time basis for which a
fee is charged by the owner or operator to the users of such facility.
   OWNER — The owner of the land on which the off-street parking facility is
located.
   OPERATOR — Such person, firm, corporation, partnership or any business or
other entity, whether as lessee or owner, who lets or rents an off-street
parking facility on a time basis and for a fee.
   PERMANENT USE — Any use as a commercial parking lot for more than one year.
   TEMPORARY USE — Any use as a commercial parking lot for one year or less.
§ 508-402. Paving, grading and drainage regulations.
   A.   All permanent commercial parking lots shall be paved with concrete or
bituminous surface course or other hard surface in accordance with plans to be
approved by the Director of Public Works so as to prevent dust and dirt to the
greatest possible extent.
   B.   All temporary commercial parking lots shall be paved with crushed
stone, slag or other semipermanent surface of a similar nature in accordance
with plans to be approved by the Director of Public Works.
   C.   All commercial parking lots shall be so graded and provided with such
drains or gutters as shall prevent the accumulation and retention of surface
water thereon, and such drains or gutters shall be installed in accordance with
plans to be approved by the Plumbing Inspector.
§ 508-403. License required; application and fee.
   A.   On or after the effective date of this Part, all commercial parking
lots shall be required to be licensed by the City, except any commercial
parking lot owned and operated by the City. The annual fee for such license
shall be per space with a minimum fee, as provided in
Chapter 212, Fees. Licenses shall be obtained at the office of the Building
Inspector. 17
   B.   There shall be two categories of licenses for commercial parking lots;
permanent and temporary, in accordance with the character of the off-street
parking facility. No license for a permanent commercial parking lot shall be
granted unless the provisions of §
508-402A and C have been complied with. No license for a temporary commercial
parking lot shall be granted unless the provisions of §
508-402B and C have been complied with. Temporary licenses shall not be
renewable unless the owner or operator can show that the denial thereof would
create an unnecessary economic hardship.
   C.   All applications for licenses shall be addressed to the Building
Inspector; shall state the nature of the license sought; shall contain the
location of the off-street parking facility, the approximate area thereof, the
number of automobiles or other vehicles that can be parked or accommodated; and
the nature and kind of surfacing on the premises.
17.   Editor's Note: Amended during codification (see
Ch. 1, General Provisions, Part 2).
§ 508-404. Operation without license prohibited.
   A.   Any person who operates, or any owner or lessee of land, whether it be
an individual, partnership or corporation, who permits land owned or leased by
it to be operated as a commercial parking lot, within the definition of this
Part, without first having obtained the license required under §
508-404 shall be deemed guilty of a violation of this Part.
   B.   Each day of such continued operation without such license shall be
deemed and regarded as a separate and distinct violation of this Part.
§ 508-405. Violations and penalties.
Whoever operates a commercial parking lot, without first having obtained a
license, as provided in this Part, on or after March 1, 1968, and whoever
violates or fails to comply with the provisions of this Part shall be, upon
conviction thereof, sentenced to a fine of not more than $1,000 plus costs and,
in default of payment of said fine and costs, shall be imprisoned for not more
than 30 days.
Part 5
Sidewalks And Curbs
§ 508-501. Permit required for curb and sidewalk work.
No person, firm or corporation shall set any curbing, set any building, open
any sidewalk, lay new sidewalk or relay old sidewalk or construct any vault
under a sidewalk, until a permit has been obtained from the Director of the
Department of Public Works or his/her designee. The Director or his/her
designee is authorized and directed to establish such rules and regulations, as
s/he deems necessary, for the proper control of the operations permitted
relative to the issuance of such permit, subject to the approval of Council.
§ 508-502. Permit application.
Any applicant for a curb and sidewalk work permit shall first make written
application to the Director of Public Works or his/her designee for a permit,
setting forth the location where such work is desired and the purpose thereof.
§ 508-503. Sidewalk widths for public streets.
   A.   When any street or alley which now or hereafter is laid out, opened and
dedicated to the public use, according to law in the City, it shall be the duty
of the owners of lots or real estate abutting thereon, and they are hereby
required upon notice from the Director of Public Works to construct sidewalks
on each side of such street or alley, at their own expense, for the safety and
convenience of the public, of the following width:
Street Name or Width Sidewalk Width
(feet)               (feet)
Street Name or Width                           Sidewalk Width
(feet)                                         (feet)
Penn Street from Fourth Street to Sixth Street 22
80                                             16
60                                             13
50                                             10
40                                             8
30                                             6.5
20                                             2
   B.   The roadway of every street or alley shall remain as a passageway for
vehicles and shall have a gutter on each side thereof. However, on front of
vacant lots, a sidewalk of a width of five feet shall be deemed sufficient,
which sidewalk shall be laid two feet from the curbline.
§ 508-504. Specifications for paving sidewalks and for curbing.
Sidewalks shall be constructed and laid either with cement, bricks or dressed
flat stones, and shall be secured with curbstones along the outside thereof, in
a manner as hereinafter prescribed, and according to the regulations of the
City, sidewalks shall have a pitch of 3/8 of an inch to the foot, from the
front line of the house or lot to the curb, and the cement bricks or flatstone
used for laying or paving any sidewalk shall not be less than two inches in
thickness. The flat stone shall be square blocks with an even surface on the
top and closely joined to the curbs and to each other. The curbstones required
to support such sidewalks shall be cut granite, sand, blue or limestones, and
shall not be less than 20 inches in width, with an even bottom. Each stone
shall be not less than three feet six inches in length, and the thickness
thereof shall be not less than four inches. In streets of a width of 20 feet
and less, curbstones 16 inches in width and three inches in thickness may be
used. Sidewalks shall be laid in good sand of not less than eight inches in
depth and shall be excavated and filled with cinder to a depth sufficient to
protect the same from frost. In all cases where the street pavement is
constructed and composed of the following improved street pavements: granite
block, asphalt block, sheet asphalt and vitrified brick, the curbing used in
and along all of such properties abutting on such improved pavements shall
consist of granite curbing of not less than five inches, 20 inches in depth and
four feet in length. The curbing shall be properly faced and jointed, set in a
firm bed of not less than six inches of sand, gravel or such material as the
Director of Public Works shall approve and backed up to the top of the stone by
not less than four inches of the same material, except that the use of concrete
is permitted in lieu of granite for the construction of curbs set to the lines
of circular arcs for the rounding of street intersections as provided by §
508-513A.
§ 508-505. Notice to recurb and relay sidewalks.
It shall be the duty of the owners of lots or real estate abutting any street
or alley to recurb, repave or relay the sidewalks whenever authorized by
Council or when required upon notice from the Director of Public Works or his/
her designee.
§ 508-506. Sidewalks for dedicated streets.
When any street which now or hereafter is opened in the City over any private
land by the owners thereof, and is dedicated to or permitted to be used by the
public, it shall be the duty of the owners of lots or real estate abutting
thereon, and they are hereby required upon notice to construct and maintain
sidewalks on each side of such street at their own expense, in such manner as
is prescribed for sidewalks upon the public streets by §
508-503 under the supervision and direction of the Director of Public Works.
§ 508-507. Paving and repair of driveways required.
When any driveway crosses the sidewalk of any street or alley within the City
for the purpose of passing to and from such street or alley to any lot or
building, it shall be the duty, and it is hereby required, upon notice from the
Director of Public Works, that the owners of lots abutting or adjoining such
street shall pave and curb the same, at their own expense, in such manner as
the Director shall require, and keep the same in repair.
§ 508-508. Duty of owner to construct and repair at own expense.
   A.   Owners of property abutting on any public street shall, at their own
expense, construct, pave, curb, repave and recurb the sidewalks on such
property.
   B.   Owners of property abutting on any public street shall, at their own
expense, keep sidewalks along such property in proper good repair in accordance
with City standards and maintained free from hazardous conditions.
§ 508-509. Work by City for failure to comply with notice.
Upon failure of any owner(s) to construct, pave, curb, repave or recurb
sidewalks, keep the same in good repair and maintain free from hazardous
conditions within 10 days after written notice by the Director of the
Department of Public Works or his/her designee the work may be done forthwith
by the City of Reading, and the expense thereof, with costs, shall be levied
and collected from such owners according to law. Nothing in this section shall
preclude the Director of the Department of Public Works or his/her designee
from undertaking enforcement of this Part as provided for in §
508-516.
§ 508-510. Cost collection by action at law or filing lien.
The amount of expense so levied shall be a lien upon such premises from the
time of the commencement of the work by the City. Such date shall be fixed by
the Director of Public Works and filed with the City Clerk, and may be
collected by action at law or a lien may be filed and proceeded in according to
law. Nothing in this section shall preclude the Director of the Department of
Public Works or his/her designee from seeking recover of expenses incurred to
construct, pave, curb, repave, recurb, restore to good repair or remove
hazardous condition as restitution through enforcement of this Part as provided
for in §
508-516.
§ 508-511. Concrete curb specifications.
Concrete curbing shall be permitted to be constructed along the sidewalks of
the City and the material used in such construction shall be as follows:
   A.   Excavations shall first be made to a depth not less than two feet six
inches from the top of the finished curb and in width not less than 14 times
the width of the curb on the top surface thereof, when finished.
   B.   The materials thereof, which shall be of a quality satisfactory to the
Director of Public Works, shall consist of American Portland cement, clean
sharp sand, and crushed stone or slag which shall be hard, clean and free from
dust or earth, run of the crusher, not exceeding one inch in its largest
dimension. 18
   C.   The proportions of mixture for concrete shall not be less than one part
of cement, three parts of sand and five parts of crushed stone or hard slag and
for mortar for the finishing coat, not less than one part of cement and no more
than two parts of sand.
   D.   The mixing, if done by hand labor, shall consist of first mixing the
cement and sand dry until a uniform color of mixture is secured, after which
the crusher stone shall be added, then wetted and turned over until every
particle is thoroughly coated with mortar. Sufficient water shall be used so
that only moderate tamping is required after the concrete is placed. If done by
machine, the method shall be approved by the Director of Public Works.
   E.   The mortar for the surface or finishing coat shall be applied with the
concrete itself by exercising care in placing the concrete against the forms
employed so as to push back the larger particles in the mixture by use of a
wide pronged fork, and by tamping the large particles down gently below the top
surface. Any small quantity of mortar that may be required for the finishing
shall be applied while the concrete is wet and only enough to smooth the
surface.
18.   Editor's Note: Amended during codification (see
Ch. 1, General Provisions, Part 2).
§ 508-512. Curb thickness and width.
No concrete curbing shall be less than eight inches on the top thereof, nor the
thickness from the bottom of excavation to the grade line of the street less
than nine inches, where the top does not exceed eight inches. It is the intent
and meaning of this section that the thickness of the concrete shall in all
cases be determined by the width of the top of the curb when finished, and that
the bottom of excavation to the grade line of the street, it shall not be less
than 1 1/4 times that of the top of curb as aforesaid.
§ 508-513. Radius curbs.
   A.   All new curbs set and all curbs reset at intersections or projecting
angles of streets shall be set or reset to the lines of circular arc, tangent
to curblines, of the greatest radii possible that will not reduce the width of
the sidewalk at any point to less than that of the sidewalks of the lesser
widths. The curb opposite the projecting angle shall have a circular arc
tangent to curblines of the greatest radius possible, that will not reduce the
width of the roadway at any point to less than that of the roadway of lesser
width.
   B.   The radii of all curbs reset at intersections of streets where traffic
regulations not permit vehicular traffic to turn corners, shall be determined
by the Director of the Department of Public Works with the approval of the
Director of Public Works. This subsection shall apply only as long as traffic
regulations do not permit such vehicular traffic turns; otherwise, Subsection
Ahereof shall apply and shall remain in full force and effect.
§ 508-514. Projecting porches, areaways or steps; cellar doors.
   A.   No person, firm or corporation shall make or set up or cause to be made
or set up or reset on Penn Street, any porch, areaway or step, which shall
extend beyond the building line as fixed by the topographical survey of the
City of Reading.
   B.   No person, firm or corporation shall make and set up or cause to be
made or set up or reset areaways extending beyond the building line of Walnut
Street, Washington Street, Penn Street, Franklin Street and Chestnut Street
from Front Street to Eleventh Street and on Front, Second, Third, Fourth,
Fifth, Sixth, Seventh, Eighth, Ninth, Tenth and Eleventh Streets from Chestnut
Street to Walnut Street in the City as fixed by the topographical survey of the
City of Reading.
   C.   It shall be unlawful to erect, reset, repair, use and maintain cellar
doors extending beyond the building line of Walnut Street, Washington Street,
Penn Street, Franklin Street and Chestnut Street from Front Street to Eleventh
Street, and on Front, Second, Third, Fourth, Fifth, Sixth, Seventh, Eighth,
Ninth, Tenth and Eleventh Streets from Chestnut Street to Walnut Street in the
City of Reading, until a permit for such cellar door has first been obtained
from the Department of Public Works subject to the following limitations,
restrictions and conditions, which shall be prescribed by the Director of
Public Works:
      (1)   No permit will be issued for the setting, resetting or repairing of
any cellar door on the above-listed streets until there has been executed a
vault or areaway agreement covering the vault or passageway under the sidewalk
leading to such cellar door.
      (2)   No permit will be issued for the setting, resetting or repair of
any cellar door on the above listed streets until the property owner files with
the City Clerk a public liability bond of $10,000 to $20,000 limit, naming the
City as a party assured. Such bond shall be kept in force as long as the cellar
door remains in existence.
      (3)   Plans of proposed construction shall be submitted by the property
owner, showing location and type of construction of vaults and cellar doors,
which shall be approved by the Director of the Department of Public Works prior
to the issuance of any permit for such work. 19
      (4)   Not more than one cellar door for each property shall be permitted
on sidewalks of the above listed streets.
      (5)   All cellar doors shall be of steel, no larger than four feet by
five feet, flush with sidewalk grade and have no projections or depressions
beyond the uniform grade of sidewalk, except those necessary to produce a
nonskid surface. They shall be arranged so they can be opened and closed only
from the outside or sidewalk area, and shall be provided with approved guards
to protect pedestrians during the entire period the doors are not firmly
closed.
      (6)   The nearest edge of new cellar door construction shall be at least
three feet from the center line of any fire hydrant and at least three feet
from the building line of any intersecting street.
      (7)   Cellar doors and vault covers shall be designed for a concentrated
live load of 800 pounds or for a uniform distributed live load of 250 pounds
per square foot over the entire area, whichever produces the greatest stress.
Top slabs shall be of a minimum thickness of six inches of reinforced concrete,
even though a more shallow depth will resist the design stresses.
      (8)   Repairs to existing cellarways or sidewalks of the above listed
streets may be made by installing new steel cellar door frames and doors at
present locations.
      (9)   The use of cellar doors at all times shall be subject to
regulations by the Department of Police.
19.   Editor's Note: Amended during codification (see
Ch. 1, General Provisions, Part 2).
§ 508-515. Openings in sidewalk to be covered or guarded.
All owners or property which have an underground alley or open passageway
occupying a portion of the City sidewalks shall have the same protected or
guarded by a covering of substantial material, or guarded in order to avoid
danger likely to arise by reason of such openings being unguarded.
§ 508-516. Administration; violations and penalties.
   A.   Regulations. The Director of the Department of Public Works may
promulgate such regulations as are necessary for the proper administration and
enforcement of this Part. The City may change, modify, repeal or amend any
portion of said regulations at any time.
   B.   Enforcement. The authority of enforcement of this Part is under the
jurisdiction of the City of Reading Department of Public Works. The Department
of Public Works is hereby authorized to share enforcement of this provision
with the Codes Enforcement Division as needed.
   C.   Prosecution of violations. Any person who shall violate a provision of
this Part, or who shall fail to comply with any of the requirements thereof or
any notice to correct shall, upon conviction be guilty of a summary offense
before any Magisterial District Judge. Such offense shall be one of strict
liability. As part of the prosecution of such offense, the enforcing authority
may seek as restitution any funds incurred by the City of Reading to correct a
violation. Each day that a violation continues shall be deemed a separate
offense. In addition, if the notice to construct, pave, curb, repave, recurb,
keep in good repair or remove hazardous conditions is not complied within the
time given, the authority with enforcement power shall institute the
appropriate proceeding at law or in equity to restrain, correct or abate such
violation. Nothing in this section shall preclude the City of Reading from
charging against the property abutting the sidewalk by placement of lien
thereon for any costs incurred by the City to correct such offense.
   D.   Penalties.
      (1)   Any person who shall violate any provision of this Part shall, upon
conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of not less than $100 and not more than
$1,000, plus costs, or in default of payment of said fine and costs, to
imprisonment for a term of not to exceed 90 days.
      (2)   Any person who violates any provision of §
508-514 shall, upon conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of not less than
$250 and not more than $1,000, plus costs, or in default of payment of said
fine and costs, to a term of imprisonment not to exceed 90 days. Further, any
such person shall forthwith remove or cause to be removed violation of §
508-514.
Part 6
Radii Of Curblines At Street Intersections
§ 508-601. Radii established.
   A.   The following radii be established for intersections of curblines to
minimize danger and avert congestion of traffic.
   B.   The radii of the circular areas of curblines connecting the adjoining
straight or tangent curblines at points of projected intersection, in all
cases, shall be those of tract circles and the lengths of such radii to be
governed as follows:
      (1)   Curblines which intersect at an angle of 90° or right angle and
which are:
         (a)   Adjacent to sidewalks, either of which is greater than 10 feet
in width, shall be joined at such intersection by a circular arc, the radius of
which shall be eight feet.
         (b)   Adjacent to sidewalks which are between 6 1/2 feet and 10 feet,
inclusive, in width, shall be joined at such intersection by a circular arc,
the radius of which shall be six feet.
         (c)   Adjacent to sidewalks which are between two feet and 6 1/2 feet,
inclusive, in width, shall be joined at such intersection by a circular arc the
radius of which shall be three feet.
      (2)   Curblines which intersect at an angle other than 90° or a right
angle shall be joined at such intersection by simple circular arcs the radius
of which shall be determined as described on Plan No. C-77 of the Department of
Public Works of the City of Reading, entitled "Plan Illustrating Rule for
Determining Curb Radii," dated April 1916, which shall be on file in the office
of the Director of Public Works.
§ 508-602. Conformance.
From and after the passage of this Part, all new curbs set and all curbs reset
shall conform to said radii.
Part 7
Street Cut Permits
[Amended 8-26-2013 by Ord. No. 35-2013; 10-28-2013 by Ord. No. 53-2013; 12-9-
2013 by Ord. No. 74-2013]
§ 508-701. Purpose.
No person, firm or corporation shall break the pavement or surface of any
legally open street, between the curblines thereof, until a street cut permit
(permit) is obtained from the Department of Public Works. It shall be the
responsibility of the person receiving the permit (the permittee) to promptly
restore the permitted street cut and any other affected facility in proper
order and repair in accordance with this Part and associated guidance
documents. When the street cut involves the use of a utility the permittee
shall be the owner of the utility or the owner's legal agent.
§ 508-702. Application.
[Amended 7-27-2015 by Ord. No. 40-2015]
Applications for a permit to break the pavement or surface of any legally open
streets shall be submitted on the form provided by the Department of Public
Works, shall include all information and applicable fees, and shall be signed
by the applicant. The application information and fees shall include the
following:
   A.   Permit fee. Each application shall be accompanied by a permit fee as
provided in
Chapter 212, Fees.
   B.   Inspection fee. An inspection fee will be assessed for each separate
street cut as provided in
Chapter 212, Fees.
   C.   Pavement restoration fee. It shall be the duty of the party applying
for the permit to restore to good order and repair in accordance with the City
of Reading's specifications. The permittee shall pay a permanent pavement
restoration fee for those cuts where the permanent pavement restoration is
provided by the City of Reading, in accordance with
Chapter 212, Fees, unless otherwise stipulated. Permittees who prefer to have
their contractor perform the permanent pavement restoration work must have
completed a letter of agreement with the City to that effect and will not be
assessed the permanent pavement restoration fee except as noted in §§
508-706 and 508-709C. Refer to §
508-706, Pavement cuts on recently paved streets, for premature degradation
charges that will apply to cuts made on recently paved streets, and §
508-709C for permanent pavement restoration made ahead of paving in
coordination with the City.
   D.   Detailed plan of the work. The applicant shall furnish a scale plan
which shall accompany the application showing the extent and nature of the
planned work at each street cut location within the right-of-way. The plan
shall set forth, but is not limited to:
      (1)   The purpose for which the excavation is to be made;
      (2)   The dimensions and location of the proposed excavation including
the nearest cross streets where the excavation or street opening is considered;
      (3)   The full scope of work to be included in the project;
      (4)   The date or dates during which the requested excavation is to be
permitted;
      (5)   The date such excavation is to be refilled and resurfaced in the
manner hereinafter provided; and
      (6)   A traffic impact plan (TIP). As specified in §
508-709, a TIP shall be submitted with any permit application for all proposed
work that is to be conducted on a City roadway.
   E.   Letter of agreement. A properly executed letter of agreement will be
required for all permits with the exception of a single permit application for
one street cut by a nonutility applicant.
   F.   Guaranty of work.
      (1)   The permittee shall guarantee and maintain the street cut,
excavation, and any related work for 24 months from the completion of the City-
approved final restoration. Within this twenty-four-month period, the permittee
shall correct or cause to be corrected all restoration work in the manner
determined necessary by the Public Works Director within five calendar days of
receipt of the notification. Failure to perform within the five calendar days
may be completed by the City and invoiced to the permittee for all costs
incurred in performance of the work. Payment not made within 30 days of the
invoice date will be enforceable against the posted bond, including any fees
and costs involved in the collection thereof.
      (2)   Each street cut will require a bond signed or other acceptable form
of surety before a permit is issued. The bond shall be signed by the applicant
in the amount as specified in
Chapter 212, Fees. The bond shall accompany the permit application and shall
remain in effect for a period of 24 months from the date of the acceptance of
the final pavement restoration. Public utility companies shall provide a bond
as specified in
Chapter 212, Fees, that will warrant all street cut work performed in that
calendar year. Bonds for utility companies shall be renewable on an annual
basis. If the condition is such that the permittee fails to comply with this
Part by not promptly completing the permitted work, including trench
restorations and restoration of other affected facilities or fails to maintain
such restorations in proper order and repair following construction, the
Director of Public Works shall have cause to remedy that condition by calling
on the permittee's bonding company to perform the work necessary to restore the
street and other affected facilities to proper order.
   G.   Additional fees and information. The size and type of street cut(s) may
require payment of additional fees and submission of additional information as
prescribed in this Part. All fees, plan information, bonding, application and
letter of agreement must be provided and approved before the City will issue a
permit. Permits are issued subject to all other applicable ordinances of the
City of Reading, and all applicable state and federal laws.
   H.   Display of permits and signage at work site. Unless otherwise
authorized, permit(s) shall be kept at the work site for the duration of the
project and made available for inspection upon request of any duly authorized
City official. Such permits cannot be affixed to any temporary structure
including fences, containers, or construction equipment.
   I.   Revocation of permit. All street cut or excavation permits are subject
to revocation at any time by the Department of Public Works upon written notice
served to whom the permit was granted, their agent, or employee. Such notice
shall contain a brief statement detailing the revocation and be issued for
failure to cure within three days:
      (1)   A violation of any condition of the permit.
      (2)   A violation of this section or any other applicable City of Reading
ordinance relating to the work.
      (3)   The creation or failure to eliminate a condition or action that
constitutes a violation of applicable Americans with Disabilities Act
compliance guidelines, or endangers the lives, property, or welfare of City
residents. [Amended 11-23-2015 by Ord. No. 77-2015]
§ 508-703. Rejection of application.
[Amended 7-27-2015 by Ord. No. 40-2015; 9-28-2015 by Ord. No. 51-2015; 11-23-
2015 by Ord. No. 77-2015]
Street cut permits shall not be issued to any person, firm or corporation
indebted to the City due to a previously issued permit. The Public Works
Director, or his designee, shall review nonemergency applications anticipated
to commence after September of the calendar year. The Public Works Director, or
his designee, may permit the project to begin contingent upon the review of
several factors, including but not limited to final restoration date, size of
the cut, use of steel plates, and scope of the project, however, no
nonemergency projects shall begin in November, December, or January of a given
year, unless a special exception is granted by the Public Works Director.
§ 508-704. Permit issuance and schedule for construction of street cuts.
[Amended 7-27-2015 by Ord. No. 40-2015]
Permit applications shall be submitted not less than 30 days prior to the start
of the proposed street cut work, and construction work must commence within 15
calendar days of approval; failure to do so may result in permit revocation, or
require the submission of a new application. The permittee shall notify the
City at least three days in advance of breaking the street. Each permit shall
be valid for a period of four months. If deemed necessary, permit time
extensions may be granted as specified in §
508-709, Other related permits and fees.
§ 508-705. Charged surface.
[Amended 7-27-2015 by Ord. No. 40-2015]
In computing the surface area of the permanent pavement restoration surface to
be charged, for small single cuts, 12 inches shall be added to all sides of the
proposed cut. For large street cuts [per §
508-707B(1)], the charged surface shall include the combined area of each
trench plus, as a separate fee, the area of milling and overlay required to
restore the overlying surface. For applicants where the large cuts are
coordinated with the City for ahead of paving permits, see §
508-709C. If the permittee or City inspector determines that the permittee
removed, disturbed or damaged a pavement area greater than what is stated on
the permit, the permittee shall pay a proportionate amount to be fixed by the
Department of Public Works.
§ 508-706. Pavement cuts on recently paved streets.
[Amended 7-27-2015 by Ord. No. 40-2015]
Street cuts on recently paved streets are subject to charges to recover the
premature degradation caused by the work. The premature degradation fee for
pavement cuts on streets paved within 10 years from the date of the application
shall be based on the permanent pavement restoration rate specified in
Chapter 212, Fees, as follows: 100% of the restoration fee for the current year
through the fifth year, and 80% of the restoration fee for years six through
10. The premature degradation fee applies to all permittees under these
conditions whether they provide the pavement restoration or the City provides
the restoration.
§ 508-707. Special site conditions.
[Amended 7-27-2015 by Ord. No. 40-2015]
   A.   Where, in the opinion of the Director of Public Works and at his/her
sole discretion, site conditions are determined to involve construction work
beyond that required for a small single utility service connection, the
permittee shall provide additional information, and may be required to perform
additional work and pay additional fees. Where additional work is required to
restore the pavement and other features within the rights-of-way, those terms
shall be included in the letter of agreement before issuance of the permit.
   B.   Special site conditions include, but are not limited to, permanent
restoration of the street surface by the applicant, permanent restoration of
the street beyond the area of the trench cut opening, construction of features
within the rights-of-way other than trench restoration, and other special site
construction work determined during the application. Examples of special site
conditions are described below:
      (1)   Large cuts.
         (a)   Additional restoration of the pavement wearing surface will be
required for cuts larger than those made for small single utility service
connections. Large street cuts include, but are not limited to, the following
conditions:
            [1]   Where two or more transverse or longitudinal cuts are made
within a one- hundred-foot-long section of street and the total area of the
cuts is equal to or greater than 40.0 square feet. (Transverse cuts are
typically made for laterals that run across the street, and longitudinal cuts
are typically made for mains running with the street.)
            [2]   Where the area of a single cut is equal to or greater than
40.0 square feet.
         (b)   The additional restoration for these cuts shall comply with the
City's standard engineering drawings and specifications for large street cut
restoration which shall include milling and overlaying of the wearing surface
of the entire lane(s) between the curb and the street center line within the
area bounded by the cut(s).
      (2)   Curb ramps.
         (a)   For conditions where the permittee proposes an alteration to a
street crosswalk or other crosswalk within the City's rights-of-way and where
the existing curb ramps at that crosswalk do not meet the current requirements
of the Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA), the permittee will be required to
upgrade the crosswalk to meet current ADA standards including curb ramps for
that crosswalk. Crosswalk and pedestrian access route alterations, as defined
by the ADA and PennDOT, shall include any project that will affect or could
affect the accessibility or use of the accessible route. Alteration projects
that meet these conditions shall be determined by the Director of Public Works
on a case-by- case basis and shall follow the latest PennDOT guidance,
including Publication 13M, Chapter 6. City crosswalks are located at all street
intersections whether or not crosswalk markings are present. Crosswalks are
also located along sidewalks where the sidewalks cross alleys and driveways.
For crosswalks that are not marked, the crosswalk area within a street
intersection is the area delineated by the outside curb radii and the lines
drawn across the streets that connect the termini of the curb radii, excluding
the area of the interior rectangle. The interior rectangle is formed by
projecting the curblines into the intersection and the rectangle is defined by
the corners of the intersecting projected curblines. Unmarked crosswalks
include the area that is defined by the projection of the sidewalk across the
street, alley or driveway. For street cuts proposed under these conditions the
permittee will be required to construct or reconstruct curb ramps at the
crosswalk to meet the current ADA and PennDOT requirements. To facilitate the
proper construction of the ramps, the permittee shall include with their permit
application the following additional provisions:
            [1]   An existing conditions survey that includes all of the curb
ramps within the intersection, alley or other accessible route where the cut is
proposed to determine compliance and/or noncompliance with ADA.
            [2]   Curb ramp designs for construction of each new and
noncompliant curb ramp. The curb ramp designs must comply with the most current
applicable PennDOT standard for curb ramps. The existing condition survey and
the ramp designs must be sealed by a qualified engineer or surveyor registered
in the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
            [3]   An amendment to the letter of agreement that states that the
permittee will construct or replace curb ramps within the intersection or alley
that does not currently meet ADA and PennDOT requirements.
            [4]   A bond, letter of credit or other form of appropriate surety
that includes an amount equal to cost to construct the ramps per the approved
design. The form of surety other than a bond must be approved by the City
Solicitor. The amount of the surety must be approved by the Director of Public
Works.
         (b)   Ramp designs will be reviewed by the Director of Public Works
for approval prior to issuance of the permit. For projects that involve state
and/or federal funding, additional PennDOT approval shall be required.
         (c)   Following construction of the curb ramps, the permittee shall
submit to Public Works completed as-built (record) drawings of the work
indicating that the ramps were properly inspected and were found to comply with
the approved design.
      (3)   Steel plates. When a temporary surface is required the temporary
installation and maintenance thereof shall be the responsibility of the
permittee until the permanent surface is completed and accepted. [Amended 11-
23-2015 by Ord. No. 77-2015]
         (a)   Steel plates shall only be used to secure open excavations when
the permittee is unable to backfill the same day excavation occurs and may be
utilized as permitted by the City. In the event steel plates must be left
unattended for a period exceeding 20 business days without prior approval, the
permittee is required to notify the City of Reading Public Works Department the
reason(s) and necessity of the plate(s), as well as the estimated time before
resuming their work. Failure to provide notice, remove the plates, resume or
complete excavation constitutes a violation of this Part and the appropriate
fine shall be levied.
         (b)   All steel plates shall be properly marked with the utility and
contractor name, and a twenty-four-hour contact phone number in the event of a
disturbance. Additionally, the steel plates shall be of sufficient thickness to
resist bending and vibration under traffic loads and shall be anchored securely
to prevent movement. If these conditions are not met, the permittee shall be
required to backfill, pave the excavation, or use alternative methods
sufficient to remedy the disruption.
         (c)   (Reserved)
         (d)   The plates shall be secured to prevent any lateral movement. If
movement occurs, the permittee will be notified to resecure plating
immediately; otherwise the permittee shall be charged 115% of the cost incurred
by the City to secure the permittee's plates.
         (e)   All plated locations must utilize traffic control devices as
defined to include signs, signals, or markings generally used to warn or guide
vehicular traffic through streets, highways, or private roads open to public
travel as regulated by the Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices (MUTCD).
§ 508-708. Inspection.
If the City of Reading determines that the permitted work is of sufficient
magnitude or importance to warrant additional inspection beyond routine spot-
inspection or due to noncompliance with the permit conditions, the permittee
shall be charged for all expenses incurred by the City of Reading for the
additional inspection(s).
§ 508-709. Other related permits and fees.
[Amended 7-27-2015 by Ord. No. 40-2015]
A separate permit shall be issued for each individual street cut. In addition
to the street cuts previously described, street cut permits will be issued for
the following:
   A.   Bore holes. Bore holes are small auger-drilled excavations, up to eight
inches in diameter and no deeper than 18 inches, made in the pavement section
for the purpose of investigating pavement conditions, or to open the pavement
for investigations below the pavement section. Bore holes made below the
pavement section must utilize nondestructive excavation methods. Nondestructive
excavation shall be limited to methods that use pressurized air and vacuum
systems to excavate borings, up to four square feet in area, for visual
examination of underground utilities and other subsurface conditions.
Nondestructive methods other than air-vacuum systems must be approved in
writing by the Director of Public Works prior to issuance of the permit. Bore
holes are street cuts and a bore hole fee will be charged for each bore hole
made, as specified in
Chapter 212, Fees. A permit will be required for each bore hole grouping. The
permittee shall restore the bore holes in the same manner as a standard street
cut. The work shall be completed within 30 days of boring. If the applicant
does not restore the bore holes within that time period, the City of Reading
reserves the right to take any steps deemed necessary to repair the street and
the associated costs shall then be paid by the permittee.
   B.   Emergency cuts. Emergency street cuts and excavation required to access
leaking utility mains or other installations that pose a potential hazard, or
bore holes required to search out threatening conditions, may be made in
advance of a permit at the discretion of the utility company conducting the
investigation and repairs. Within two hours of commencing an emergency cut or
excavation, the City's Police Department shall be notified at (610) 655-6111,
as well as other potentially affected utilities and the PA One Call System. An
authorized representative of the responsible party(ies) shall notify the
Department of Public Works the next business day, and a proper permit
application accompanied by appropriate fees and other required documents shall
be submitted to the City within seven business days of the commencement of the
work.
      (1)   A permittee shall perform emergency work until the emergency is
eliminated, unless otherwise directed by the City.
      (2)   Once obtained, the emergency permit shall be kept on site and
presented upon the request of any City official authorized to enforce this
Part.
   C.   Ahead of paving permit. Applicants proposing street cuts at locations
that are scheduled for street improvements by the City of Reading will be
charged at the ahead of paving permit fee rate as specified in
Chapter 212, Fees. A detailed construction plan must accompany each application
for an ahead of paving permit. Temporary and permanent trench restoration will
be performed by the permittee at his/her cost and in accordance with the
schedule as directed by the Director of Public Works. The permanent pavement
surface restoration will be coordinated with the Director of Public Works. The
fee charged for this restoration shall be determined by applying typical costs
for this construction work applied to the charged surface per §
508-705.
   D.   Traffic impact plan (TIP). The TIP shall detail the method by which
vehicular and pedestrian traffic will be affected and controlled during a
permitted project. The TIP shall also include any barricades, signs, lights or
other approved safety devices necessary to facilitate a closure and where the
work results in closing or diverting traffic into another lane, a flag person
shall at all times be posted while the work is actively being performed. For
street closures within the City that also require PennDOT permits, the
application must include a copy of the state-issued permit and comply with all
traffic control standards. In residential districts zoned R1, the Public Works
Director may waive the requirement for a TIP; however, all other traffic
control regulations are enforced.
   E.   Time extension. For conditions where the permitted work may not be
completed, or has not been completed, on or before the permit expiration date,
the Director of Public Works may, if he/she deems it advisable, take steps to
backfill the trench and replace a permanent pavement over the opening. If an
extension of time beyond the permit expiration date is necessary for the
permittee to complete the work, then a written application must be submitted
and signed by the permittee at least two weeks prior to the expiration date.
Permit time extensions will only be granted upon the timely submission of the
permit extension application and the payment of the time extension fee, as
specified in
Chapter 212, Fees. Any permittee that fails to request and receive an extension
for permitted work and continues to work shall be in violation of this section.
§ 508-710. Construction standards.
   A.   Plan and subsurface drawings and record drawings. All applicants shall
include with their application scale drawings that clearly and accurately show
the location of the proposed work with respect to existing facilities within
the vicinity of the proposed work that will be, or could be, affected by the
work. The scope of the drawings shall include as a minimum: all adjacent
underground utilities, curblines, sidewalks, traffic control loops, and similar
features in both plan and cross-section view. Upon completion of work, the
permittee shall furnish to the Director of Public Works record drawing(s) that
indicates the as-constructed location, size and type of utility or feature
installed or altered and its location with reference to the street surface and
the adjacent curblines. The standard of accuracy for the drawings shall be:
[Amended 7-27-2015 by Ord. No. 40-2015]
      (1)   For standard single utility service connections: the same as those
submitted for final plan under
Chapter 515, Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance.
      (2)   For large street cuts and cuts required for work other than a
single service connection: as specified on the City of Reading's Street Cut
Restoration drawing.
   B.   Excavation notice.
      (1)   Pennsylvania law (Act No. 187, as amended) 20  requires those who
intend to excavate or demolish to file certain notices (PA One Call) before
commencing work. Applicants for permits to break the pavement or surface of any
legally open street shall comply with all the requirements of this Act, and the
City of Reading permits issued where this obligation has not been met shall be
deemed null and void.
      (2)   The permittee shall deliver a construction schedule in writing to
the City indicating the date which the street cut will begin, the estimated
date when the restoration of the trench will begin, and any other milestones
that may be critical to the inspection of the work.
   C.   Pavement edges. The paved surface shall be cut to a neat edge using an
asphalt/concrete saw or jackhammer. The permittee shall take the necessary
precautions to protect the neat edge, and is responsible to restore any edges
that become broken.
   D.   Barricades, trench covers and lighting. All street openings shall be
properly barricaded and protected by the permittee. Excavations shall not be
left open at the end of the work shift or when left unattended. Permittees are
responsible for the protection of the public within the construction areas and
all work zones shall be marked in accordance with PennDOT's work zone traffic
control regulations until the permitted street cut is restored and approved.
Nothing contained in this Part or other legislation of the City of Reading
shall release the person or persons opening the street from any liability
associated with claims for injury or damage resulting therefrom.
   E.   Backfilling. Materials excavated in conjunction with street cuts should
be promptly hauled away and shall be removed before nightfall. The permittee
shall arrange for the immediate repair of the affected utility and backfill the
trench without delay. Backfill material shall consist of crushed stone placed
and properly compacted in accordance with the details and specifications issued
by the City Engineer.
   F.   Paving restoration. Immediately following backfilling and compaction,
the permittee shall apply a temporary pavement restoration in accordance with
the City of Reading's Street Cut Restoration drawing and specifications. For
those permits where the permittee performs the permanent pavement restoration,
this work shall be completed not less than three months nor more than six
months following the temporary pavement restoration. The surface material shall
be compacted with a gravity roller or vibrating compactor subject to the
approval of the City Engineer. The permittee shall maintain the restoration by
re-excavating and/or applying additional surface material in order to provide a
smooth- riding surface for a period of one year after restoration, or where
applicable, until the City provides a permanent surface repair. Repairs shall
be made by the permittee within 24 hours' notice by the City. The permittee is
responsible for the continual protection and maintenance of the cut whether or
not he/she is notified by the City to perform additional work.
   G.   Notices to begin and end work. The Department of Public Works shall be
notified at least three work days prior to the start of the pavement cut, and
shall be notified at least three work days prior to when the trench is to be
backfilled and the restoration completed.
   H.   Work to conform to the City of Reading standards. The work shall be
done at such time and in such manner as shall be consistent with the safety of
the public and in accordance with the City of Reading engineering standard
drawings and specifications. If the City of Reading discovers that the work has
been discontinued or has not been properly performed, the permittee, upon being
notified thereof in writing by the City of Reading, shall immediately take all
necessary steps, at permittee's own expense, to place the work in such
condition as to conform to the City's requirements or standards. If a dispute
arises between the permittee and the City of Reading's inspector, the City of
Reading's inspector shall have the authority to suspend work until the matter
can be referred to the Director of Public Works for resolution. [Amended 7-27-
2015 by Ord. No. 40-2015]
20.   Editor's Note: See 73 P.S. § 177.
§ 508-711. Comprehensive general liability and indemnification.
[Added 7-27-2015 by Ord. No. 40-2015 21 ]
The applicant for a street cut or excavation permit shall provide a certificate
of insurance with general liability coverage, including any liability normally
covered by a general liability policy with limits of not less than $1,000,000
per occurrence and $2,000,000 in the annual aggregate. Prior to commencement of
the performance of the excavation, contractor shall furnish to the City a
certificate of insurance evidencing required coverage in at least the limits
required herein, naming the City of Reading, its elected officials, agents, and
employees as additional insured for "ongoing operations" and "products and
completed operations." Moreover, the applicant agrees, as a condition governing
the issuance of permit, that they shall hold harmless the City of Reading, its
elected officials, agents, and employees from any and all claims and actions
whatsoever arising under the execution of said permit.
21.   Editor's Note: This ordinance also redesignated former §
508-711, Violations and penalties, as §
508-712.
§ 508-712. Violations and penalties.
[Amended 7-27-2015 by Ord. No. 40-2015]
Any person, firm or corporation who breaks or cuts in any manner the surface of
any street of the City without first having obtained the proper permit and paid
the application fee and charges hereinbefore set forth, including any time
extension fee, or violates any of the other provisions of this Part shall, upon
conviction before Magisterial District Judge, be sentenced to pay a fine not
exceeding $300 for an initial offense and not to exceed $1,000 for subsequent
violations, plus costs; and in default of the payment of such fine and costs,
said person and/or the responsible agents or officers of firms or corporations,
violating the provisions of this Part, shall be imprisoned in the Berks County
Prison for a period not exceeding 90 days.
Chapter 515
SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT
Part 1
General Provisions
§
515-101.   Short title.
§
515-102.   Policy.
§
515-103.   Purposes.
§
515-104.   Authority for adoption.
§
515-105.   Jurisdiction and application.
§
515-106.   Interpretation and conflict.
§
515-107.   Municipal liability.
Part 2
Definitions
§
515-201.   General interpretation.
§
515-202.   Meanings of specific words.
Part 3
Plan Submission Procedures
§
515-301.   Review and approval.
§
515-302.   Classification of subdivisions.
§
515-303.   Submission of sketch plan.
§
515-304.   Submission of preliminary plan.
§
515-305.   Review of preliminary plan.
§
515-306.   Approval of preliminary plan.
§
515-307.   Submission of final plan.
§
515-308.   Review of final plan.
§
515-309.   Performance/maintenance guarantees.
§
515-310.   Recording of final plan.
§
515-311.   Release from improvement guarantee.
§
515-312.   Plans exempted from standard procedures.
§
515-313.   Conditional plan approval.
§
515-314.   Support agencies.
Part 4
Plan Requirements
§
515-401.   Sketch plans.
§
515-402.   Preliminary plans.
§
515-403.   Final plans.
§
515-404.   Soil percolation test requirements.
§
515-405.   Impact studies.
§
515-406.   As-built plans or improvement plans.
Part 5
Design Standards
§
515-501.   Application and general standards.
§
515-502.   Streets.
§
515-503.   Blocks and sidewalks.
§
515-504.   Lots and parcels.
§
515-505.   Sanitary sewage disposal.
§
515-506.   Water supply.
§
515-507.   Storm drainage.
§
515-508.   Public use and service area.
§
515-509.   Landscaping and shade trees.
§
515-510.   Erosion and sedimentation control plans.
Part 6
Improvement Specifications
§
515-601.   General requirements.
§
515-602.   Required improvements.
Part 7
Administration, Appeals and Penalty
§
515-701.   Amendments; notice.
§
515-702.   Validity and conflict.
§
515-703.   Fees.
§
515-704.   Modifications.
§
515-705.   Reconsideration.
§
515-706.   Challenges.
§
515-707.   Appeals.
§
515-708.   Preventative remedies.
§
515-709.   Enforcement remedies.
[HISTORY: Adopted by the City Council of the City of Reading 10-12-1977 by Ord.
No. 39-1977 (Ch. 22 of the 2001 Code of Ordinances). Amendments noted where
applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Construction codes — See
Ch. 180.
Fees — See
Ch. 212.
Shade trees — See
Ch. 555, Part 1.
Streets and sidewalks — See
Ch. 508.
Zoning — See
Ch. 600.
STATE LAW REFERENCES
Municipalities Planning Code (MPC) — See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
Subdivision and land development provisions, MPC — See 53 P.S. § 10501 et seq.
State penalties — See 53 P.S. § 10515.3.
Requirements to revise official plans — See 25 Pa. Code § 71.11 et seq.
Sewage disposal facility standards — See 25 Pa. Code Ch. 73.
Erosion control — See 25 Pa. Code Ch. 102.
Part 1
General Provisions
§ 515-101. Short title.
This chapter shall be known as the "Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance
of the City of Reading."
§ 515-102. Policy.
   A.   It is hereby declared to be the policy of the City to consider the
subdivision of land and the subsequent development of the subdivided plat as
subject to the control of the City pursuant to the Official Master Plan of the
City for the orderly, planned, efficient and economical development of the
City.
   B.   Land to be subdivided shall be of such character that it can be used
safely for building purposes without danger to health or peril from fire, flood
or other menace, and land shall not be subdivided until available public
facilities and improvements exist and proper provision has been made for
drainage, water, sewerage and capital improvements such as schools, parks,
recreational facilities and transportation facilities.
   C.   The existing and proposed public improvements shall conform to and be
properly related to the proposals shown in the Master Plan, Official Map and
the Capital Budget and Program of the City, and it is intended that this
chapter shall supplement and facilitate the enforcement of the provisions and
standards contained in the Building and Housing Codes (
Chapter 180),
Chapter 600, Zoning, the Master Plan, Official Map and Land Use Plan and the
Capital Budget and Program of the City.
§ 515-103. Purposes.
This chapter is adopted for the following purposes.
   A.   To protect and provide for the public health, safety and general
welfare of the City.
   B.   To guide the future growth and development of the City in accordance
with the Official Master Plan.
   C.   To provide for adequate light, air and privacy, to secure safety from
fire, flood and other danger, and to prevent overcrowding of the land and undue
congestion of population.
   D.   To protect the character and the social and economic stability of all
parts of the City and to encourage the orderly and beneficial development of
all parts of the City.
   E.   To protect and conserve the value of land throughout the City and the
value of buildings and improvements upon the land, and to minimize the
conflicts among the uses of land and buildings.
   F.   To guide public and private policy and action in order to provide
adequate and efficient transportation, water, sewerage, schools, parks,
playgrounds, recreation and other public requirements and facilities.
   G.   To provide the most beneficial relationship between the uses of land
and buildings and the circulation of vehicular and pedestrian traffic
throughout the City, having particular regard to the avoidance of congestion in
the streets and highways, and to provide for the proper location and width of
streets and building lines.
   H.   To establish reasonable standards of design and procedures for
subdivisions and resubdivisions in order to further the orderly layout and use
of the land and to ensure proper legal descriptions and monumenting of
subdivided land.
   I.   To ensure that public facilities are available and will have a
sufficient capacity to serve the proposed subdivision.
   J.   To prevent the pollution of air, streams and ponds; to assure the
adequacy of drainage facilities; to safeguard the water table; and to encourage
the wise use and management of natural resources throughout the City in order
to preserve the integrity, stability and beauty of the community and the value
of the land.
   K.   To preserve the natural beauty and topography of the City and to ensure
appropriate development with regard to these natural features.
   L.   To provide for adequate open spaces through the most efficient design
and layout of the land.
   M.   To regulate the subdivision and/or development of land within any
designated floodplain district in order to promote the general health, welfare
and safety of the community. [Amended 9-20-1978 by Ord. No. 35-1978]
   N.   To require that each subdivision lot in flood-prone areas be provided
with a safe building site with adequate access and that public facilities which
serve such uses be designed, and installed at the time of initial construction,
to preclude flooding. [Amended 9-20-1978 by Ord. No. 35-1978]
   O.   To protect individuals from buying lands which are unsuitable for use
because of flood by prohibiting the improper subdivision and/or development of
unprotected lands within the designated floodplain districts. [Amended 9-20-
1978 by Ord. No. 35-1978]
§ 515-104. Authority for adoption.
   A.   By authority of the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code 1  (Act
247-1968, as amended by Act 93-1972), and other applicable laws, statutes and
regulations of the State of Pennsylvania, Council hereby delegates the Planning
Commission as its agent to administer and enforce this chapter.
   B.   This chapter, as adopted by resolution of the Planning Commission under
the foregoing authority and as adopted by Council, shall remain in effect until
modified, amended or rescinded by Council.
1.   Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 515-105. Jurisdiction and application.
[Amended 3-22-2021 by Ord. No. 22-2021]
   A.   Regulation of the subdivision of land and the attachment of reasonable
conditions to land subdivision is an exercise of a valid police power delegated
by the state to this City. The developer has the duty of compliance with
reasonable conditions laid down by the Planning Commission for the design,
dedication, improvement and restrictive use of the land so as to conform to the
Master Plan and the various ordinances and regulations adopted by the City for
the orderly and beneficial development of the City. The developer has a further
responsibility to protect and provide for the safety and general welfare of the
future plot owners in the subdivision and of the community at large.
   B.   This chapter shall apply to all subdivisions, re-subdivisions,
annexations, developments and/or land developments, as defined herein, located
wholly or partially within the corporate limits of the City of Reading.
   C.   This chapter shall also apply to all resubdivisions. For any change in
a map of a previously approved or recorded subdivision plat, if such change
affects any street layout shown on such map or area reserved thereon for public
use or any lot line, or if it affects any map or plan legally reached prior to
the adoption of any regulations controlling subdivisions, such parcel shall be
approved by the Planning Commission by the same procedure, rules and
regulations as for a subdivision.
   D.   This chapter shall not apply to any lot or lots forming a part of a
subdivision or resubdivision created and recorded prior to the effective date
of this chapter.
   E.   No land shall be subdivided, resubdivided or developed, as defined
herein, within the corporate limits of the City until:
      (1)   The subdivider, developer or his agent shall submit a sketch plan
of the parcel(s) to the Planning Commission through the Planning Division of
the Community Development Department. [Amended 5-29-2001 by Ord. No. 14-2001]
      (2)   The subdivider, developer or his agent shall obtain approval of the
preliminary and/or final plan itself by the Planning Commission.
      (3)   An approved final plan is filed with the County Recorder of Deeds.
   F.   No building permit or certificate of occupancy shall be issued for any
parcel or plot of land which was created by subdivision after the effective
date of, and not in conformity with, the provisions of this chapter, and no
excavation of land or construction of any public or private improvements shall
take place or be commenced except in conformity with this chapter.
   G.   This chapter supersedes any ordinances currently in effect in flood
areas. However, any other applicable ordinances shall remain in full force and
effect to the extent that those provisions are more restrictive. [Amended 9-20-
1978 by Ord. No. 35-1978]
   H.   All references to the "City" or "City of Reading" within this chapter
shall apply to: the area or corporate limits of the City of Reading; the
governing body or commission designated by the City of Reading; the department
or administrator designated by the City of Reading; and/or as designated by the
City of Reading Code of Ordinances.
§ 515-106. Interpretation and conflict.
[Amended 9-20-1978 by Ord. No. 35-1978]
   A.   Interpretation. In their interpretation and application, the provisions
of this chapter shall be held to be the minimum requirements for the promotion
of the public health, safety and general welfare.
   B.   Conflict with public and private provisions.
      (1)   Public provisions. The regulations are not intended to interfere
with, abrogate or annul any other ordinance, rule or regulation, statute or
other provision of law. Where any provision of this chapter imposes
restrictions different from those imposed by any other provision of this
chapter or any other ordinance, rule or regulation, or other provision of law,
whichever provision is more restrictive or imposes higher standards shall
control.
      (2)   Private provisions. This chapter is not intended to abrogate any
easement, covenant or any other private agreement or restriction, provided
that, where the provisions of this chapter are more restrictive or impose
higher standards or regulations than such easement, covenant or other private
agreement or restriction, the requirements of this chapter shall govern. Where
the provisions of the easement, covenant or private agreement or restriction
impose duties and obligations more restrictive, or higher standards than either
the requirements of this chapter or the determinations of the Planning
Commission or the City in approving a subdivision or in enforcing this chapter,
and such private provisions are not inconsistent with this chapter or
determinations thereunder, then such private provisions shall be operative and
supplemental to this chapter and determinations made thereunder.
§ 515-107. Municipal liability.
[Added 9-20-1978 by Ord. No. 35-1978]
The grant of a permit or approval of a plan for any proposed subdivision and/or
land development to be located within any designated floodplain district shall
not constitute a representation, guarantee or warranty of any kind by the City
or by any official or employee thereof of the practicability or safety of the
proposed use, and shall create no liability upon the City, its officials or
employees.
Part 2
Definitions
§ 515-201. General interpretation.
Unless otherwise expressly stated, the following terms shall, for the purpose
of this chapter, have the meanings indicated:
   A.   Words in the singular include the plural, and those in the plural
include the singular.
   B.   Words used in the present tense include the future tense.
   C.   The words "person" or "subdivider" and "owner" include a corporation,
unincorporated association and a partnership, or other legal entity, as well as
an individual.
   D.   The word "building" includes "structure" and shall be construed as if
followed by the phrase "or part thereof."
   E.   The word "watercourse" includes channel, creek, ditch, dry run, spring,
stream and river.
   F.   The words "should" and "may" are permissive; the words "shall" and
"will" are mandatory and directive.
§ 515-202. Meanings of specific words.
[Amended 3-22-2021 by Ord. No. 22-2021]
Other terms or words used herein shall be interpreted or defined as follows:
   ALLEY — A public or private right-of-way primarily designed to serve as
secondary access to the side or rear of those properties whose principal
frontage is on some other street.
   ANNEXATION - A subdivision, the sole purpose of which is to consolidate one
or more lots or parcels with an adjacent lot or parcel, resulting in a single
lot or parcel of land.
   APPLICATION FOR DEVELOPMENT — Every application, whether preliminary,
tentative or final, required to be filed and approved prior to start of
construction or development, including, but not limited to, an application for
a building permit, for the approval of a subdivision plat or plan, or for the
approval of a development plan. [Amended 5-29-2001 by Ord. No. 14-2001]
   APPLICANT — The owner of land proposed to be subdivided or his
representative. Consent shall be required from the legal owner of the premises.
   BLOCK — A tract of land bounded by streets or by a combination of streets
and public parks, cemeteries, railroad rights-of-way, shorelines of waterways
or boundary lines of municipalities.
   BOND — Any form of security including a cash deposit, surety bond,
collateral, property or instrument of credit in an amount and form satisfactory
to the City Solicitor and/or Council. All bonds shall be approved by the City
Solicitor wherever a bond is required by this chapter.
   BUILDING — Any structure, either open or closed, having a roof supported by
columns, piers or walls, including tents, lunch wagons, trailers, dining cars,
camp cars, or other structures on wheels or having other supports. Any
structure having an independent entrance or an independent electrical,
mechanical or heating system shall be considered a single building. [Amended 9-
20-1978 by Ord. No. 35-1978]
   BUILDING SETBACK LINE — The line established by ordinance beyond which no
structure may extend.
   CARTWAY (ROADWAY) — The portion of a street right-of-way, paved or unpaved,
intended for vehicular use within the topographical curbline.
   CITY or CITY OF READING - All references to the "City" or "City of Reading''
within this Chapter shall apply to the area or corporate limits of the City of
Reading; the governing body or commission designated by the City of Reading;
the department or administrator designated by the City of Reading; and/or as
designated by the City of Reading Code.
   COMPREHENSIVE PLAN - A plan adopted by the City of Reading, which has been
prepared and adopted in accordance with the provisions that are specified by
the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code.
   COUNCIL — The City Council of Reading, Pennsylvania.
   CITY HEALTH OFFICER — The Sewage Enforcement Officer. [Amended 5-29-2001 by
Ord. No. 14-20012]
   CITY PLANNING COMMISSION — The Planning Commission of the City of Reading,
Pennsylvania.
   CITY PLANNING DIVISION MANAGER — The City Planning Division Manager under
the Community Development Department. [Amended 5-29-2001 by Ord. No. 14-2001]
   CITY ZONING ADMINISTRATOR — The agent or official designated by Council and
charged by law with the administration and enforcement of
Chapter 600, Zoning.
   CLEAR SIGHT TRIANGLE — An area of unobstructed vision at street
intersections defined by lines of sight between points at a given distance from
the intersection of the street center lines.
   CONSTRUCTION PLAN — The maps or drawings accompanying a subdivision plat and
showing the specific location and design of improvements to be installed in the
subdivision in accordance with the requirements of the Planning Commission as a
condition for the approval of the plan.
   COUNTY — The County of Berks, Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
   COUNTY PLANNING COMMISSION — The Planning Commission of the County of Berks.
   CROSSWALK (INTERIOR WALK) — A publicly or privately owned right-of-way for
pedestrian use extending from a street into a block or across a block to
another street.
   CUL-DE-SAC — A local street with only one outlet and having an appropriate
terminal for the safe and convenient reversal of traffic movement.
   DESIGNATED FLOODPLAIN DISTRICTS — Those floodplain districts specifically
designated in
Chapter 600, Zoning, as being inundated primarily by the one-hundred-year
flood. Included would be areas identified as the Floodway District (FW), the
Flood-Fringe District (FF) and the General Floodplain District (FA). [Amended
9-20-1978 by Ord. No. 35-1978]
   DEVELOPER — Any landowner, agent of such landowner or tenant with the
permission of such landowner, who makes or causes to be made a subdivision or
resubdivision of land.
   DEVELOPMENT — Any man-made change to improved or unimproved real estate,
including but not limited to buildings or other structures, the placement of
mobile homes, streets and other paving, utilities, mining, dredging, filling,
grading, excavation or drilling operations and the subdivision of land.
[Amended 9-20-1978 by Ord. No. 35-1978]
   DEVELOPMENT PLAN — The provisions for development including a planned
residential development, a plat of subdivision, all covenants relating to use,
location and bulk of buildings and other structures, intensity of use or
density of development, streets, ways and parking facilities, common open space
and public facilities. The phrase "provisions of development plan," when used
in this chapter, shall mean the written and graphic materials referred to in
this definition. [Amended 5-29-2001 by Ord. No. 14-2001]
   DIRECTOR OF PUBLIC WORKS — The Engineer or his responsible representative,
as designated by the City. [Amended 5-29-2001 by Ord. No. 14-2001]
   DRAINAGE RIGHT-OF-WAY — The lands required for the installation of sanitary
or storm sewers or drainage ditches or required along a natural stream or
watercourse for preserving the channel and providing for the flow of water
therein to safeguard the public against flood damage.
   DWELLING UNIT — Any structure, or part thereof, designed to be occupied as
living quarters or as a single housekeeping unit.
   EASEMENT — A right-of-way granted, but not dedicated, for limited use on
private land for a public or quasi-public purpose and within which the owner of
the property shall not erect any permanent structures but shall have the right
to make any other use of the land which is not inconsistent with the rights of
the grantee.
   ENGINEER — A person licensed to practice in the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania
as a registered professional engineer.
   ESCROW — A deposit of cash with the local government in lieu of an amount
required and still in force on a performance or maintenance bond. Such escrow
funds shall be deposited by the City in a separate account.
   FLOOD-PRONE AREA — A relatively flat or low land area adjoining a stream,
river or watercourse which is subject to partial or complete inundation; or any
area subject to the unusual and rapid accumulation of runoff or surface waters
from any source.
   FLOODWAY — The channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land
areas required to carry and discharge a flood of the one-hundred-year
magnitude. This definition and other flood-connected definitions relate to the
Flood Insurance Study prepared by or for the Federal Insurance Administration
and dated June 11, 2012. [Amended 9-20-1978 by Ord. No. 35-19783]
   FRONTAGE — That side of a lot abutting on a street or way and ordinarily
regarded as the front of the lot, but it shall not be considered as the
ordinary side of a corner lot.
   GOVERNING BODY — Council or its lawful designee. [Amended 9-20-1978 by Ord.
No. 35-1978]
   GRADE — The inclination, with the horizontal, of a road, unimproved land,
etc., which is generally expressed by stating the vertical rise or fall as a
percentage of the horizontal distance.
   INDIVIDUAL SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEM — A septic tank, seepage tile sewage
disposal system, or any other approved sewage treatment device.
   JOINT OWNERSHIP — Among persons shall be construed as the same owner;
"constructive ownership" for the purpose of imposing subdivision regulations.
   LAND DEVELOPMENT — Any of the following activities: [Amended 5-29-2001 by
Ord. No. 14-2001]
   A.   The improvement of one lot or two or more contiguous lots, tracts or
parcels of land for any purpose involving:
      (1)   A group of two or more residential or nonresidential buildings,
whether proposed initially or cumulatively, or a single nonresidential building
on a lot or lots regardless of the number of occupants or tenure; or
      (2)   The division or allocation of land or space, whether initially or
cumulatively, between or among two or more existing or prospective occupants by
means of or for the purpose of streets, common areas, leaseholds, condominiums,
building groups or other features.
   B.   A subdivision of land.
   C.   "Land development" does not include development which involves:
      (1)   The conversion of an existing single-family detached dwelling or
single-family semidetached dwelling into not more than three residential units,
unless such units are intended to be a condominium;
      (2)   The addition of an accessory building, including farm building, on
a lot or lots subordinate to an existing principal building; or
      (3)   The addition or conversion of buildings or rides within the
confines of an enterprise which would be considered an amusement park. For the
purposes of this subsection, an "amusement park" is defined as a tract or area
used principally as a location for permanent amusement structures or rides.
This exclusion shall not apply to newly acquired acreage by an amusement park
until initial plans for the expanded area have been approved by the proper
authorities.
   LANDOWNER — The legal or beneficial owner or owners of land, including the
holder of an option or contract to purchase, whether or not such option or
contract is subject to any condition; a lessee having a remaining term of not
less than 40 years or other person having a proprietary interest in land shall
be deemed to be a "landowner" for the purpose of this chapter.
   LAND PLANNER — A recognized professional individual or firm affiliated with
registered engineers, architects and/or surveyors capable of preparing physical
development or redevelopment plans.
   LOT — A designated parcel, tract or area of land established by a plat or
otherwise as permitted by law and to be used, developed or built upon as a
unit. [Amended 5-29-2001 by Ord. No. 14-2001]
   LOT IMPROVEMENT — Any building, structure, place, work of art or other
object, or improvement of the land on which they are situated, constituting a
physical betterment of real property or any part of such betterment. Certain
lot improvements shall be properly bonded as provided in this chapter.
   LOT LINE — A line designating the boundary of a lot. The lot line may also
be known as the "property line." Where the property abuts a right-of-way, the
lot line shall be the line dividing the lot from the right-of-way.
   MAINTENANCE GUARANTEE — A guarantee by the subdivider that he shall maintain
all improvements in good condition for a period of one year after completion of
construction and installation of all such improvements.
   MAJOR SUBDIVISION — All subdivisions or resubdivisions not classified as
minor subdivisions, including but not limited to subdivisions of two or more
lots or any size subdivision requiring any new street or extension of the local
governmental facilities or the creation of any public improvements.
   MARKER — A metal pipe or pin of at least 3/4 inch in diameter and at least
24 inches in length.
   MASTER PLAN - A plan providing specific emphasis on land use, zoning,
housing, historic preservation, cultural resources, natural features,
environmental or ecological resources, community development, corridor or
streetscape enhancement, economic development, redevelopment or revitalization,
parks and recreation, open space, parking, pedestrian or bicycle circulation,
transportation, airports, education, libraries, health care, sanitary sewage
disposal, water supply, utilities, conservation management, stormwater
management, flood protection, scenic resources, tourism, solid waste
management, recycling, emergency management services and/or other community
issues. A Master Plan may include, promote, incorporate or implement specific
elements of the “Comprehensive Plan.”
   MINOR LAND DEVELOPMENT - The construction, expansion or redevelopment of a
building that is not more than 2,500 square feet of gross floor area; where the
area of disturbance is less than 5,000 square feet of land area; the property
includes a change of use with minimal site improvements; not involving any new
street or road or the extension of municipal facilities, and not adversely
affecting the remainder of the parcel or adjoining property, and not in
conflict with any provision or portion of the Master Plan, Official Map,
Chapter 600, Zoning, or this chapter.
   MINOR SUBDIVISION — Any subdivision containing not more than five lots nor
more than one principal building per lot, fronting on an existing street, not
involving any new street or road or the extension of municipal facilities, and
not adversely affecting the remainder of the parcel or adjoining property, and
not in conflict with any provision or portion of the Master Plan, Official Map,
Chapter 600, Zoning, or this chapter.
   MOBILE HOME — A transportable, single-family dwelling intended for permanent
occupancy, contained in one unit, or in two or more units designed to be joined
into one integral unit capable of again being separated for repeated towing,
which arrives at a site complete and ready for occupancy except for minor and
incidental unpacking and assembly operations, and constructed so that it may be
used without a permanent foundation. [Amended 5-29-2001 by Ord. No. 14-2001]
   MOBILE HOME LOT — A parcel of land in a mobile home park improved with the
necessary utility connections and other appurtenances necessary for the
erection thereon of a single mobile home. [Amended 5-29-2001 by Ord. No. 14-
2001]
   MOBILE HOME PARK — A parcel, or contiguous parcels of land, which has been
so designated and improved that it contains two or more mobile home lots for
the placement thereon of mobile homes. [Amended 5-29-2001 by Ord. No. 14-2001]
   MONUMENT — A stone or concrete monument with a flat top at least four inches
in diameter or square containing a copper or brass dowel (plug) and at least 24
inches in length. It is recommended that the bottom sides or radius be at least
two inches greater than the top, to minimize movements caused by frost.
   MULTIPLE-DWELLING BUILDING — A building housing three or more separate
dwelling units.
   MUNICIPAL AUTHORITY — A body politic and corporate created pursuant to the
Act of May 2, 1945 (P.L. 382, No. 164), known as the "Municipalities Authority
Act of 1945." 4 [Amended 5-29-2001 by Ord. No. 14-2001]
   MUNICIPALITY — The City of Reading, unless the sentence construction clearly
indicates otherwise.
   NONRESIDENTIAL SUBDIVISION — A subdivision whose intended use is other than
residential, such as commercial or industrial. Such subdivision shall comply
with the applicable provisions of this chapter.
   OFFICIAL MAP — The map established by Council pursuant to law showing the
streets, highways and parks, and drainage systems and setback lines theretofore
laid out, adopted and established by law, and any amendments or additions
thereto adopted by Council or additions thereto resulting from the approval of
subdivision plats by the Planning Commission and the subsequent filing of such
approved plats.
   ONE-HUNDRED-YEAR FLOOD — A flood that, on the average, is likely to occur
once every 100 years, i.e., that has a one-percent chance of occurring each
year, although the flood may occur in any year. [Amended 9-20-1978 by Ord. No.
35-1978]
   ORDINANCE — Any legislative action, however denominated, of a local
government which has the force of law, including any amendment or repeal of any
ordinance.
   OWNER — Any person, firm, association or syndicate, copartnership or
corporation having a proprietary interest in any land sought to be subdivided
in pursuance of this chapter.
   PERFORMANCE GUARANTEE — Any security which may be accepted in lieu of a
requirement that certain improvements be made before the Planning Commission
gives final approval to the plan, including performance bonds, escrow
agreements and any other collateral or surety agreements.
   PLAN, FINAL — A complete and exact subdivision plan, including all required
supplementary data, prepared for official recording as by statute, to define
property rights and proposed streets and other improvements.
   PLAN, MAJOR STREET — That element of the Comprehensive Plan, now or
hereafter adopted, which shows the general location, alignment and dimensions,
and the identification and classification of existing and proposed streets,
highways and other thoroughfares.
   PLAN, OFFICIAL — The Comprehensive Development Plan and/or Master Plan and/
or future land use plan and/or ultimate right-of-way plan and/or Official Map
and/or topographical survey and/or other such plans, or portions thereof, as
may have been adopted pursuant to statute for the area of the City in which the
subdivision is located.
   PLAN, PRELIMINARY — A tentative subdivision plan, including all required
supplementary data, in lesser detail than a final plan, showing approximate
proposed street and lot layout as a basis for consideration prior to the
preparation of a final plan.
   PLAN, PRELIMINARY/FINAL - A complete and exact subdivision or land
development plan, including all required supplementary data, identified as such
with the title “Preliminary/Final Plan,” prepared for official recording as by
statute, to define property rights and proposed streets or other improvements,
wherein the requirement to submit separate Preliminary and Final Plans has been
waived by the Planning Commission.
   PLAN, RECORD — The copy of the final plan which contains the original
endorsements of the City Planning Commission, the County Planning Commission,
or their authorized representatives, and which is intended to be recorded with
the County Recorder of Deeds.
   PLAN, SKETCH — An informal plan, not necessarily to exact scale, indicating
salient existing features of a tract and its surroundings and the general
layout of a proposed subdivision.
   PLAT — A map or plan of a subdivision, whether preliminary or final.
   PUBLIC GROUNDS — Includes: [Amended 5-29-2001 by Ord. No. 14-2001]
   A.   Parks, playgrounds, trails, paths and other recreational areas and
other public areas;
   B.   Sites for schools, sewage treatment, refuse disposal and other publicly
owned or operated facilities; and
   C.   Publicly owned or operated scenic and historic sites.
   PUBLIC HEARING — A formal meeting held pursuant to public notice by the City
Council or Planning Commission, intended to inform and obtain public comment
prior to taking action in accordance with this chapter. [Amended 5-29-2001 by
Ord. No. 14-2001]
   PUBLIC MEETING — A forum held pursuant to notice under the Sunshine Act, 65
Pa.C.S.A. § 701 et seq. (October 15, 1998, P.L. 729, No. 93). [Amended 5-29-
2001 by Ord. No. 14-20015]
   PUBLIC NOTICE — Notice published once each week for two successive weeks in
a newspaper of general circulation in the City. Such notice shall state the
time and place of the hearing and the particular nature of the matter to be
considered at the hearing. The first publication shall not be more than 30 days
and the second publication shall not be less than seven days from the date of
the hearing. [Amended 5-29-2001 by Ord. No. 14-2001]
   PUBLIC IMPROVEMENT — Any drainage ditch, roadway, parkway, sidewalk,
pedestrianway, tree, lawn, off-street parking area, lot improvement or other
facility for which the local government may ultimately assume the
responsibility for maintenance and operation, or which may affect any
improvement for which local government responsibility is established. All such
improvements shall be properly bonded.
   REGULATORY FLOOD ELEVATION — The one-hundred-year flood elevation plus a
freeboard safety factor of 1 1/2 feet. [Amended 9-20-1978 by Ord. No. 35-1978]
   RESERVE STRIP — A panel of ground in separate ownership separating a street
from other adjacent properties or from another street.
   RESUBDIVISION or REVISED PLAN OF RECORD - Any revision, replatting or
resubdivision of land that includes changes to the most recently approved final
and recorded plan, or other change that modifies any street layout on such map
or an area reserved thereon for public use; any lot line; or any map or plan
legally recorded prior to the adoption of this regulation controlling
subdivisions.
   REVERSE FRONTAGE LOT — A lot extending between and having frontage on two
generally parallel streets, excluding service streets, with vehicular access
solely from one street.
   REVIEW — Whenever the Planning Commission possesses such jurisdiction, the
action of "review" also includes "review-and-approval" or, if necessary,
"review-and-disapproval."
   RIGHT-OF-WAY — A strip of land occupied or intended to be occupied by a
street, crosswalk, railroad, road, electric transmission line, oil or gas
pipeline, water main, sanitary or storm sewer main, shade trees or by another
special use. The usage of the term "right-of-way" for land platting purposes
shall mean that every right-of-way hereafter established and shown on a final
plan is to be separate and distinct from the lots or parcels adjoining such
right-of-way and not included within the dimensions or areas of such lots or
parcels. Rights-of-way intended for streets, crosswalks, water mains, sanitary
sewers, storm drains, shade trees or any other use involving maintenance by a
public agency shall be dedicated to public use by the maker of the plan on
which such right-of-way is established.
   ROAD RIGHT-OF-WAY WIDTH — The distance between property lines measured at
right angles to the center line of the street.
   SALE or LEASE — Any immediate or future transfer of ownership or any
possessory interest in land, including contract of sale, lease, devise,
intestate succession or transfer, of an interest in a subdivision or part
thereof, whether by metes and bounds, deed, contract, plat, map, lease, devise,
intestate succession or other written instrument.
   SAME OWNERSHIP — Ownership by the same person, corporation, firm, entity,
partnership or unincorporated association, or ownership by different
corporations, firms, partnerships, entities or unincorporated associations, in
which a stockholder, partner or associate, or a member of his family, owns an
interest in each corporation, firm, partnership, entity or unincorporated
association.
   SANITARY SEWAGE DISPOSAL, ON-SITE — Any structure designed to biochemically
treat sanitary sewage within the boundaries of an individual lot.
   SANITARY SEWERAGE SYSTEM, PUBLIC — A sanitary sewage collection system in
which sewage is carried from individual lots by a system of pipes to a water
pollution control facility.
   SEPTIC TANK — A covered watertight settling tank in which raw sewage is
biochemically changed into liquid or gaseous states to facilitate further
treatment and final disposal.
   SETBACK — The distance between a structure and the lot line nearest thereto.
   SHADE TREE — A tree in a public place, street, special easement, or right-
of-way adjoining a street as provided in this chapter and
Chapter 555, Part 1, Shade Trees.
   SIGHT DISTANCE — The required length of roadway visible to the driver of a
motor vehicle at any given point on the roadway when the view is unobstructed
by traffic. Sight distance measurements shall be made from a point 4 1/2 feet
above the center line of the road surface to a point 1/2 foot above the center
line of the road surface.
   SOIL PERCOLATION TEST — A field test conducted to determine the suitability
of the soil for on-site sanitary sewage disposal facilities by measuring the
absorptive capacity of the soil at a given time and location.
   STREET — Includes street, avenue, boulevard, road, highway, freeway,
parkway, lane, alley, viaduct or any other ways used or intended to be used by
vehicular traffic or pedestrians, whether public or private. [Amended 5-29-2001
by Ord. No. 14-2001]
   A.   COLLECTOR STREET — A street which, in addition to providing access to
abutting properties, intercepts minor streets to provide a route serving 50 or
more dwelling units and a means of access to community facilities and/or other
collector and major streets. Streets in industrial and commercial subdivisions
shall generally be considered collector streets.
   B.   CUL-DE-SAC STREET — A minor street intersecting another street at one
end and terminating in a vehicular turnabout at the other end.
   C.   INTERNAL STREET — A minor street used for circulation and access within
a development project involving multi-residence or commercial or industrial
uses.
   D.   MAJOR STREET (ARTERIAL) — A street serving a large volume of
comparatively high- speed and long-distance traffic, including all facilities
classified as main and secondary highways by the Pennsylvania Department of
Transportation.
   E.   MARGINAL ACCESS STREET — A minor street, parallel and adjacent to a
major street, but separated from it by a reserve strip, which provides access
to abutting properties and control of intersections with the major streets.
   F.   MINOR STREET — A street used primarily to provide access to abutting
properties.
   STRUCTURE — Any man-made object having an ascertainable stationary location
on or in land or water, whether or not affixed to the land. [Amended 5-29-2001
by Ord. No. 14-2001]
   SUBDIVIDER — Any individual, copartnership or corporation or agent
authorized thereby which undertakes the subdivision or development of land, as
defined by this chapter, as the owner, equitable owner, or agent authorized
thereby, of the land being subdivided or developed.
   SUBDIVISION — The division or redivision of a lot, tract or parcel of land
by any means into two or more lots, tracts, parcels or other divisions of land,
including changes in existing lot lines for the purpose, whether immediate or
future, of lease, transfer of ownership or building or lot development:
   A.   A subdivision, as defined above, includes the division, over any period
of time after the enactment of this chapter, of a recorded parcel of land
having frontage on an existing or proposed street into two or more parcels
having frontage on the existing or proposed street.
   B.   For the purpose of this chapter, the division of land for agricultural
purposes into parcels of more than 10 acres, not involving any new street or
easement of access, shall not be deemed a subdivision.
   C.   The term "subdivision" shall also include any development of a parcel
of land, for example, as an industrial park, a shopping center or a multiple-
dwelling project, which involves installation of streets and/or alleys, even
though the streets and/or alleys might not be dedicated to public use and the
parcel might not be divided immediately for purposes of conveyance, transfer or
sale, or even though the owner does not transfer legal or equitable title; for
example, structures for rental purposes.
   D.   The term "subdivision" includes resubdivision or any replatting of
land, including changes to recorded plans.
   E.   The term "subdivision" shall refer, as appropriate in this chapter, to
the process of subdividing land or to the land proposed to be subdivided.
   SUBDIVISION, MAJOR — See "major subdivision."
   SUBDIVISION, MINOR — See "minor subdivision."
   SUBDIVISION PLAT OR PLAN — The final map or drawing, described in this
chapter, on which the subdivider's plan of subdivision is presented to the
Planning Commission for approval and which, if approved, may be submitted and
recorded with the County Recorder of Deeds.
   SURVEYOR — A licensed surveyor registered by the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania.
   WATER SURVEY — An inventory of the source, quantity, yield and use of
groundwater and surface water resources within the City. [Amended 5-29-2001 by
Ord. No. 14-2001]
2.   Editor's Note: Amended during codification (see
Ch. 1, General Provisions, Part 2).
3.   Editor's Note: Amended during codification (see
Ch. 1, General Provisions, Part 2).
4.   Editor's Note: See now 53 Pa.C.S.A. § 5601 et seq.
5.   Editor's Note: Amended during codification (see
Ch. 1, General Provisions, Part 2).
Part 3
Plan Submission Procedures
§ 515-301. Review and approval.
[Amended 2-27-2017 by Ord. No. 11-2017]
Hereafter, all plans for the subdivision, resubdivision and development of land
within the corporate limits of the City of Reading shall be reviewed by the
Planning Commission and other City, county and state officials as deemed
necessary and shall be approved or disapproved by the Planning Commission in
accordance with the procedures specified in this chapter. Any approval not
processed as required hereafter shall be null and void unless it occurred prior
to the adoption of this chapter.
§ 515-302. Classification of subdivisions.
[Amended 2-27-2017 by Ord. No. 11-2017]
   A.   Whenever any subdivision, resubdivision or development of land is
proposed, before any contract is made for the sale of any part thereof, and
before any permit for the erection of a structure in such proposed subdivision
shall be granted, the subdividing owner or his authorized agent shall apply for
and secure approval of the Planning Commission for such proposed subdivision in
accordance with the following procedure, which includes basically two steps for
a minor subdivision and three steps for a major subdivision:
      (1)   Minor subdivision.
         (a)   Sketch plan submission.
         (b)   Final subdivision plan submission.
      (2)   Major subdivision.
         (a)   Sketch plan submission.
         (b)   Preliminary plan submission.
         (c)   Final subdivision plan submission.
   B.   The Planning Division of the Community Development Department, acting
on behalf of the Planning Commission, shall review subdivision sketch plans
submitted to the Commission and classify each acceptable plan as being either a
minor or a major subdivision. If a plan is classified as a minor subdivision,
the Planning Commission may, at a regularly scheduled meeting, proceed directly
to a review and disposition of the plan in its final form. If a plan is
classified as a major subdivision, the Planning Commission may, at successive,
regularly scheduled meetings, proceed to a review and disposition of the plan
in its preliminary and then its final form. See §
515-202 for the criteria used in designating major and minor subdivisions.
[Amended 5-29-2001 by Ord. No. 14-2001]
§ 515-303. Submission of sketch plan.
[Amended 2-27-2017 by Ord. No. 11-2017; and 3-22-2021 by Ord. No. 22-2021]
   A.   Before preparing the sketch plan for a subdivision, the applicant
should discuss with the Planning Division of the Community Development
Department the procedure for adoption of a subdivision plan and the
requirements for the general layout of streets and for reservations of land,
street improvements, drainage, sewerage, fire protection and similar matters,
as well as the availability of existing services. The Planning Division of the
Community Development Department shall also advise the applicant, where
appropriate, to discuss the proposed subdivision with those officials who shall
eventually approve aspects of the subdivision plan coming within their
jurisdiction.
   B.   Following such discussions, subdividers are urged to prepare
subdivision sketch plans for review with the Planning Commission or its duly
authorized representatives. Such plans, if submitted for review, shall include
at least those items listed in Part 4 and shall conform to the other
requirements hereafter specified.
   C.   The Sketch Plan Application shall be submitted to the City of Reading
and shall include: four (4) hard copies and one electronic copy of the plan in
PDF format, or such number and format as the City may require; the application
form; and filing fee. The Sketch Plan shall be considered as an informal
submission for discussion between the applicant, the Planning Commission, and
City staff.
   D.   Submission of a Sketch Plan involving subdivisions, re-subdivisions,
developments and/or land developments, as defined herein, shall not be
considered as an official submission of a plan to the Planning Commission.
   E.   Based on the information shown on such sketch plan, the Planning
Commission or its duly authorized representatives shall, as promptly as
possible, advise the subdivider of the extent to which the proposed subdivision
conforms to the applicable requirements of this chapter, classify the
subdivision in accordance with this section, and discuss plan modifications
which are deemed advisable or necessary to secure conformance with this
chapter.
§ 515-304. Submission of preliminary plan.
[Amended 2-27-2017 by Ord. No. 11-2017; and 3-22-2021 by Ord. No. 22-2021]
   A.   The initial plan officially submitted to the Planning Commission shall,
if it meets all applicable requirements, be considered a preliminary plan.
   B.   Where a preliminary plan shows the proposed subdivision of only a part
of the subdivider's total property, a sketch may be required showing the
prospective street system in the remainder of the property so that the street
system in the submitted portion may be considered in relation to future
connections with the unsubmitted portion.
   C.   Preliminary plans and all necessary supporting data shall be submitted
in a hard and electronic form in accordance with the submission requirements
and deadlines set forth by the City of Reading.
   D.   The Preliminary Plan Application shall be submitted to the City of
Reading and shall include: six (6) hard copies of all plan sheets; two (2) hard
copies of all technical reports; one (1) copy of the application form; the
filing fee; and a complete electronic copy in PDF format of any application,
plan, report, or other documentation; or such number and format as the City may
require. The Preliminary Plan shall be considered as a formal submission to the
City of Reading in accordance with the provisions specified by the Pennsylvania
Municipalities Planning Code.
   E.   The Planning Director or his representative shall collect a filing fee
at the time of submission of the preliminary plan in accordance with the
requirements of §
515-703 of this chapter.
   F.   If the preliminary plan submission complies with §
515-402 and all other applicable provisions of this chapter, the Planning
Director shall acknowledge such compliance and shall certify the intention of
the Planning Commission to review the preliminary plan by issuance to the
subdivider of a preliminary subdivision plan receipt. The issuance of such
receipt shall constitute official submission of the preliminary plan to the
City.
   G.   The submission of a Preliminary Plan, as defined herein, shall be
initially reviewed by the City of Reading to determine if it is
administratively complete and to confirm that the application has been
submitted by the applicant to the Berks County Planning Commission, along with
any required fee, before it is formally accepted by the City Planning
Commission for further review and consideration. Additional copies of the
Preliminary Plan may be required by the City of Reading or agencies with
jurisdiction.
§ 515-305. Review of preliminary plan.
[Amended 2-27-2017 by Ord. No. 11-2017]
   A.   Review by Director of Public Works. The Director of Public Works shall
review the preliminary plan to determine its conformance to the chapter. The
Director of Public Works shall recommend changes, alterations or modifications,
as he may deem necessary. The report of the Director of Public Works shall be
in writing and shall be submitted to the Planning Commission prior to the
regularly scheduled meeting at which the preliminary plan is to be considered
by the Planning Commission. The report shall include an estimate of the cost of
construction of all improvements as required by this chapter. [Amended 5-29-
2001 by Ord. No. 14-2001]
   B.   Review by Zoning Officer. The Zoning Administrator shall review the
preliminary plan to determine its conformance to
Chapter 600, Zoning. The Zoning Administrator shall check all data as required
to be shown under §
515-403 to determine if information is in accordance with the latest amendments
to
Chapter 600, Zoning. The report from the Zoning Administrator as to the
accuracy of the information shown shall be submitted to the Planning Commission
prior to the regularly scheduled meeting at which the preliminary plan is to be
considered by the Planning Commission.
   C.   Review by County Planning Commission. No official action shall be taken
by the City Planning Commission with respect to a preliminary plan for a major
subdivision until the City has received the written report of the County
Planning Commission; provided, however, that, if the County Planning Commission
fails to report thereon within 30 days after issuing a preliminary subdivision
plan receipt, then the City Planning Commission may act without having received
and considered such report. If the preliminary plan submission complies with §
3.2 of the County Regulations, the County Planning Commission shall acknowledge
such compliance and shall certify its intention to review the preliminary plan
by issuance to the subdivider and to the City Planning Commission Secretary or
the Community Development Director of a preliminary subdivision plan receipt.
[Amended 5-29-2001 by Ord. No. 14-20017]
   D.   Preliminary plans and all necessary supporting data shall be submitted
in a hard and electronic form in accordance with the submission requirements
and deadlines set forth by the City of Reading. [Amended 3-22-2021 by Ord. No.
22-2021]
   E.   As a part of its review, the City Planning Commission or its
representatives may discuss the preliminary plan and supplementary data with
the subdivider, with appropriate officials of the City, and with appropriate
county and state agencies.
   F.   Prior to the meeting at which the preliminary plan is to be considered,
the owner of the property or his agent shall be notified that the preliminary
plan has been submitted and will be considered by the Commission at its meeting
of a specified date and be invited to be represented at that meeting.
   G.   At a public meeting, the City Planning Commission or its annually
appointed nominees shall review the preliminary plans and the written reports
and recommendations thereon of the County Planning Commission, if same have
been received, the Director of Public Works, the City Zoning Administrator, the
Berks County Soil and Water Conservation District, the Department of
Environmental Protection, and of any other officials of the City, county and
state to determine the preliminary plan's conformance to the standards
contained in this chapter. The City Planning Commission may require or
recommend such changes and modifications as it deems necessary or advisable in
the public interest. [Amended 5-29-2001 by Ord. No. 14-2001]
   H.   The action of the City Planning Commission, either approving or
disapproving the preliminary plan, shall be noted, with the date of such action
and the signature of the Commission on two sets of plans. The findings and
reasons upon which the action is based, including the provisions of the statute
or ordinance relied upon, shall also be stated in the minutes and in writing.
   I.   Within 90 working days after the meeting at which the preliminary plan
is reviewed, the Secretary of the City Planning Commission or the Community
Development Department Director shall send written notice of the findings,
action taken, and reason thereof. When the application is not approved in terms
as filed, the decision shall specify the defects found in the application,
describing the requirements which have not been met, and shall in each case
cite the provisions of the statute or ordinance relied upon. Copies of the
written notice shall be sent to the following: [Amended 5-29-2001 by Ord. No.
14-2001]
      (1)   Zoning Administrator.
      (2)   Director of Public Works.
      (3)   The engineer, surveyor or land planner of the subdivider or his
agent.
      (4)   The subdivider or his agent.
7.   Editor's Note: Amended during codification (see
Ch. 1, General Provisions, Part 2).
§ 515-306. Approval of preliminary plan.
[Amended 2-27-2017 by Ord. No. 11-2017]
   A.   One signed copy of the plan indicating the modifications necessary for
final approval shall be maintained by the City in the records of the Planning
Division of the Community Development Department, and one signed copy shall be
sent to the subdivider or his agent. [Amended 5-29-2001 by Ord. No. 14-2001]
   B.   Approval of the preliminary plan, subject to conditions, revisions and
modifications as stipulated by the City Planning Commission, shall constitute
conditional Commission approval as to the character and intensity of
development, the arrangement and approximate dimension of streets, lots and
other planned features, but shall not authorize the sale or transfer of lots.
Approval of the preliminary plan shall not constitute acceptance of a
subdivision for recording.
§ 515-307. Submission of final plan.
[Amended 2-27-2017 by Ord. No. 11-2017]
   A.   Within 12 months after approval of a preliminary plan, as defined
herein, the applicant or authorized representative shall submit a final plan,
as defined herein, to the Planning Commission in accordance with the
requirements of this section. An extension of time may be granted by the City
Planning Commission and the County Planning Commission upon written request by
the applicant or representative. Final plans submitted after this expiration of
time for which no time extension has been granted shall be considered as a new
preliminary plan. [Amended 5-29-2001 by Ord. No. 14-2001; and 3-22-2021 by Ord.
No. 22-2021]
   B.   The final plan for a minor or major subdivision shall conform in all
important respects to the sketch plan or the preliminary plan as previously
reviewed and approved by the City Planning Commission or its appointee. The
City Planning Commission or its duly appointed representative may, however,
accept a final plan so modified as to reflect any substantial changes which
have occurred on the site of the proposed subdivision, or its surroundings,
since the time of sketch plan review for a minor subdivision or preliminary
plan review for a major subdivision.
   C.   The City Planning Commission may permit submission of the final plan in
sections, each covering a reasonable portion of the entire proposed subdivision
as shown on the previously reviewed sketch plan or preliminary plan.
   D.   Final plans and all necessary supporting data shall be submitted in a
hard and electronic form in accordance with the submission requirements and
deadlines set forth by the City of Reading. [Amended 3-22-2021 by Ord. No. 22-
2021]E.   The final plan application shall be submitted to the City of Reading
and shall include: six (6) hard copies of all plan sheets; two (2) hard copies
of all technical reports; one (1) copy of the application form; the filing fee;
and a complete electronic copy in PDF format of any application,, plan, report,
or other documentation, or such number and format as the City may require. The
Final Plan shall be considered as a formal submission to the City of Reading in
accordance with the provisions specified by the Pennsylvania Municipalities
Planning Code. [Amended 3-22-2021 by Ord. No. 22-2021]
   F.   If the final plan submission complies with § 515-403 and all other
applicable provisions of this chapter, the Director of Community Development or
his duly authorized representative shall acknowledge such compliance and shall
certify the intention of the City Planning Commission to review the final plan
by issuance to the subdivider of a final subdivision plan receipt. The issuance
of such receipt shall constitute official submission of the final plan to the
City. [Amended 5-29-2001 by Ord. No. 14-2001]
   G.   The submission of a final plan, as defined herein, shall be initially
reviewed by the City of Reading to determine if it is administratively complete
and to confirm that the application has been submitted by the applicant to the
Berks County Planning Commission, along with any required fee, before it is
formally accepted by the City Planning Commission for further review and
consideration. Additional copies of the final plan may be required by the City
of Reading or agencies with jurisdiction. [Amended 3-22-2021 by Ord. No. 22-
2021]
   H.   The final plan shall be reviewed and approved by the City Planning
Commission and County Planning Commission in accordance with the provisions
established by the City of Reading and the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning
Code. Unless otherwise required by the City of Reading, the approved final plan
including all plan sheets and agreements shall be recorded with the Berks
County Recorder of Deeds. [Amended 3-22-2021 by Ord. No. 22- 2021]
§ 515-308. Review of final plan.
[Amended 5-29-2001 by Ord. No. 14-2001; 2-27-2017 by Ord. No. 11-2017]
   A.   Review by County Planning Commission. If the final plan submission for
a minor subdivision complies with § 3.3 of the County Regulations and §
515-403 of this chapter, the County Planning Commission shall acknowledge such
compliance and shall certify its intention to review the final plan by issuance
to the subdivider of a final subdivision plan receipt. Copies of this receipt
shall also be mailed to the Director of Community Development and the Secretary
of the City Planning Commission. No official action shall be taken by the City
Planning Commission or its nominee with respect to a final plan for a minor
subdivision until the City has received the written report of the County
Planning Commission; provided, however, that, if the County Planning Commission
fails to report thereon within 30 days after issuing a final subdivision plan
receipt, then the City Planning Commission or its nominee may act without
having received and considered such report. 8
   B.   Review by City Planning Commission.
      (1)   Upon receipt of an official submission of a final plan, as defined
herein, the city shall review the plan for its conformance with this section
and Section 515-403 and shall notify the applicant in writing upon a
determination that the submission is complete. [Amended 3-22- 2021 by Ord. No.
22-2021]
      (2)   Upon determining that the submission is complete, the city shall
schedule the matter for a meeting before the Planning Commission. [Amended 3-
22-2021 by Ord. No. 22- 2021]
      (3)   During review of the final plan, the City Planning Commission may
also consider the written reports of the Director of Public Works, City Zoning
Administrator, and other appropriate City, county and state agencies.
      (4)   The City Planning Commission or its nominees shall review the final
plan at a scheduled public meeting. The findings, reasons upon which the action
is based and, if the application is not approved, the provisions of the statute
or ordinance relied upon, shall be stated in the minutes and in writing.
      (5)   Within 90 working days after the final plan is officially reviewed,
the Secretary of the Planning Commission or Director of Community Development
or his designee shall send written notice of the findings, action taken and
reason thereof and shall, when the application is not approved, specify the
defects found in the application and describe the requirements which have not
been met, and shall, in each case, cite the provisions of the statute or
ordinance relied upon. The following persons shall receive such notice:
         (a)   County Planning Commission.
         (b)   Director of Public Works.
         (c)   The engineer, surveyor or land planner of the subdivider or his
agent.
         (d)   The subdivider or his agent.
      (6)   If the final plan is approved, the action of the City Planning
Commission or its nominee shall be noted, together with the date and signature
of the Planning Commission, on eight sets of the final plan, including the
linen and Mylar copies. If the final plan is disapproved or is recommended for
disapproval, reasons for such action shall be explicitly stated and, if deemed
necessary, any modifications required by the City Planning Commission as
prerequisites to approval of the final plan shall be noted on the final plan,
which shall be distributed as follows:
         (a)   One copy to the Director of Public Works.
         (b)   Three copies to the County Planning Commission for County
endorsement.
         (c)   One copy to the engineer, surveyor or land planner of the
subdivider or his agent.
         (d)   One copy to be filed in the Registry Office of the City.
         (e)   A Mylar reproduction to be filed with the Planning Commission or
Director of Community Development.
         (f)   One copy to be filed with the City Zoning Administrator.
8.   Editor's Note: Amended during codification (see
Ch. 1, General Provisions, Part 2).
§ 515-309. Performance/maintenance guarantees.
[Amended 5-29-2001 by Ord. No. 14-2001; 2-27-2017 by Ord. No. 11-2017]
   A.   Before the City Planning Commission approves any final plan and as a
prerequisite for approval, the subdivider shall deliver to the City Planning
Commission or Director of Community Development, who will forward to the
Finance Director, a performance guarantee in the amount of 110% of the cost of
all public improvements required by this chapter, as estimated by the Director
of Public Works, in a form and with a surety approved by the City Solicitor or
such other collateral as the Planning Commission, with the approval of City
Council, shall deem sufficient under the circumstances, guaranteeing the
construction and installation of all such public improvements within a stated
period, which shall not be longer than one year from the date of final
subdivision approval. Upon written application signed by both the obligor and
surety of performance guarantee, in a form approved by the City Solicitor or
Council, the City Planning Commission may, at its discretion, extend such
period by not more than three additional years or, when the improvements have
been partially completed, reduce proportionately the amount of the performance
guarantee by formal resolution.
   B.   Before the City Planning Commission approves any final plan and as a
prerequisite for approval, the subdivider shall also deliver to the Planning
Commission a maintenance guarantee in an amount of not less than 5% of the
Director of Public Works' estimate of the cost of all improvements required by
this chapter, guaranteeing that the subdivider shall maintain all such
improvements in good condition for a period of one year after the completion of
construction and installation of all such improvements.
§ 515-310. Recording of final plan.
[Amended 2-27-2017 by Ord. No. 11-2017]
   A.   Within 90 days after endorsement of the final plan by the City and the
County Planning Commissions, the subdivider shall file the record plan with the
County Recorder of Deeds. If the subdivider fails to record the final plan
within such period, the action of the Planning Commission shall be null and
void unless an extension of time is granted in writing by the City Planning
Commission upon the written request of the subdivider. No subdivision plan may
be legally recorded unless it bears the City Planning Commission's approval and
seal and the County Planning Commission's stamp of review. In the event any
such unapproved plan is recorded it shall be considered invalid, and the
Commission shall institute proceedings to have the plan stricken from the
records of the Recorder of Deeds, Berks County.
   B.   Recording the final plan after approval of the Commission shall have
the effect of an irrevocable offer to dedicate all streets and other public
ways shown thereon to the public use and to dedicate or reserve all park
reservations and school sites and other public areas to public use, unless
reserved by the subdivider as hereinafter provided. The approval of the
Commission shall not impose any duty upon the City concerning maintenance or
improvement of any such dedicated streets, parks, areas or portions of same
until the proper authorities of the City shall have actual appropriation of the
same by entry, use or improvement. However, the subdivider may place a notation
on the final plan to the effect that there is no offer of dedication of certain
designated streets or other public areas to the public use, in which event the
title to such ways and other lands shall remain with the owner, and the county
and local authorities shall assume no responsibility for improvement or
maintenance thereof, which fact shall also be noted on the final plan.
§ 515-311. Release from improvement guarantee.
[Amended 2-27-2017 by Ord. No. 11-2017]
   A.   When the subdivider or developer has completed all of the necessary and
appropriate improvements, he shall notify the City Planning Commission, in
writing, by certified or registered mail, of the completion of the aforesaid
improvements and shall send a copy thereof to the Director of Public Works. The
Planning Commission or its representative shall, within 10 days after receipt
of such notice, direct and authorize the Director of Public Works to inspect
all of the aforesaid improvements. The Director of Public Works shall,
thereupon, file a report, in writing, with the City Planning Commission and
shall promptly mail a copy of the same to the developer by certified or
registered mail. The report shall be made and mailed 30 days after receipt by
the Director of Public Works of the aforesaid authorization from the City
Planning Commission; the report shall be detailed and shall indicate approval
or rejection of such improvements, either in whole or in part, and if such
improvements or any portion thereof shall not be approved or shall be rejected
by the Director of Public Works, such report shall contain a statement of the
reasons for such nonapproval or rejection. [Amended 5-29-2001 by Ord. No. 14-
2001]
   B.   The City Planning Commission or its representative shall notify the
developer, in writing, by certified or registered mail, of the action of the
Planning Commission with relation thereto.
   C.   If any portion of the improvements shall not be approved or shall be
rejected by the City Planning Commission, the developer shall proceed to
complete the same and, upon completion, the same procedure of notification as
outlined herein shall be followed.
   D.   In the event that any improvements which may be required have not been
installed as provided in this chapter or in accord with the approved final
plan, the Planning Commission or its representative is hereby granted the power
to enforce any corporate bond or other security by appropriate legal and
equitable remedies. If proceeds of such bond or other security are insufficient
to pay the cost of installing or making repairs or corrections to all the
improvements covered by such security, Council may, at its option, install part
of such improvements in all or part of the subdivision or land development and
may institute appropriate legal or equitable action to recover the moneys
necessary to complete the remainder of the improvements. All of the proceeds,
whether resulting from the security or from any legal or equitable action
brought against the developer, or both, shall be used solely for the
installation of the improvements covered by such security and not for any other
City purpose.
§ 515-312.   Plans exempted from standard procedures. [Added 3-22-2021 by Ord.
No. 22-2021]
   A.   Annexation Plans: Where the sole purpose of the proposed plan is to
annex one or more lots or parcels to an adjacent lot or parcel, the applicant
shall comply with the following procedures:
      (1)   A preliminary/final plan shall be submitted and reviewed in
accordance with the provisions specified under Sections
515-307 and
515-403 of this Chapter.
      (2)   The proposed annexation plan shall indicate that the purpose of the
plan is for annexation purposes only and that no new building lots are proposed
as a result of the annexation plan.
      (3)   Where appropriate, the lots or parcels of land affected by the
annexation shall be joined as a common deed and new deed descriptions shall be
prepared for recording purposes.
   B.   Revised Plan of Record: Any revision, replatting or resubdivision of
land that includes changes to the most recently approved final and recorded
plan shall be considered a revised plan of record and shall be prepared in
accordance with the following procedures:
      (1)   A preliminary/final plan shall be submitted and reviewed in
accordance with the provisions specified under Sections
515-307 and
515-403 of this Chapter.
      (2)   Lot line revisions from those on the approved final and recorded
plan may be considered, provided that in making such revisions: no lot or tract
of land shall be created or sold pursuant to this Subsection that does not
comply with the minimum lot area or lot width required by
Chapter 600, Zoning; the easements or rights-of-way shall not be changed; the
street locations and block sizes shall not be changed; no lot or tract of land
shall be created that does not have proper access or abut an existing or
proposed street; the area devoted to open space and recreational areas shall
not be reduced.
      (3)   The revised plan of record shall specifically identify that this
plan shall supersede the previously approved final and recorded plan.
   C.   Minor Subdivision Plans: Where the sole purpose of a plan is to create
a minor subdivision with five (5) or fewer residential lots containing one (1)
principal building per lot, with minor improvements or related impacts, a minor
subdivision plan shall be prepared in accordance with the following procedures:
      (1)   The applicant shall meet with the assigned staff members and any
appointed consultants designated by the City of Reading to determine if the
application qualifies as a minor subdivision.
      (2)   A preliminary/final plan shall be submitted and reviewed in
accordance with Sections
515-307 and
515-403 of this Chapter.
   D.   Minor Land Development Plans: Where the sole purpose of the plan is to
develop a lot or tract of land with minor improvements or related impacts, a
minor land development plan shall be prepared in accordance with the following
procedures:
      (1)   The applicant shall meet with the assigned staff members and any
appointed consultants designated by the City of Reading to determine if the
land development plan qualifies as a minor land development.
      (2)   A minor land development plan may be considered provided that: the
development of a property involves the construction, expansion or redevelopment
of a building that is not more than 2,500 square feet of gross floor area; the
area of disturbance is less than 5,000 square feet of land area; any change of
use will require minimal site improvements; the project does not involve any
new street or road or the extension of municipal facilities, will not adversely
affect the remainder of the parcel or adjoining properties, and will not
conflict with any provision or portion of the Master Plan, Official Map,
Chapter 600, Zoning, or this Chapter.
      (3)   A minor land development plan may be waived provided that: the
development of a property is less than 800 square feet; the expansion of the
existing building does not exceed more than five (5) percent of the total
existing gross floor area; the development is connected to sanitary sewage
disposal facilities and water supply facilities with adequate capacities; the
existing building complies with the dimensional requirements of
Chapter 600, Zoning; and there will be no adverse impacts to the remainder of
the parcel or adjoining properties.
      (4)   If the development qualifies as a minor land development, a
preliminary/final land development plan shall be submitted and reviewed in
accordance with Sections
515-307 and
515-403 of this Chapter.
   E.   Special Zoning Approvals: The Planning Commission or its representative
shall review applications that are required, pursuant to the written conditions
of a decision granting a zoning variance, special exception or conditional use,
to be reviewed for compliance with the provisions of this Chapter; applications
that are required to be reviewed by the Planning Commission pursuant to
Chapter 600, Zoning; or other applications that are referred to the Planning
Commission by the Zoning Administrator.
   F.   Preliminary/Final Plan Applications: All plans that qualify as
"exempted from standard procedures" may be submitted as a preliminary/final
plan to the City of Reading. The applicant or developer shall be responsible
for all plan requirements and shall submit to the City of Reading the required
fees for a preliminary plan or final plan, whichever is greater.
   G.   Major Plans: All applications that exceed the parameters established by
this section shall be classified as "major plans" and shall be subject to the
provisions of this Chapter.
§ 515-313.   Conditional plan approval. [Added 3-22-2021 by Ord. No. 22-2021]
   A.   The Planning Commission may consider the approval of a final or
preliminary/final plan with conditions, which shall be incorporated into the
motion of approval or resolution. All such conditions of approval shall
reference the applicable section of this Chapter.
   B.   All conditions of final plan approval, including any required approvals
or permits from other agencies having jurisdiction, shall be capable of being
resolved within ninety (90) days from the date of municipal approval by the
City Planning Commission.
   C.   The Planning Commission shall designate or authorize representatives of
the Planning Commission and/or staff members to determine if the conditions of
approval have been properly satisfied, as stipulated by the Planning
Commission. A report verifying that the conditions of final plan approval have
been satisfied shall be presented to the Planning Commission.
   D.   The Planning Commission shall not release the approved plan until the
conditions of approval have been resolved to the satisfaction of the City of
Reading. Unless otherwise required by the City of Reading, the approved final
plan including all plan sheets and agreements shall be recorded with the Berks
County Recorder of Deeds.
§ 515-314.   Support agencies. [Added 3-22-2021 by Ord. No. 22-2021]
   A.   All applications for subdivision or land development shall be subject
to the review and approval of any department, organization or agency affiliated
with the City of Reading.
   B.   All applications for subdivision or land development shall be generally
consistent with all pertinent plans, studies and reports that have been adopted
by the City of Reading. If a conflict does exist, the Planning Commission shall
consider reasonable alternatives or prescribe remedies to resolve the conflict.
   C.   All applications for subdivision or land development shall be subject
to the review and approval of any county, state or federal agency with
jurisdiction. The applicant or developer shall be responsible for all
applications, fees, permits and approvals that may be required by other
agencies. This review and approval process shall be completed to the
satisfaction of the Planning Commission prior to municipal approval.
Part 4
Plan Requirements
§ 515-401. Sketch plans.
   A.   The scale and sheet size of the sketch plan of a proposed subdivision
shall be as required in §
515-402 for preliminary plans. The sketch plan shall contain at least the
following data, legibly drawn to scale but not necessarily showing precise
dimensions:
      (1)   Tract boundaries, accurately labeled.
      (2)   Name of the municipality and county in which the subdivision is
located.
      (3)   North point.
      (4)   Written and graphic scales.
      (5)   Significant topographical and physical features.
      (6)   Proposed general street and lot layout.
   B.   A letter of intent explaining the concept of development should be
filed with the sketch plan.
   C.   The Berks County Soil and Water Conservation District shall be
consulted by the subdivider where the sketch plan would indicate advice on
erosion and sediment control.
§ 515-402. Preliminary plans.
[Amended 3-22-2021 by Ord. No. 22-2021]
   A.   Preliminary plan applications shall be subject to the following
drafting or general layout standards:
      (1)   The preliminary plan shall be clearly and legibly drawn to a scale
of one (1) inch equals fifty (50) feet, except under the following conditions:
         (a)   The plan may be drawn at a scale of one (1) inch equaling one
hundred (100) feet if the average size of the proposed lots within the
subdivision is five (5) acres or larger.
         (b)   The plan may be drawn at a scale of one (1) inch equaling twenty
(20) feet if the frontage or average frontage or lot width is less than fifty
(50) feet.
         (c)   The plan may be prepared at a scale ranging between one (1) inch
equaling twenty (20) feet and one (1) inch equaling fifty (50) feet if the
applicant can sufficiently demonstrate that the scale is necessary to depict
the amount of detail required by this Chapter while conforming with the
provisions for permitted sheet sizes.
         (d)   Alternate plan scales that may include a range between one (1)
inch equaling twenty (20) feet to one (1) inch equaling one hundred (100) feet
shall be subject to the review and approval of the Planning Commission.
      (2)   The plan and all submitted prints shall be made on sheets no
smaller than twenty-four (24) inches by thirty-six (36) inches and no greater
than thirty (30) inches by forty-two (42) inches.
   B.   All dimensions shall be shown in feet and hundredths of a foot.
   C.   If the preliminary plan requires more than one sheet, a key diagram
showing relative location of the several sections shall be drawn on each sheet
and appropriately labeled with match lines.
   D.   The preliminary plan shall show:
      (1)   Name of the proposed subdivision or land development or otherwise
identifying title other than the name of the property owner and of the City.
      (2)   North point, graphic scale, written scale and date, including the
month, day and year that the original drawing was completed, and the month,
date and year that the original drawing was revised for each revision.
      (3)   Name and address of the record owner.
      (4)   Name and address of the subdivider or land developer if different
from record owner.
      (5)   Name, address, license number and seal of the registered engineer
or surveyor responsible for the subdivision plan.
      (6)   Names of all abutting subdivisions or developments, if any, and
names of all adjacent unplatted land, with the Deed Book, volume and page
numbers where recorded.
      (7)   The ward, block and lot number from the City's Official Tax Map.
      (8)   A key map, for the purpose of locating the property being
subdivided, drawn at a scale of one inch equals 800 feet and showing the
relation of the property, differentiated by tone or pattern, to adjoining
property and to all streets, roads, municipal boundaries and recorded
subdivision plans existing within 1,000 feet of any part of the property.
      (9)   In the case of a subdivision or development located less than 3,000
feet from the boundaries of the City, the name and approximate distance of all
cities, boroughs and townships within the three-thousand-foot perimeter must be
indicated. A title, scale, North point, date and drawing of the boundary line
of the City for a reasonable distance shall be indicated.
      (10)   Where the preliminary plan submitted covers only a part of the
subdivider's or developer's entire holding, a sketch of the prospective future
street system of the submitted part shall be furnished, and the street system
of the submitted part shall be considered in the light of adjustments and
connections with future streets in the part not submitted.
      (11)   Total tract boundaries of the property being subdivided or
developed, showing bearings and distances, and a statement of total acreage of
the property.
      (12)   Zoning data, including all of the following which are applicable:
         (a)   Zoning district lines, existing and proposed, shall be provided.
A separate print of the plan may be submitted showing this information. Bulk
and use regulations shall be provided on the standard form application for
review of a preliminary plan.
         (b)   Any changes in the existing zoning proposed to be requested by
the subdivider or developer or owner.
         (c)   Requirement for the lot size and front yard of the subdivision
or development.
      (13)   Contour lines at vertical intervals of at least two feet for land
with average natural slope of 4% or less and at intervals of at least five feet
for land with average natural slope exceeding 4%. For slopes of less than 1%,
the Planning Commission may require spot elevations at all high and low points
and/or a designated survey grid.
      (14)   Location and elevation of the datum to which contour elevations
refer. The datum used shall be from a known source or established benchmark
that is acceptable to the City of Reading.
      (15)   All existing sewer lines, water lines, fire hydrants, utility
transmission lines, culverts, bridges, railroad, watercourses and other
significant man-made or natural features within the proposed subdivision or
development and within 50 feet from the boundaries of the proposed subdivision.
      (16)   All existing buildings or other structures and the approximate
location of all existing tree masses and/or individual trees over eight inches
in diameter within the proposed subdivision or development.
      (17)   All existing streets, including streets of record, recorded but
not constructed, on or abutting the tract, including names, right-of-way
widths, cartway or pavement widths and approximate grades.
      (18)   The full plan of proposed development, including:
         (a)   Location and width of all proposed streets and rights-of-way,
with a statement of any condition governing their use.
         (b)   Suggested street names and public utility and private easement
locations.
         (c)   The proposed building reserve setback lines for each lot along
each street, and in the case of land developments, the proposed placement of
each building, in accordance with requirements set forth in
Chapter 600, Zoning.
         (d)   Lot lines with approximate dimensions.
         (e)   A statement of the intended use of all nonresidential lots and
parcels.
         (f)   A statement of the total number of lots and parcels.
         (g)   Sanitary and storm sewers and other drainage facilities, with
the size and material of each indicated, and any proposed connections with
existing facilities.
         (h)   Parks, playgrounds and other areas dedicated or reserved for
public use, with any conditions governing such use.
      (19)   Location of soil percolation test holes as may be required by §
515-404.
         (a)   Whenever required under Subsection E(4) hereof, the location and
types of erosion and sediment control measures as outlined in §§
515-508D and 515-602K.9
   E.   The preliminary plan shall be accompanied by the following
supplementary data, as applicable:
      (1)   Typical street cross-section drawing(s) for all proposed streets.
Cross-section drawings may be shown on either the preliminary plan or on the
profile sheets required by this section.
      (2)   Tentative profiles along top of cartway or pavement edges or along
the top of curb for both sides of each proposed street shown on the preliminary
plan. Such profiles shall show natural and finished grades at one of the
following sets of scales or any combination thereof:
         (a)   One inch equals 10 feet horizontal and one inch equals one foot
vertical;
         (b)   One inch equals 20 feet horizontal and one inch equals four feet
vertical;
         (c)   One inch equals 40 feet horizontal and one inch equals four feet
vertical; or
         (d)   One inch equals 50 feet horizontal and one inch equals five feet
vertical.
      (3)   In lieu of the separate profile sheets required by Subsection E(2)
hereof, the tentative finished cartway or pavement edge or top of curb grades
for both sides of each street may be labeled on the preliminary plan.
      (4)   Where deemed necessary by the Planning Commission or its
representative, a plan for the surface drainage of the tract to be subdivided.
Such plan shall include stormwater runoff calculations for the entire property
being subdivided as required by the Director of Public Works and shall show the
proposed method of accommodating the anticipated runoff, and shall be subject
to approval by the Planning Commission or its nominee. Recommendations for
controlling erosion and sedimentation should be obtained from the Berks County
Soil Conservation District. [Amended 5-29-2001 by Ord. No. 14-2001]
      (5)   Preliminary designs of any bridges or culverts which may be
required. Such designs shall meet all applicable requirements of the
Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection and/or the Pennsylvania
Department of Transportation and shall be subject to approval by the Planning
Commission or its nominee.
      (6)   When bridge construction, floodplain areas or stream rechanneling
are involved in a subdivision or land development proposal, the plans shall be
submitted to the Bureau of Dams and Encroachments, Pennsylvania Department of
Environmental Protection (DAMS), for recommendations and approval. [Amended 5-
29-2001 by Ord. No. 14-2001]
      (7)   A solid waste management plan must be shown on the plan in accord
with the provisions of §
515-508E. 10
      (8)   A map showing the location of the proposed subdivision and/or land
development with respect to the City's flood-prone areas, including information
on, but not limited to, the regulatory flood, one-hundred year-elevations,
boundaries of flood-prone areas, proposed lots and sites, fills, flood or
erosion protective facilities and areas subject to special deed restrictions.
      (9)   Where the subdivision and/or land development lies partially or
completely in the flood-prone areas, or where the subdivision and/or land
development borders on the flood-prone areas, the preliminary plan map shall
include detailed information giving the location and elevation of proposed
roads, public utilities, and building sites. All such maps shall also show
contours at intervals of two or five feet, depending upon the slope of the
land, and identify accurately the boundaries of the flood-prone areas.
      (10)   Three copies of the subdivision sewage disposal report whenever
soil percolation tests are required by §
515-404.
9.   Editor's Note: Amended during codification (see
Ch. 1, General Provisions, Part 2).
10.   Editor's Note: Amended during codification (see
Ch. 1, General Provisions, Part 2).
§ 515-403. Final plans.
[Amended 9-20-1978 by Ord. No. 35-1978]
   A.   The final plan shall include all information as required for
preliminary plans under §
515-402 and the following:
      (1)   The source(s) of title to the land being subdivided or developed,
as shown by the records of the County Recorder of Deeds. City requires signed
affidavit on the plan.
      (2)   The total tract boundary lines of the area being subdivided or
developed with accurate distances to hundredths of a foot and bearings to 1/
4 of a minute. These boundaries shall be determined by accurate survey in the
field, which shall be balanced and close with an error of closure not to exceed
one foot in 10,000 feet; provided, however, that the boundary(ies) adjoining
additional unplatted land of the subdivider, for example, between separately
submitted final plan sections, are not required to be based upon field survey
and may be calculated. These closure computations shall accompany the final
plan being placed on the linen or tracing cloth when possible. The location and
elevation of all boundary line or perimeter monuments shall be indicated, along
with a statement of the total area of the property being subdivided or
developed. In addition, the engineer's or surveyor's seal shall certify to the
accuracy of the survey, the drawn plan and the placement of the monuments.
      (3)   The following data for the cartway edges or curblines and right-of-
way lines of all recorded, except those which are to be vacated, and/or
proposed streets and for the right-of-way lines of all existing streets within
the property.
         (a)   The length, in feet and hundredths of a foot, of all straight
lines and any two functions of a chord of all curved lines.
         (b)   The width, in feet, of the cartway, right-of-way and, if
required, of the ultimate right-of-way and, in degrees, minutes and quarters of
a minute, of the delta angle of all curved lines, including curved lot lines.
      (4)   All lot lines shall be completely dimensioned in feet if straight,
and if curved, by designating length of arc and radius in feet and central
angle in degrees, minutes and seconds. All internal angles within the lots
shall be designated to the closest second.
      (5)   Lot numbers, numbered consecutively.
      (6)   A statement of the intended use of all nonresidential lots or, in
the case of land developments, building units, with reference to restrictions
of any type which exist or will exist as covenants in the deed for the lots or
units contained in the subdivision and, if covenants are recorded, including
the book and page number from the County Deed Book.
      (7)   The location and elevation, if established, of all existing and
proposed street monuments.
      (8)   All easements or rights-of-way where provided for or owned by
public services or private agreement and any limitations on such easements or
rights-of-way. Rights- of-way shall be shown and accurately identified on the
plan, and easements shall either be shown or specifically described on the
plan. Easements should be located in cooperation with the appropriate public
utilities.
      (9)   Location, size and invert elevation of all sanitary and/or storm
sewers and location of all manholes, inlets and culverts; this data may be
submitted as a separate plan.
      (10)   The location and width of all private driveways.
      (11)   The location and types of erosion and sediment control measures
prepared.
      (12)   If the subdivision or development proposes a new street
intersection with a state legislative route, the intersection permit number(s)
issued by the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation shall be indicated for
all such intersections.
      (13)   A certification of ownership, acknowledgment of plan and offer of
dedication shall be lettered on the plan and shall be duly acknowledged and
signed by the owner(s) of the property and notarized.
      (14)   A certificate for approval of the plan by the City Planning
Commission or its nominee shall be lettered on the plan.
      (15)   A blank space measuring 3 1/2 inches by 5 1/2 inches shall be left
along the lower edge of the sheet in order that the County Planning Commission
may acknowledge receipt and review of the plan prior to it being recorded.
      (16)   A blank space measuring three inches square shall be left along
the lower edge of the sheet in order that the County Recorder of Deeds may
acknowledge receipt and recording of the plan when it is presented.
   B.   The final plan shall be accompanied by the following supplementary data
where applicable:
      (1)   Typical street cross-section drawing(s) for all proposed streets.
Cross-section drawings may be shown either on the final plan or on the profile
sheets required by §
515-402E(2).
      (2)   Profile sheets for all proposed streets within the tract. Such
profiles shall show at least the following information, properly labeled:
         (a)   Existing, natural grade profile along both topographical
curblines of each street.
         (b)   Proposed finished grade of the center line, or proposed finished
grade at the top of both curbs, or proposed finished grade at both cartway
edges.
         (c)   The length of all vertical curves.
         (d)   Existing and proposed sanitary sewer mains and manholes.
         (e)   Existing and proposed storm sewer mains, inlets, manholes and
culverts.
      (3)   The profile sheets required by Subsection B(1) hereof shall be
legibly drawn at one of the sets of scales required for preliminary plans under
§
515-402E(2).
      (4)   In addition to the evidence required by Subsection B(8) hereof,
evidence shall be submitted by the subdivider or developer that any changes
requested in the existing zoning provisions have been approved according to the
procedures specified in
Chapter 600, Zoning.
      (5)   All offers of dedication and covenants governing the reservation
and maintenance of undedicated open space, which shall bear the certificate of
approval of the City Solicitor as to their legal sufficiency.
      (6)   Such private deed restrictions, including building setback lines,
as may be imposed upon the property as a condition to sale, together with a
statement of any restrictions previously imposed which may affect the title to
the land being subdivided or developed.
      (7)   Whenever a subdivider or developer proposes to establish a street
which is not offered for dedication to public use, the City Planning Commission
shall require the subdivider to submit, and also to record with the plan, a
copy of an agreement made with the City on behalf of his heirs and assigns, and
signed by the City Solicitor, and which shall establish the conditions under
which the street may later be offered for dedication, and shall stipulate,
among other things:
         (a)   That the street shall conform to the City's specifications or
that the owners of the abutting lots shall include with the offer of dedication
sufficient money, as estimated by the Director of Public Works, to restore the
street to conformance with the City's specifications. [Amended 5-29-2001 by
Ord. No. 14-2001]
         (b)   That an offer to dedicate the street shall be made only for the
street as a whole.
         (c)   That the method of assessing repair costs be as stipulated.
         (d)   That agreement by the owner(s) of 51% of the front footage
thereon shall be binding on the owners of the remaining lots.
      (8)   Where lot sizes are based on public water and/or public sewer
facilities, assurance acceptable to the Planning Commission that such
facilities shall be installed in accordance with approved plans and the
subdivision and/or land development agreement.
      (9)   A solid waste management plan shown on the final plan in accord
with §
515-508E. 11
      (10)   The City Planning Commission or its representatives may require a
subdivider to submit a separate landscape plan showing the number, location,
size and species of all shrubbery that will be planted on the lot.
      (11)   A map showing the location of the proposed subdivision and/or land
development with respect to the City's flood-prone areas, including information
on the one- hundred-year flood elevations, the boundaries of flood-prone areas,
proposed lots and sites, fills, flood or erosion protective facilities and
areas subject to special deed restrictions.
      (12)   Submission of the final plan shall also be accompanied by all
required permits and related documentation from the Department of Environmental
Protection and any other commonwealth agency or local municipality where any
alteration or relocation of a stream or watercourse is proposed. In addition,
documentation shall be submitted indicating that all affected adjacent
municipalities have been notified of the proposed alteration or relocation. The
Department of Community and Economic Development and the Federal Insurance
Administrator shall also be notified whenever such activity is proposed.
[Amended 5-29-2001 by Ord. No. 14-2001]
11.   Editor's Note: Amended during codification (see
Ch. 1, General Provisions, Part 2).
§ 515-404. Soil percolation test requirements.
   A.   Soil percolation tests shall be performed for all subdivisions or
developments wherein buildings at the time of construction will not be
connected to a live community sanitary sewage disposal system.
   B.   Soil percolation tests shall be made at a minimum rate of one test hole
per acre and in accordance with the procedure required by the Pennsylvania
Department of Environmental Protection, Title 25, Pennsylvania Code, Rules and
Regulations, Chapter 73, and administered by a certified sewage enforcement
officer. [Amended 5-29-2001 by Ord. No. 14-2001]
   C.   A sufficient number of soil tests shall be taken to a depth of seven
feet or to the top of the limiting zone, whichever is less, which take into
account all meaningful engineering and soils data. These tests shall be
conducted to determine the presence and actual depth of the limiting zones and
shall be administered by a certified sewage enforcement officer.
   D.   The results of the soil percolation tests and soil test pits shall be
entered on three copies of the site investigation and percolation test report
for on-lot disposal of sewage. The affected subdivider shall also complete
three copies of the plan revision module for subdivisions and land
developments, the form being available from the Pennsylvania Department of
Environmental Protection office. The developer is then instructed to distribute
two copies of each form to the City certified Sewage Enforcement Officer.
[Amended 5-29-2001 by Ord. No. 14-2001]
   E.   The City certified Sewage Enforcement Officer shall then review the
submitted information and recommend to Council whether or not a sewage plan
revision is necessary and, if applicable, recommend whether or not the City
should adopt a resolution amending the City sewer plan and approving the
concept of the proposed sewage disposal system for the proposed subdivision.
   F.   The City Sewage Enforcement Officer, after the above review has been
completed, shall forward the adopted resolution and all other applicable
information to the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection for
review and comments on site suitability in accordance with Title 25,
Pennsylvania Code, Rules and Regulations, Chapter 71, § 71.15, Subchapter B.
[Amended 5-29-2001 by Ord. No. 14-2001]
   G.   The issuance of permits to permit on-site sanitary sewage disposal
shall be made by the City Sewage Enforcement Officer in accordance with Title
25, Pennsylvania Code, Rules and Regulations, Chapter 71, Subchapter C.
§ 515-405.   Impact studies.
[Added 3-22-2021 by Ord. No. 22-2021]
   A.   If required by the Planning Commission, the applicant shall prepare and
submit the following relevant reports with the preliminary or final plan
application:
      (1)   Environmental Impact Assessment Report.
      (2)   Community and Fiscal Impact Assessment Report.
      (3)   Traffic Impact Assessment Report.
      (4)   Parking and Loading Impact Assessment Report.
      (5)   Park and Recreation Impact Assessment Report.
   B.   The required impact studies that are relevant to the plan application
shall document the existing conditions and the proposed impacts that should be
considered as a result of the development being built or implemented over a 5-
year implementation period. The report shall include recommendations and
conclusions on how impacts and implications associated with the development
shall be overcome.
   C.   If required by the Planning Commission, the applicant or developer
shall meet with local or regional agencies in order to assess: zoning and land
use; historic and cultural resources; environmental features, ecological
habitats; community facilities, emergency management services; utilities;
flooding; stormwater management; pedestrian circulation; public transportation;
parking and loading; and transportation. If appropriate, the plan should
address the community development objectives within the City of Reading.
   D.   The applicant may offer a financial contribution in order to offset
community related impacts or improvement costs that are relative to a
neighborhood, municipal or regional project. All such contributions shall be
made to implement the action plans for community planning and development that
have been adopted by the City of Reading. The validity of the contributions
shall be reviewed by the legal staff or consultants representing the City of
Reading.
§ 515-406. As-built plans or improvement plans.
[Added 3-22-2021 by Ord. No. 22-2021]
   A.   Upon the completion of all site improvements required by the approved
final plan and subsequent improvements agreement, the applicant or any
successor of interest to the applicant, shall supply the City of Reading with a
complete set of as-built plans or improvement plans for the entire tract
showing all lot lines as deeded and all surface and subsurface improvements as
actually constructed for the development.
   B.   Unless otherwise permitted by the City of Reading, the as-built plans
or improvement plans shall be prepared at the same scale as the approved final
plan. The applicant or any successor of interest shall meet with the authorized
representatives of the City of Reading to discuss the requirements for the as-
built plan or improvement plan.
   C.   The as-built plans shall be made on plan sheets no smaller than twenty-
four (24) inches by thirty-six (36) inches and no greater than thirty (30)
inches by forty-two (42) inches. The plan sheets shall be scanned and provided
to the City of Reading as a PDF or other acceptable electronic format.
   D.   The applicant or any successor of interest to the applicant shall
submit the as-built plans or improvement plans to the City of Reading for
review and consideration prior to the acceptance of any municipal improvements
within the development. The as-built plan or improvement plan shall accurately
depict all features and site improvements, including: street cartway, turning
lanes and rights-of-way; curbs, sidewalks, crosswalks and handicapped ramps;
driveways and curb cuts; street monuments and property markers; sanitary sewage
disposal facilities; water supply facilities; public utilities; stormwater
management facilities; erosion and sedimentation control facilities; street
lights, traffic control signs, street signs and streetscape improvements; parks
and recreation facilities; common open space; principal and accessory building;
lot lines; street addresses; parking and loading areas; landscaping, street
trees and buffer yards; easements and right-of-ways; and other additional
information required by the City of Reading.
   E.   The City of Reading shall review the as-built plans to determine if
they are complete and acceptable. Upon determining that the as-built plans are
acceptable, the applicant or developer shall provide the City of Reading with
three (3) paper copies and a PDF or other electronic format that is acceptable
to the City of Reading.
Part 5
Design Standards
§ 515-501. Application and general standards. [Amended 9-20-1978 by Ord. No.
35-1978]
   A.   The standards and requirements contained in this Part 5 and in Part 6
are intended as the minimum for the promotion of the public health, safety and
general welfare, and shall be applied as such by the Planning Commission in
reviewing all subdivision plans.
   B.   Whenever other City ordinances or regulations impose more restrictive
standards and requirements than those contained herein, such other regulations
shall be observed.
   C.   Land subject to hazards to life, health or property, such as may arise
from fire, floods, disease or other causes, shall not be subdivided for
building purposes unless such hazards have been eliminated or unless the
subdivision plan shall show adequate safeguards against them which shall be
approved by the appropriate regulatory agencies.
      (1)   Where not prohibited by this or any other laws or ordinances, land
located in flood- prone area(s) may be platted for development with the
provision that the developer construct all buildings and structures to preclude
flood damage in accordance with this and any other laws and ordinances
regulating such development.
      (2)   Building sites for residences or any other type of dwelling or
accommodation shall not be permitted in any floodway area. Sites for these uses
may be permitted outside the floodway area if the sites or dwelling units are
elevated to a height at least one foot above the elevation of the one-hundred-
year flood. If fill is used to raise the elevation of a site, the fill area
shall extend out laterally for a distance of at least 15 feet beyond the limits
of the proposed structures.
      (3)   Building sites for structures or buildings other than for
residential uses shall also not be permitted in any floodway area. Also, such
sites for structures or buildings outside the floodway shall be protected as
provided for in Subsection C(2) hereof. However, Council may allow the
subdivision and/or development of areas or sites for commercial and industrial
uses at an elevation less than one foot above the one- hundred-year flood
elevation if the developer otherwise protects the area to that height or
assures that the buildings or structures will be floodproofed at least up to
that height.
      (4)   If the Planning Commission determines that only a part of a
proposed plat can be safely developed, it shall limit development to that part
and shall require that development proceed consistent with this determination.
      (5)   When a developer does not intend to develop the plat himself and
the Planning Commission determines that additional controls are required to
ensure safe development, it may require the developer to impose appropriate
deed restrictions on the land. Such deed restrictions shall be inserted in
every deed and noted on every recorded plat.
   D.   Subdivision plans shall give due recognition to the Comprehensive Plans
and Official Maps of the City and of the County or to such parts thereof as may
have been adopted pursuant to statute.
   E.   Land proposed for subdivision shall not be developed or changed by
grading, excavating or by the removal or destruction of the natural topsoil,
trees or other vegetative cover unless adequate provisions for minimizing
erosion and sediment are provided as required under Title 25, Pennsylvania
Code, Chapter 102, Rules and Regulations of the Pennsylvania Department of
Environmental Protection and §§
515-508D and 515-602K. [Amended 5-29-2001 by Ord. No. 14-200112]
   F.   All elevations shall be based on City datum.
12.   Editor's Note: Amended during codification (see
Ch. 1, General Provisions, Part 2).
§ 515-502. Streets.
   A.   General standards.
      (1)   The location and width of all streets shall conform to the official
plans or to such parts thereof as may have been adopted by the City.
      (2)   The proposed street system shall extend existing or recorded
streets at the width of the street standards specified in Subsection B hereof.
      (3)   Where, in the opinion of the Planning Commission or its
representative, it is desirable to provide for street access to adjoining
property, streets shall be extended by dedication to the boundary of such
property.
      (4)   New minor or local streets shall be laid out to conform as much as
possible to the topography, to discourage use by through traffic, to permit
efficient drainage and utility systems, and to require the minimum number of
streets necessary to provide convenient and safe access to property. The
subdivider shall also give adequate consideration to provision for the
extension and continuation of major and collector streets into and from
adjoining properties.
      (5)   Subdivisions that adjoin or include existing streets that do not
conform to width or alignment as shown on the official plans or the street
width requirements of this chapter shall dedicate additional width along either
one or both sides of such road. If the subdivision is along one side only, the
subdivider shall provide the extra width deemed necessary by the Planning
Commission or its representatives and/or the Director of Public Works along the
fronts of the lots being subdivided. [Amended 5-29-2001 by Ord. No. 14-2001]
      (6)   The finished elevation of proposed streets shall not be more than
the one foot below the regulatory flood elevation. The Planning Commission may
require, where necessary, profiles and elevations of streets to determine
compliance with the requirement. Drainage openings shall be sufficient to
discharge flood flows without unduly increasing flood heights. [Amended 9-20-
1978 by Ord. No. 35-1978]
   B.   Street widths.
      (1)   Minimum street right-of-way and cartway or pavement widths shall be
as shown on the official plans or Comprehensive Plan or, if not shown on such
plans, shall be as follows:
Street Type Required Widths
            (feet)
Street Type                 Required Widths
                            (feet)
Arterial street
Right-of-way                80
Cartway                     48(b)
Collector street
Right-of-way                60
Cartway                     36(a)(b)
Minor street
Right-of-way                40(c)
Cartway                     24(c)
Marginal access street
Right-of-way                40(c)
Cartway                     24(c)
Permanent cul-de-sac street
Right-of-way                40(c)
Cartway                     24(c)
 
Notes:
         (a)   As specified in the official plans or Comprehensive Plan, or as
determined after consulting with the City, the County Planning Commission and
the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation.
         (b)   No on-street parking.
         (c)   If on-street parking is desired, the minimum right-of-way and
cartway width shall be increased to 60 feet and 36 feet, respectively.
      (2)   Additional right-of-way and cartway widths may be required by the
Planning Commission for the purpose of promoting the public safety and
convenience or to provide parking in commercial and industrial areas and in
areas of high-density residential development.
   C.   Restriction of access.
      (1)   Subdivision abutting arterial streets shall provide a marginal
service road or shall front buildings upon a minor street parallel to the
arterial street and removed from it by the depth of a lot with a buffer strip
for planting or some other means of separation of through and local traffic as
the Planning Commission may deem appropriate.
      (2)   Except as provided in Subsection C(1) hereof, reserve strips shall
be prohibited.
   D.   Street grades.
      (1)   There shall be a minimum center-line grade of 1/2%.
      (2)   Center-line grades shall not exceed the following:
 
Street       Percent
Minor        12%
Collector    10%
Arterial     6%
Intersection 5%
 
      (3)   Grades in excess of the above shall be submitted for study and
approval by the Planning Commission, Planning Director and/or the Director of
Public Works. [Amended 5-29-2001 by Ord. No. 14-2001]
   E.   Horizontal and vertical curves.
      (1)   Horizontal curves. Where connecting street lines deflect from each
other at any one point by more than 10° they shall be connected by a curve with
a radius of not less than 100 feet for minor streets and 300 feet for arterial
and collector streets.
      (2)   Vertical curves. Vertical curves shall be required for streets,
curbs and sidewalks in all instances where the algebraic sum of the grades
exceeds 2 1/2%. Minimum tangent distance shall be determined by multiplying the
differential in grades by 800.
   F.   Intersections.
      (1)   Streets shall intersect as nearly as possible at right angles, and
no street shall intersect another at an angle of less than 60° or more than
120°.
      (2)   No more than two streets shall intersect at the same point.
      (3)   Streets intersecting another street shall either intersect directly
opposite to each other or shall be separated by at least 125 feet between
center lines, measured along the center line of the street being intersected.
      (4)   Intersections shall be approached on all sides by a straight
leveling area, the grade of which shall not exceed 5% within 50 feet of the
intersection of the nearest right-of- way lines.
      (5)   Intersections with major streets shall be located not less than
1,000 feet apart, measured from center line to center line, along the center
line of the major street.
      (6)   Street curb intersections shall be rounded by a tangential arc with
a minimum radius of 13 feet provided that the radius is at least equal to the
width of the sidewalk, and shall be the width of the wider sidewalk area at an
intersection with different sidewalk width. 13
      (7)   Clear sight triangles shall be provided at all street
intersections. Within such triangles, no vision-obstructing objects shall be
permitted which exceed a height of 30 inches above the elevation of the
intersecting streets. Such triangles shall be established from a distance of 75
feet from the point of intersection of the center line.
      (8)   Whenever a portion of the line of such triangle occurs behind,
i.e., from the street, the building reserve setback line, such portion shall be
shown on the final plan of the subdivision and shall be considered a building
reserve setback line.
   G.   Cul-de-sac streets.
      (1)   Dead-end streets are prohibited unless designed as cul-de-sac
streets or designed for future access to adjoining properties.
      (2)   Cul-de-sac streets, permanently designed as such, shall not exceed
400 feet in length and shall not furnish access to more than 20 dwelling units.
Lengths in excess of the above shall be submitted for study and approval by the
Planning Commission, Planning Director and/or the Director of Public Works.
[Amended 5-29-2001 by Ord. No. 14-2001]
      (3)   Unless future extension is clearly impractical or undesirable, the
turnaround right-of- way shall be placed tangentially to the tract boundary
with sufficient additional width provided along the boundary line to permit
extension of the street at full width.
      (4)   All cul-de-sac streets, whether permanently or temporarily designed
as such, shall be provided at the closed end with a fully paved turnaround. The
minimum radius to the pavement edge of the topographical curbline shall be 50
feet, and the minimum radius of the right-of-way line shall be 60 feet. The
sidewalk area within the right-of-way line should conform with the straightway
portion of the street and the curvature of the street.
      (5)   Drainage of cul-de-sac streets shall preferably be towards the open
end. If drainage is toward the closed end, it shall be conducted away in an
underground storm sewer.
      (6)   The center-line grade on a cul-de-sac street shall not exceed 12%,
and the grade of the diameter of the turnaround shall not exceed 5%.
   H.   Service streets (alleys).
      (1)   Service streets are prohibited in subdivisions for single-family
detached residences, except where required to avoid direct driveway access to
major streets.
      (2)   Service streets may be permitted in other types of residential
development, provided that the subdivider produces evidence satisfactory to the
Planning Commission of the need for such service streets, provided these are
not the primary means of access.
      (3)   Where permitted, service streets or alleys in residential
developments shall have a minimum paved width of 20 feet with no parking
permitted.
      (4)   No part of any dwelling, garage or other structure shall be located
within 16 feet of the center line of a service street.
      (5)   Except where other adequate provision is made for off-street
loading and parking consistent with the use proposed, service streets shall be
required in commercial and industrial districts and shall have a minimum paved
width of 22 feet.
   I.   Street names.
      (1)   Proposed streets which are obviously in alignment with others
already existing and named shall bear the name of the existing streets.
      (2)   In no case shall the name of a proposed street duplicate an
existing street name in either the City or the postal district, irrespective of
the use of the suffix street, road, avenue, boulevard, drive, way, place,
court, lane, etc.
      (3)   All street names shall be subject to the approval of the Director
of Public Works and the City Traffic Engineer. [Amended 5-29-2001 by Ord. No.
14-2001]
13.   Editor's Note: See also §
508-601.
§ 515-503. Blocks and sidewalks.
   A.   The length, width and shape of blocks shall be determined with due
regard to:
      (1)   The provision of adequate sites for buildings of the type proposed.
      (2)   Zoning requirements.
      (3)   Topography.
      (4)   Requirements for safe and convenient vehicular and pedestrian
circulation, including the reduction of intersections with major streets.
   B.   Size. Block length and width or acreage within bounding roads shall be
such as to accommodate the size of lot required in the area by
Chapter 600, Zoning, and to provide for convenient access, circulation control
and the safety of vehicular and pedestrian movement. Each block shall have at
least one fire hydrant and as many more as necessary to ensure adequate fire
protection.
   C.   Crosswalks.
      (1)   Crosswalks may be required wherever necessary to facilitate
pedestrian circulation and to give access to community facilities, as well as
in blocks of over 1,000 feet in length.
      (2)   Such crosswalks shall have a minimum width of 10 feet and a paved
walk with a width of not less than six feet.
   D.   Sidewalk slope.
      (1)   Sidewalk slope between curb and building line shall be 0.03 feet
per foot.
      (2)   Where curb grades at intersections meet, sidewalk slope may vary
between a minimum of 0.005 foot per foot and a maximum slope of 0.06 foot per
foot. Change in slope between the curbline and the regular slope of 0.03 foot
per foot shall be accomplished in a distance equal to three times the sidewalk
area with curbline to building line.
   E.   Commercial and industrial blocks.
      (1)   For commercial use, group housing or industrial use, the block size
shall be sufficient in the judgment of the Planning Commission or Planning
Director to meet all area and yard requirements for such use.
      (2)   Adequate service areas shall be provided within the block to
facilitate the flow of pedestrian and vehicular traffic so as not to inhibit
the flow of such traffic on public rights-of-way.
§ 515-504. Lots and parcels.
   A.   All lots created by subdivision shall strictly conform to the
requirements of
Chapter 600, Zoning, as amended. The subdivider shall adhere to the provisions
of
Chapter 600, Zoning, as to area and dimensions, adequacy of space and grade to
provide on-site facilities as required, and other requirements concerning lots
specified in
Chapter 600, Zoning.
   B.   Insofar as is practical, side lot lines shall be at right angles to
straight streets and radial to curved streets.
   C.   Where feasible, lot lines shall follow City boundaries rather than
cross them in order to avoid jurisdictional problems.
   D.   Where extra width has been dedicated for widening of existing streets,
lots shall begin at such extra-width line, and all setbacks shall be measured
from such line.
   E.   Each lot must have frontage on and access from a public or private
street having a right-of- way of at least 40 feet.
   F.   Where there is a question as to the suitability of a lot or lots for
their intended use, due to factors such as rock formations, drainage, flood
conditions or similar causes, the Planning Commission may, after adequate
investigation, withhold approval of the proposed use for such area.
   G.   Whenever approval by the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental
Protection is required for the water supply or sanitary sewage disposal system
(s) for a proposed subdivision, the Planning Commission shall require that a
copy of such approval certification be submitted prior to the recording of a
plan. [Amended 5-29-2001 by Ord. No. 14-2001]
   H.   Where studies by the Planning Commission indicate that construction or
extension of public sanitary trunk sewers to serve the subdivision appears
probable within a reasonably short time, up to five years, the Planning
Commission may permit lot sizes smaller than as specified above, provided that
soil and drainage data submitted with the plan indicate the temporary on-site
sanitary sewage disposal systems will function properly within the subdivision,
and provided that the on-lot system design recognizes potential connection to a
central sewage system, i.e., capped sewer mains and house connections.
§ 515-505. Sanitary sewage disposal.
[Amended 3-22-2021 by Ord. No. 22-2021]
   A.   As part of all subdivision and land development plan applications, the
applicant shall develop a plan for the collection, conveyance and treatment of
waste-water considering the following criteria;
      (1)   The plan for sewage disposal shall be consistent with the most
recent plans and ordinances that have been adopted by the City of Reading and
with the provisions of the Pennsylvania Sewage Facilities Act (PA Act 537, as
amended).
      (2)   The plan for sewage disposal shall consider the recommendations
pertaining to land use, sewage disposal and water supply, as may be contained
within the Sewage Facilities Plan (Act 537 Plan) and/or Comprehensive Plan.
      (3)   The plan for sewage disposal shall be consistent with all
provisions specified and adopted by the City of Reading or other authorities
with jurisdiction.
      (4)   The plan for sewage disposal shall be consistent with all pertinent
design requirements specified by the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental
Protection.
      (5)   The plan for sewage disposal shall be prepared to consider all
pertinent local, regional, state and federal permitting requirements.
   B.   All proposed land uses that are located within a designated sewer
service district or planned growth area shall be required to connect to the
municipal sanitary sewage disposal system subject to the following provisions:
      (1)   The Planning Commission shall not approve a subdivision or land
development plan unless the City of Reading has reviewed such plan and
determined that proposed sanitary sewer improvements are adequate and that any
permits for the sanitary sewer improvements have been issued by the agencies
with jurisdiction.
      (2)   Unless otherwise permitted or required by the City of Reading, all
proposed sanitary sewer improvements shall be located, designed, constructed
and installed in accordance with the sanitary sewer design standards and
specifications that have been adopted by the City of Reading. Where certain
standards and specifications do not exist, the engineer appointed by the City
of Reading shall provide a designated requirement or alternative for the
proposed sanitary sewer improvements.
      (3)   The applicant shall be responsible for any required off-site
sanitary sewage disposal improvements that may be necessary to accommodate the
wastewater flow from the development. All such off-site improvements shall be
coordinated with the City of Reading.
      (4)   Where required, the appropriate planning modules or exemption
requests shall be submitted to the City of Reading and the Pennsylvania
Department of Environmental Protection for review and consideration.
      (5)   All uses connected to the municipal sanitary sewer system shall be
subject to the sanitary sewer use and maintenance provisions of the City of
Reading and the agencies with jurisdiction.
   C.   All proposed land uses that are located outside of a designated
sanitary sewer service district or planned growth area shall be required to
utilize on-lot sewage disposal technology, as the method for sewage disposal.
All such on-lot sewage disposal systems shall be subject to the following
provisions:
      (1)   The sewage enforcement officer appointed by the City of Reading
shall review all subdivision or land development plans in which the proposed
uses will utilize on-lot sewage disposal systems. All field testing procedures
and application requirements shall be subject to the approval of the sewage
enforcement officer and the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental
Protection. The City of Reading shall not approve a proposed subdivision or
land development plan until the sewage enforcement officer has received a
favorable recommendation for the on-lot sewage disposal system.
      (2)   All on-lot sewage disposal facilities shall be located, designed,
constructed and installed in accordance with the standards and specifications
of the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection and the City of
Reading.
      (3)   All proposed uses connected to an on-lot sewage disposal system
shall be subject to all land use and maintenance provisions adopted by the City
of Reading.
      (4)   All proposed uses connected to a holding tank shall be subject to
the provisions of the City of Reading and Pennsylvania Department of
Environmental Protection.
   D.   If municipal sewage disposal service is not accessible to an approved
subdivision or land development, but is planned to be accessible within five
(5) years of final approval, the applicant shall install an approved capped
collection system within the limits of the subdivision or land development, in
addition to the approved on-lot sewage facilities. The collection and
conveyance system shall be capped at the limits of the subdivision or land
development and the laterals shall be capped at the street right-of-way.
   E.   The required sewage facilities planning modules shall be reviewed and
approved by Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection (PADEP) prior
to final plan approval. The City of Reading may provide comments to the PADEP
and/or applicant regarding the sewage facilities planning module.
§ 515-506. Water supply.
[Amended 3-22-2021 by Ord. No. 22-2021]
   A.   As part of all subdivision and land development plan applications, the
applicant shall develop a plan for water supply considering the following
criteria:
      (1)   The plan for water supply shall be consistent with the most recent
plans and ordinances adopted by the City of Reading.
      (2)   The plan for water supply shall consider the recommendations
pertaining to land use, sewage disposal and water supply, as contained within
the Comprehensive Plan and/or studies completed by the agencies with
jurisdiction.
      (3)   The plan for water supply shall be consistent with all pertinent
design requirements specified by the City of Reading, the municipal water
authority with jurisdiction, and the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental
Protection.
      (4)   The plan for water supply shall be prepared to consider all
pertinent local, regional, state and federal permitting requirements.
      (5)   If water is to be provided by means other than by private wells
owned and maintained by the individual owners of lots within the subdivision or
land development, the developer shall present evidence to the City of Reading
that the subdivision or development is to be supplied by a certified public
utility, a bona fide cooperative association of lot owners, or by a municipal
corporation, authority or utility. A copy of a Certificate of Public
Convenience from the Pennsylvania Public Utility Commission or an application
for such certificate, a cooperative agreement or a commitment or agreement to
serve the area in question, whichever is appropriate, shall be submitted to the
City of Reading.
      (6)   If required, the applicant shall submit evidence to the City of
Reading that the proposed water supply source and service is capable of
providing sufficient fire protection for the proposed use and/or development.
Such evidence may include current pressure and flow data for existing fire
hydrant(s) in the water main(s) that will service the project together with
calculated pressures and flows within the development at the proposed fire
hydrant(s) location(s). The required flow and pressures will be determined by
the City of Reading and local fire departments.
      (7)   The applicant shall refer to the International Fire Code § 101.2.1,
2015 edition, Appendix C, or as adopted or amended in the future by the City of
Reading, and comply with its requirements on fire hydrant locations and
distribution. Applicant shall consult with the City of Reading, municipal water
authority ivith jurisdiction and/or the local fire department to determine if
any existing fire hydrants or water supply sources should be evaluated in order
to determine if the sufficient water supply and pressure are available.
   B.   All proposed land uses that are located within a designated water
supply service district or planned growth area shall be required to connect to
the municipal water supply system subject to the following provisions:
      (1)   The City of Reading shall review all such subdivision or land
development plan applications to determine the adequacy of the proposed water
supply improvements. The City of Reading shall not approve a proposed
subdivision or land development plan until the engineer appointed by the City
of Reading or water authority with jurisdiction have issued a favorable
recommendation for the water supply improvements.
      (2)   All proposed water supply facilities shall be located, designed,
constructed and installed in accordance with the standards and specifications
of the City of Reading and/or the municipal water authority with jurisdiction.
Where certain standards and specifications do not exist, the City of Reading
and/or municipal water authority with jurisdiction shall provide a designated
requirement or alternative for the proposed water supply improvements.
      (3)   The applicant shall be responsible for any required off-site
municipal water supply improvements that may be necessary to provide a reliable
supply of water to the development. All such off-site improvements shall be
coordinated with the City of Reading and the water authority with jurisdiction.
   C.   All proposed land uses that are located outside of a designated water
supply service district or planned growth area shall be required to utilize on-
lot water supply facilities through individual well(s). All such water supply
wells shall be subject to the following provisions:
      (1)   All proposed individual on-lot wells shall be located, designed,
drilled, constructed and installed in accordance with the standards and
specifications of the City of Reading and the Pennsylvania Department of
Environmental Protection.
      (2)   Each lot to be served by individual on-lot water supply shall be of
a size and shape to permit the safe location for each well. All proposed wells
shall be located, designed, constructed and maintained in accordance with the
provisions established by the City of Reading.
      (3)   A hydrogeological study shall be required for subdivision plans
involving twenty (20) or more lots or for land development plans in which the
estimated water usage shall exceed 5,000 gallons per day. The hydrogeological
study shall be prepared by a professional hydrogeologist who shall provide
documentation to conclude that the proposed individual well(s) will be capable
of supplying each lot or use(s) with a dependable supply of safe potable water
and that the proposed well(s) will not adversely affect the groundwater table
or existing wells near the project site.
   D.   All proposed land uses that are located outside of a designated water
supply service district or planned growth area may utilize a community water
supply system through individual well(s). All such community water supply
systems shall be subject to the provisions established by the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania and the City of Reading.
   E.   All proposed subdivisions and land developments that are to be served
by a public or community water supply system shall provide fire hydrants within
the development. The proposed fire hydrants shall comply with the following
provisions:
      (1)   Fire hydrants shall be located no more than eight hundred (800)
feet apart, as measured along the centerline of each road. All residential
dwelling units and non-residential principal buildings shall be located no more
than four hundred (400) feet from an active fire hydrant.
      (2)   Fire hydrants shall be located in a manner to provide complete
accessibility and so that possibility of damage from vehicles or injury to
pedestrians will be minimized. Unless otherwise directed by the City of
Reading, the barrel of the fire hydrant shall be set so that no portion of the
pumper or hose nozzle cap will be less than eighteen (18) inches from the curb
line.
      (3)   If required by the City of Reading, the existing service area of
the fire hydrants shall be extended to consider public safety.
      (4)   The provisions relating to fire protection and suppression that are
specified within the City of Reading Code does not relieve the applicant from
the requirements for providing fire hydrants within the development.
      (5)   The type and location of all required fire hydrants shall be
subject to the review and approval of the City of Reading and the local fire
departments.
§ 515-507. Storm drainage.
   A.   Storm sewers, culverts and related installations shall be provided as
necessary to:
      (1)   Permit unimpeded flow of natural watercourses.
      (2)   Ensure adequate drainage of all low points along the line of
streets.
      (3)   Intercept stormwater runoff along streets at intervals related to
the extent and grade of the area drained.
      (4)   Provide positive drainage away from on-site sewage disposal
facilities.
      (5)   Take surface water from the bottom of vertical grades, to lead
water from springs, and to avoid excessive use of cross gutters at street
intersections and elsewhere.
   B.   All streets shall be so designed as to provide for the discharge of
surface water from their rights-of-way.
   C.   The slope of the crown on proposed streets shall be not less than 1/
8 of an inch per foot and not more than 1/3 an inch per foot.
   D.   Storm sewers and related installations shall be required only when the
runoff of stormwater cannot be satisfactorily handled within the street
cartway.
   E.   Where existing storm sewers are reasonably accessible, proposed
subdivisions shall be required, if necessary, to connect therewith.
   F.   Storm drainage facilities shall be designed not only to handle the
anticipated peak discharge from the property being subdivided, but also the
anticipated increase in runoff that will occur when all the property at a
higher elevation in the same watershed is fully developed. Storm sewers shall
be designed to meet the City standards for capacity and type of structures.
      (1)   In the design of storm drainage facilities, special consideration
shall be given to avoidance of problems which may arise from the concentration
of stormwater runoff onto adjacent developed or undeveloped properties.
   G.   Where a subdivision is traversed by a watercourse, drainageway, channel
or stream, there shall be provided a drainage easement conforming substantially
with the line of such watercourse, drainageway, channel or stream and of such
width as will be adequate to preserve the unimpeded flow of natural drainage or
for the purpose of widening, deepening, relocating, improving or protecting
such drainage facilities as deemed necessary by the Planning Commission. Any
changes in the existing drainageway shall be subject to the approval of the
Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection. [Amended 5-29-2001 by Ord.
No. 14-2001]
   H.   As part of all subdivision and land development plan applications, the
applicant shall prepare and submit a stormwater management plan considering the
following criteria:
      (1)   The stormwater management plan shall be prepared considering all
pertinent provisions relating to drainage, runoff, infiltration, erosion and
discharge, as adopted by the City of Reading.
      (2)   The stormwater management plan shall be prepared to comply with
Chapter 505, Watershed Stormwater Management, and the Stormwater Management
Plan for the Schuylkill River, as adopted by the City of Reading.
      (3)   The stormwater management plan shall be prepared to consider the
recommendations pertaining to natural resources, floodpiains, wetlands,
stormwater management and hydrological resource planning, as contained within
the Comprehensive Plan or other prevailing plan adopted by the City of Reading.
      (4)   The stormwater management plan shall comply with the National
Pollution Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) Stormwater Permitting
Regulations.
      (5)   The stormwater management plan shall comply with the provisions
established by the City of Reading MS4 Program.
      (6)   The stormwater management plan shall consider the implementation of
“best management practices", as endorsed by the City of Reading, the
Comprehensive Plan and/or as recommended by the City of Reading.
      (7)   The stormwater management plan shall be prepared to consider all
pertinent local, regional, state and federal permitting requirements.
      (8)   The City of Reading reserves the right, but not the duty, to
inspect all stormwater management facilities that are required for the
development.
   I.   The stormwater management plan shall contain the following:
      (1)   Mapping of the watershed area or areas in which the proposed
subdivision or land development is located.
      (2)   A study shall be performed of the watershed in which the
subdivision or land development is located to assess the impact the proposal
will have on downstream conditions. The stormwater management plan shall
address all identified impacts to the satisfaction of the City of Reading.
      (3)   Computations of the stormwater runoff for all points of runoff
concentration before and after development, including all supporting data.
      (4)   Complete drainage systems for the subdivision or land development.
All existing drainage features, which are to be incorporated as part of the
design, shall be identified with a detailed explanation of the operations of
the facilities.
      (5)   Plans showing all existing and proposed drainage facilities
affecting the subject property, including plan views, profile views and/or
detail sheets.
      (6)   Computations for all existing and proposed drainage structures that
is associated with the development.
      (7)   Plans showing proposed grading, including typical structure
footprint(s) with first floor elevation(s).
      (8)   Construction details for all proposed facilities.
      (9)   As part of the review process of the stormwater management plan,
the City of Reading may determine that off-site improvements are necessary to
satisfactorily control the stormwater from the proposed development. The
applicant or developer shall be responsible for the design, permitting and
construction of the off-site improvements, which may also include obtaining any
required easements or rights-of-way.
      (10)   A detailed plan of all required off-site drainage improvements.
      (11)   All other documentation that may be required to satisfy provisions
specified under this Chapter.
   J.   All stormwater management basins, ponds, pipes, structures and related
site improvements shall be located, designed, constructed and installed in
accordance with all requirements specified by the City of Reading.
   K.   All permits that are required to satisfy the provisions of this Chapter
shall be obtained prior to municipal approval of the subdivision or land
development plan.
   L.   Where certain stormwater management improvements are inadvertently
omitted from the approved plan, or if any inconsistencies arise during
construction phase of the site improvements, the applicant shall be responsible
for the design, construction and installation of those site improvements as
directed by the City of Reading.
   M.   The City of Reading Engineer or other authorized consultant designated
by the City of Reading may advise the applicant to include special notes or
design criteria that should be added to the plan.
   N.   Unless otherwise specified by the City of Reading, the stormwater
management improvements shall be inspected and approved by the authorized
representative of the City of Reading prior to the release of funds held in
escrow and/or the issuance of permits.
[Amended 3-22-2021 by Ord. No. 22-2021]
§ 515-508. Public use and service area.
   A.   Public grounds.
      (1)   In reviewing subdivision plans, the Planning Commission shall
consider whether community facilities, especially schools, in the area are
adequate to serve the needs of the additional dwellings proposed by the
subdivision and shall make such recommendations thereon as it deems necessary
in the public interest.
      (2)   Subdividers shall give earnest consideration to the desirability of
providing or reserving areas for facilities normally required in residential
neighborhoods, including churches, libraries, schools and other public
buildings; parks, playgrounds and play fields, shopping and local business
centers. Areas provided or reserved for such community facilities should be
adequate to provide for building sites, landscaping and off-street parking as
appropriate to the use proposed. Prior to the preparation of plans, subdividers
of large tracts should review with the staff of the Planning Commission the
minimum standards for various community facilities applicable to the tract
being subdivided.
      (3)   If portions of the Official Plan of the City contain proposals for
drainage right- of-way, streets or street improvements, schools, parks or
playgrounds within the proposed subdivision or in its vicinity, or if standards
for the allocation of portions of subdivisions for drainage rights-of-way,
school sites, streets or street improvements, parks and playground purposes
have been adopted, then before approving subdivisions the Planning Commission
may further require that such drainage rights- of-way, streets or street
improvements, school sites, parks or playgrounds be shown in locations and in
dimensions suitable to their intended use. The Planning Commission shall be
permitted to reserve the location of and extent of school sites, public parks,
and playgrounds shown on the Official Plan for a period of one year after the
approval of the final plan or within such further time as agreed to by the
applying party. Unless during such one-year period or extension thereof, the
City or School District shall have entered into a contract to purchase or have
instituted condemnation proceedings according to law for such school site, park
or playground, the subdivider shall not be bound by the proposals for such
areas shown on the Official Plan. This provision shall apply to the streets,
roads or drainage rights-of-way required for final approval of any plan and
deemed essential to the public welfare for an indefinite period of time.
      (4)   In subdivisions or developments which are intended to provide
housing for more than 50 families, the Planning Commission shall consider the
need for suitable open areas for recreation and shall make a recommendation
thereon. Standards to be used by the Planning Commission in requesting the
reservation of space for recreation shall be as follows:
         (a)   The subdivider shall provide at least 1/2 acre of recreational
facilities for every 50 families served by the development. The Planning
Commission may modify this standard where the type of structures proposed will
place an undue burden upon the subdivider or developer.
   B.   Community assets. Consideration shall be shown for all natural features
such as large healthy trees, watercourses, historic areas and structures and
similar community assets which, if preserved, will add attractiveness and value
to the remainder of the subdivision.
   C.   Utility easements.
      (1)   In accordance with two separate orders of the Pennsylvania Public
Utility Commission, all new residential developments involving five or more
dwelling units are required to install electric and telephone distribution
lines underground. The orders are mandatory and include, but are not limited
to, single-family, semidetached, townhouse, apartment, and mobile home
developments. In compliance with this chapter and with the cooperation of the
affected electric and telephone utility companies, the following procedure
shall be followed by the Planning Commission when reviewing developments
subject to this chapter and the Public Utility Commission orders.
         (a)   Upon receipt of a preliminary plan or an official sketch plan
for review, the Planning Commission shall forward a copy of the notice of
review to the appropriate utility companies if the development would fall
subject to the Public Utility Commission orders. This would apprise the utility
companies of the project status and indicate that a developer would be
contacting them in the near future.
         (b)   After the Commission's review of the plan and within the letter
of review, the developer shall be instructed to contact the appropriate utility
companies, and secure a letter from each company which indicates that the
developer has contacted the company and arrangements have been made to supply
electric and telephone service to the area. A copy of this approved plan shall
be required prior to City endorsement of any plan for recording. The
responsibility for securing this approval and coordinating the plan with the
utility company would be the developer's or his representative's.
      (2)   If easements are used at the rear of lots to provide sewer
facilities, a minimum easement of 12 feet from the rear of each adjacent lot
shall be provided. This width for a sewer easement shall be added to and made a
part of each lot, thereby increasing the lot depth from the minimum as
required.
      (3)   If easements are used at the front or rear of lots to provide for
electric or telephone service facilities, a minimum easement width of five feet
from the front or rear of each lot shall be provided. Such easements shall be
of the width and location determined by the Planning Commission or its
representatives after consultation with the City departments or public utility
companies concerned. No structures or trees shall be placed within such
easements. [Amended 5-29-2001 by Ord. No. 14-2001]
      (4)   There shall be a minimum distance of 20 feet from the right-of-way
line, measured in the shortest distance, between any proposed dwelling unit and
any petroleum, petroleum products or natural gas transmission line which
traverses the subdivision.
      (5)   Utility service for all residential developments is recommended to
be provided through the use of underground facilities in accord with the
standards and approval of the utility company having appropriate jurisdiction.
      (6)   All other public and/or private utilities and facilities including
gas and electric shall be elevated or floodproofed up to the regulatory flood
elevation. [Amended 9-20-1978 by Ord. No. 35-1978]
   D.   Erosion and sediment controls and guidelines.
      (1)   Where any excavation or grading is proposed or where any existing
trees, shrubs or other vegetative cover shall be removed, the developer shall
consult the County Conservation District representative concerning plans for
erosion and sediment control and to also obtain a report on the soil
characteristics of the site so that a determination can be made as to the type
and degree of development the site may accommodate. Before undertaking any
excavation or grading, the developer shall obtain a grading and excavation
permit from the City Building Inspector. [Amended 9-20-1978 by Ord. No. 35-
1978]
      (2)   Erosion and sediment control measures where required under Title
25, Pennsylvania Code, Chapter 102, Rules and Regulations of the Pennsylvania
Department of Environmental Protection, shall meet the standards and
specifications of the Berks County Soil and Water Conservation District.
[Amended 5-29-2001 by Ord. No. 14-2001]
      (3)   The following guidelines shall be applied as needed in developing
erosion and sediment control measures:
         (a)   Stripping of vegetation, grading, filling, excavating or other
alteration of the landscape shall be done in such a way that will minimize
erosion.
         (b)   Whenever feasible, natural vegetation shall be retained,
protected and supplemented.
         (c)   The disturbed area and the duration of exposure shall be kept to
a practical minimum.
         (d)   Disturbed soils shall be stabilized as quickly as practicable.
         (e)   Temporary vegetation and/or mulching may be used to protect
exposed critical areas during development.
         (f)   Permanent vegetation and mechanical erosion control and drainage
measures shall be installed as soon as practicable in the development.
         (g)   Provisions shall be made to effectively accommodate the
increased runoff caused by changed soil and surface conditions during and after
development. Where necessary, the rate of surface water runoff may be
mechanically retarded.
         (h)   Sediment in the runoff water shall be trapped until the
disturbed area is stabilized by the use of debris basins, sediment basins, silt
traps or similar measures.
         (i)   Grading and cut/fill operations shall be kept to a minimum to
ensure conformity with the natural topography, to minimize the erosion hazard
and to adequately handle the surface runoff.
      (4)   The following guidelines shall be applied as needed in excavation
and fills as part of erosion and sediment controls:
         (a)   Adequate provisions shall be made to prevent surface water from
damaging the cut face of excavations or the sloping surfaces of fill.
         (b)   Cuts and fills shall not endanger adjoining property.
         (c)   Fill shall be placed and mechanically compacted to minimize
sliding or erosion of the soil.
         (d)   Fills shall not encroach on natural watercourses or constructed
channels.
         (e)   Fills placed adjacent to natural watercourses or constructed
channels shall have suitable protection against erosion during periods of
flooding.
         (f)   During grading operations, necessary measures for dust control
shall be exercised.
         (g)   Grading equipment shall not be allowed to cross live streams.
Provision shall be made for the installation of culverts or bridges.
      (5)   The following guidelines shall be applied as needed in establishing
easements as part of erosion and sediment controls.
         (a)   Nothing shall be permitted to be placed, planted, set or put
within the area of an easement. The area should be kept as lawn.
         (b)   Where a subdivision or land development is traversed by a
watercourse, there shall be provided a drainage easement or right-of-way
conforming substantially with the line of such watercourse and of such width as
will be adequate to preserve natural drainage but not less than 20 feet or as
may be required or directed by the Department of Environmental Protection. The
owner shall properly grade and seed slopes and fence any open ditches when it
is deemed necessary by the Planning Commission. [Amended 5-29-2001 by Ord. No.
14-2001]
         (c)   Where stormwater or surface water will be gathered within the
subdivision or land development and discharged or drained in volume over lands
within or beyond the boundaries of the subdivision or land development, the
applicant or owner shall reserve or obtain easements over all lands affected
thereby, which easements shall be adequate for such discharge of drainage and
for the repair and reconstruction of same, including the right of passage over
and upon the same by vehicles, machinery and other equipment for such purposes,
and which shall be of sufficient width for such passage and work. The owner
shall convey, free of charge or cost, such easements to the City upon demand.
   E.   Solid waste management.
      (1)   To ensure incorporation of adequate provision for solid waste
management practices in the design of land developments and subdivisions, the
following minimum requirements shall be contained on development plans in
accord with §§
515-402E(7) and 515-403B(9):
         (a)   The location, size and type of bulk storage containers shall be
shown and shall be adequate to contain all wastes generated between
collections.
         (b)   All bulk storage containers shall be located to permit efficient
use of collection equipment and to permit maneuverability of such equipment.
         (c)   All bulk storage containers shall be appropriately screened.
         (d)   A statement of the method and frequency of bulk refuse
collection to be used shall be included on the plan.
      (2)   Where no bulk storage is proposed and individual households are
expected to individually establish appropriate collection service, a statement
shall be shown on the plan which advises that solid waste storage and
collection is an individual household responsibility.
      (3)   In subdivisions or land developments located in areas presently
served by a City collection or City contract collection system, and for which
no bulk storage methods are proposed, a statement indicating the availability
of an existing solid waste collection system may be shown on the plan in lieu
of information required in Subsection E(1) hereof.
§ 515-509. Landscaping and shade trees.
   A.   The Planning Commission or its representative may require a subdivider
to submit a separate landscape plan showing the number, location, size and
species of all shrubbery that shall be planted on the lot with the preliminary
or final plan. Where such shrubbery is deemed insufficient, the Planning
Commission may require that additional landscaping be added.
   B.   Protective screen planting or fences shall be placed by the developer
at locations as required by the Planning Commission or its representatives.
   C.   Shade trees along the street line shall be planted by the developer in
such number and manner as shall be deemed necessary by the Planning Commission.
Such shade tree planting shall be subject to the requirements of Chapter 555,
Part 1, Shade Trees.
   D.   The following list of trees may be utilized to meet the standards and
specifications for landscaping, shade trees and buffer yards based upon the
existing physical and natural conditions of the site. The City of Reading
Arborist and/or other professional consultants designated by the City of
Reading should be consulted during the plan review process, as not all trees on
the list of approved species, as referenced below, are appropriate for all
areas within the City of Reading:
      (1)   Tentative trees species shall be indicated on the preliminary plan
and shall be of a species approved by the City of Reading Arborist and Planning
Commission. In particular, approved shade trees include the following:
         Acer tataricum - Tatarian Maple
         Amelanchier x grandifolia - Serviceberry
         Carpinus betulus Emerald Avenue - Emerald Ave European Hornbeam
         Carpinus betulus Fastigiata - Columnar Hornbeam
         Carpinus caroliniana - American Hornbeam
         Cercis Canadensis - Eastern Redbud
         Cladrastis lutea - Yellowwood
         Cornus mas Golden Glory - Cornelian Cherry
         Crataegus laevigata Crimson Cloud - English Hawthorn
         Crataegus viridts Winter King - Green Hawthorn
         Ginkgo biloba Autumn Gold - Male Maidenhair Tree
         Ginkgo biloba Princeton Sentry - Columnar Maidenhair Tree
         Gleditsia triacanthos inermis Imperial - Honeylocust
         Gleditsia triacanthos inermis Shademaster - Honeylocust
         Gleditsia triacanthos inermis Skyline - Honeylocust
         Metasequoia glyptostroboides - Dawn Redwood
         Nyssa sylvatica - Blackgum
         Ostrya virginiana - Hop Hornbeam
         Parrotia persica - Persian Parrotia
         Platanus x acerifolia Bloodgood - Planetree
         Platanus x acerifolia Exclamation - Planetree
         Primus serrulata Kwanzan - Kwanzan Japanese Cherry
         Prunus subhirtella Autumnalis - Autumn Flowering Cherry
         Prunus x Okame - Okame Japanese Cherry
         Prunus x Snow Goose - Snow Goose Japanese Cherry
         Prunus x yedoensis Yoshino - Yoshino Japanese Cherry
         Quercus imbricaria - Shingle Oak
         Quercus x Kindred Spirit - Columnar Oak
         Quercus x Regal Prince - Columnar Oak
         Styrax japonica - Japanese Snowbell
         Syringa reticulata Ivory Silk - Japanese Tree Lilac
         Tilia cordata Greenspire - Littleleaf Linden
         Tilia tomentosa Sterling Silver ~ Silver Linden
         Ulmus americana Princeton - American Elm
         Ulmus parvifolia Alice - Lacebark Elm
         Zelkova serrata Green Vase - Japanese Zelkova
         Zelkova serrata Musashino - Columnar Zelkova
   (2)   In addition to the list of approved shade trees, the following trees
are recommended for planting in suburban or open areas within the City of
Reading:
         Acer rubrum Armstrong - Columnar Red Maple
         Acer rubrum Armstong Gold Columnar Red Maple
         Aesculus x carnea Fort McNair - Red Flowering Horsechestnut
         Celtis occidentalis - Hackberry
         Cercidiphyllum japonicum - Katsura
         Cornus x Rutgers Celestial - White Dogwood
         Cornus x Rutgers Hyperion - White Dogwood
         Cornus x Rutgers Stellar Pink - Pink Dogwood
         Fagus sylvatica Fastigiata - Columnar European Beech
         Fagus sylvatica Dawyck Purple - Columnar Purple European Beech
         Fagus sylvatica Red Obelisk - Columnar Purple European Beech
         Halesia Carolina - Carolina Silverbell
         Koelreuteria paniculata - Golden Raintree
         Liquidambar styraciflua Cherokee (seedless) - Sweetgum
         Liquidambar styraciflua Happidaze (seedless) - Sweetgum
         Liquidambar styraciflua Slender Silhouette - Columnar Sweetgum
         Liriodendron tulipifera Arnold - Columnar Tulip Poplar
         Malus Donald Wyman - White Crabapple
         Malus Prairifire - Red Crabapple
         Malus Royal Raindrops - Pink Crabapple
         Malus Sugar Tyme - White Crabapple
         Prunus virginiana Canada Red - Chokecherry
         Quercus alba - White Oak
         Quercus bicolor - Swamp White Oak
         Quercus macrocarpa - Bur Oak
         Quercus rubra Northern - Red Oak
         Taxodium distichum - Bald Cypress
         Tilia americana Redmond - American Linden
   E.   Landscaping, shade trees and/or buffer yards shall be considered on a
property or development site provided that: the selected species do not create
an adverse impact within a street or utility right-of-way; the selected species
do not create an adverse impact with stormwater management facilities, sanitary
sewage disposal facilities or water supply facilities; the selected species do
not create an adverse impact on the existing trees or woodlands on the
property; the selected species are considered necessary to provide a
landscaping screen or buffer yard; the selected species are required to
mitigate any adverse noise or lighting impacts; the selected species are
required to comply with the land use and zoning requirements established by the
City of Reading; and/or the Planning Commission determines that landscaping,
shade trees or buffer yards are necessary.
[Amended 3-22-2021 by Ord. No. 22-2021]
§ 515-510. Erosion and sedimentation control plans.
   A.   No changes shall be made to the contour of the land, and no grading,
excavating, removal or destruction of the topsoil, trees or other vegetative
cover of the land shall be commenced until such time as a plan for minimizing
erosion and sedimentation has been processed and reviewed by the appropriate
local, county, state and/or federal agencies.
   B.   All permits required to implement the erosion and sedimentation control
plan shall be obtained from the appropriate agencies prior to municipal
approval of the subdivision plan or land development plan.
   C.   The approval of a plan does not relieve the developer's obligation to
execute the erosion and sediment control measures as specified on the approved
plans or as otherwise required by local, state and federal laws.
   D.   When erosion and sedimentation control measures are required, the
improvements shall be either: incorporated within the municipal improvements
agreement; completed by the applicant prior to plan approval; or deferred to
the building permit phase. All such options shall be subject to the approval of
the City of Reading, the Berks County Conservation District and/or the
Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection.
   E.   During the development phase, the City of Reading shall be provided
with the opportunity to inspect the site improvements and enforce compliance
with the approved subdivision plan or land development plan.
   F.   Prior to the issuance of an occupancy permit, the City of Reading may
conduct a site inspection to determine compliance with the approved subdivision
plan or land development plan. The occupancy permit shall not be issued until
all site improvements have been completed to the satisfaction of the City of
Reading. The City of Reading reserves the right, but not the duty, to inspect
all erosion and sedimentation control facilities that are required for the
development.
   G.   The erosion and sedimentation controls and guidelines specified under
Section
515-508.D shall also apply to Erosion and Sedimentation Control Plans.
[Added 3-22-2021 by Ord. No. 22-2021]
Part 6
Improvement Specifications
§ 515-601. General requirements.
   A.   Physical improvements to the property being subdivided shall be
provided, constructed and installed as shown on the record plan, in accordance
with the requirements of the City.
   B.   As a condition to review of a final plan by the Planning Commission,
the subdivider shall agree with the City as to the installation of all
improvements shown on the plan and required by this chapter. Before the record
plan may be endorsed by the Planning Commission, the subdivider shall submit a
completed original copy of the subdivision improvements agreement. This
agreement shall also guarantee that no lot(s) shall be sold or building
constructed in any flood-prone area prior to completion of all protective works
or measures planned for such lot(s) and necessary access facilities.
   C.   All improvements installed by the subdivider shall be constructed in
accordance with the design specifications of the City. Where there are no
applicable City specifications, improvements shall be constructed in accordance
with specifications of such other local, state or federal agency standards as
the Planning Commission may require. If there are no applicable standards, the
Planning Commission may authorize that specifications be prepared by the
Director of Public Works. [Amended 5-29-2001 by Ord. No. 14-2001]
   D.   Supervision of the installation of the improvements required by §
515-602 shall in all cases be the responsibility of the City or of the
appropriate state regulatory agency.
   E.   All improvements required by the Planning Commission shall be subject
to the inspection and approval of the Director of Public Works, who shall be
notified by the developer at least 24 hours prior to the start of construction
of same. No underground installation shall be covered until inspected and
approved. [Amended 5-29-2001 by Ord. No. 14-2001]
§ 515-602. Required improvements.
The following improvements, as required by the Planning Commission and shown on
the record plan, shall be provided by the subdivider:
   A.   Street grading. All streets shall be graded at full right-of-way width,
except that in subdivisions where the average lot frontage, measured at the
topographical building line, is
100 feet or more, streets shall be graded at cartway width, plus eight
additional feet on both sides.
   B.   Cartway paving. All streets intended to be dedicated to public use
shall be paved to full cartway width, as shown on the final plan, in accordance
with City ordinances and/or the requirements of the Director of Public Works.
[Amended 5-29-2001 by Ord. No. 14-2001]
   C.   Curbs. Curbs shall be installed along both sides of the cartway of all
streets, except service streets, constructed and/or dedicated by the
subdivider. Where the land being subdivided lies adjacent to an existing paved
cartway, the subdivider shall provide curbing along that portion of the street
which abuts his property, except that when, in the opinion of the Planning
Commission, the street would not have been improved except for the needs of the
property being subdivided, curbing may be required of the subdivider along both
sides of the existing cartway. Curbs shall be of the vertical type, constructed
of portland cement, with the dimensions and the quality of materials conforming
to City standards.
   D.   Sidewalks. Sidewalks shall be a minimum of five feet in width and shall
be installed along both sides of the cartway of all streets, except service
streets, constructed and/or dedicated by the subdivider. 15  Where the land
being subdivided lies adjacent to an existing paved cartway, the subdivider
shall provide sidewalk along that portion of the street which abuts his
property, except that when, in the opinion of the Planning Commission, the
street would not have been improved except for the needs of the property being
subdivided, sidewalk may be required of the subdivider along both sides of the
existing cartway. Sidewalks shall be installed in accordance with the
specifications contained in §
515-503D and other appropriate City standards.
   E.   Sewers.
      (1)   Storm sewers. Storm sewers and related facilities shall be
installed consistent with the design principles and requirements contained in §
515-507.
      (2)   Sanitary sewage disposal. Sanitary sewage disposal and/or
collecting systems shall be installed consistent with the design principles and
requirements contained in §
515-505 and the specifications of Title 25, Pennsylvania Code, Chapter 73,
Rules and Regulations of the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental
Protection. [Amended 5-29-2001 by Ord. No. 14-2001]
   F.   Water supply and fire hydrants. Water supply system(s) and fire
hydrants shall be installed consistent with the design principles and
requirements contained in §
515-506.
   G.   Monuments.
      (1)   All monuments shall be of the size and shape required by the City.
      (2)   Permanent monuments conforming to City standards shall be
accurately placed at the intersection of all lines in the boundary or perimeter
of the property being subdivided on range lines approved by the Director of
Public Works. [Amended 5-29-2001 by Ord. No. 14-2001]
      (3)   All monuments shall be placed by a registered professional engineer
or registered professional surveyor so the scored (by an indented cross at the
top of the monument) point shall coincide exactly with the point of
intersection of the lines being monumented.
      (4)   Where the Director of Public Works directs, monuments shall be set
with their top level with the finished grade of the surrounding ground, except:
[Amended 5-29-2001 by Ord. No. 14-2001]
         (a)   Monuments which are placed within the lines of existing or
proposed sidewalks shall be so located, preferably beneath the sidewalks, that
their tops shall not be affected by lateral movement of the sidewalk.
         (b)   Where monuments are located beneath a sidewalk, cast-iron
monument frames and lids of approved City design shall be provided for their
use.
      (5)   All streets shall be monumented, preferably on the right-of-way
lines, at the following locations:
         (a)   At least one monument at each intersection.
         (b)   At changes in direction of street lines, excluding curb arcs at
intersections.
         (c)   At each end of each curved street line, excluding curb arcs at
intersections.
         (d)   An intermediate monument wherever topographical or other
conditions make it impossible to sight between two otherwise required
monuments.
         (e)   At such other places along the line of streets as may be
determined by the Director of Public Works to be necessary so that any street
may be readily defined in the future. [Amended 5-29-2001 by Ord. No. 14-2001]
      (6)   Metal markers are to be accurately placed at all corners of lots
shown on a final plan.
   H.   Street signs. Street name signs and traffic signals shall be installed
at all street intersections in accord with the specifications for design and
placement of the City Traffic Engineer.
   I.   Streetlights. In accordance with the conditions to be agreed upon by
the subdivider, the Department of Public Works of the City and the City Traffic
Engineer, streetlights are to be installed in all subdivisions. [Amended 5-29-
2001 by Ord. No. 14-2001]
   J.   Landscaping and shade trees. Landscaping and shade trees shall be
provided in accord with the provisions of §
515-509 of this chapter.
   K.   Erosion and sedimentation control. Whenever a plan locates and shows
erosion and sediment control measures, the developer or his agent shall provide
these measures by:
      (1)   Removing sedimentation from all adjoining surfaces, drainage
systems and watercourses and by repairing any damage at his expense as quickly
as possible.
      (2)   Maintaining all drainage facilities and watercourses within the
subdivision until they are accepted by the City.
      (3)   Maintaining as nearly as possible streams, watercourses, swale,
floodplain or right- of-way during construction and returning it to its
original or equal condition after construction is completed.
      (4)   Providing adequate rights-of-way and/or easements for all drainage
facilities and watercourses which are proposed for acceptance by the City.
      (5)   Making surface changes subject to the following conditions:
         (a)   Collect all on-site surface runoff and dispose of it to the
point of discharge into the common natural watercourse of the drainage area.
         (b)   Handle existing off-site runoff through his development by
designing to adequately handle storm runoff from a fully developed area
upstream.
         (c)   Pay his proportionate share of the total cost of off-site
improvements to the common natural watercourse based on a fully developed
drainage area.
         (d)   Provide and install at his expense, in accordance with City
requirements, all drainage and erosion control improvements (temporary and
permanent) as required by Title 25, Chapter 102, Rules and Regulations of the
Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection, as administered by the
Berks County Conservation District. [Amended 5-29-2001 by Ord. No. 14-2001]
15.   Editor's Note: See also
Chapter 508, Part 5.
Part 7
Administration, Appeals And Penalty
§ 515-701. Amendments; notice.
   A.   Amendments to this chapter other than those resulting from amendments
to the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code shall become effective only
after a public hearing held pursuant to public notice. A brief summary setting
forth the principal provisions of the proposed amendment and a reference to the
place where copies of the proposed amendment may be secured or examined shall
be incorporated in the public notice. The public notice shall be published by
the City in a paper of general circulation in the City once a week for two
successive weeks; provided, however, that the last publication shall be not
less than seven days before the proposed public hearing.
   B.   In the case of an amendment other than that prepared by the Planning
Commission or its representatives, Council shall submit each such amendment to
the Planning Commission for recommendations at least 30 days prior to the date
fixed for the public hearing on such proposed amendment.
   C.   At its annual organizational meeting, the Planning Commission shall
review this chapter to determine the advisability of recommending revisions or
amendments in the light of changing standards and technological advances.
   D.   At least 30 days prior to the hearing on the amendment, the
municipality shall submit the proposed amendment to the County Planning Agency
for recommendations. 16
   E.   Within 30 days after adoption, the governing body shall forward a
certified copy of any amendment to the County Planning Agency. 17
16.   Editor's Note: Added during codification (see
Ch. 1, General Provisions, Part 2).
17.   Editor's Note: Added during codification (see
Ch. 1, General Provisions, Part 2).
§ 515-702. Validity and conflict.
   A.   Should any action or provision of this chapter be declared by the
courts to be invalid, such decision shall not affect the validity of this
chapter as a whole nor the validity of any other section or provision of this
chapter than the one so declared.
   B.   Where this chapter imposes a greater restriction upon land than is
imposed or required by such existing provisions of law, ordinance, contract or
deed, the provisions of this chapter shall control.
   C.   Any subdivision or land development, as defined in this chapter, in any
area of the City for which Council has approved a redevelopment proposal or an
urban renewal plan in accordance with the Pennsylvania Urban Redevelopment Law,
Act of May 24, 1945, P.L. 991, as amended, 35 P.S. § 1701 et seq., shall be
subject to review, approval and regulation in accordance with the provisions of
this chapter under the standards and criteria set forth in such redevelopment
proposal or urban renewal plan, and any amendments thereto, which standards and
criteria shall supersede the standards and criteria for subdivision and land
development set forth in Parts 5 and 6.
   D.   All ordinances or parts of ordinances which are inconsistent with the
provisions of this chapter are hereby repealed to the extent of such
inconsistency.
§ 515-703. Fees.
   A.   The City of Reading shall establish, by ordinance or resolution, a fee
schedule for the submission and processing of all applications pertaining to
this Chapter, including an escrow to be established by the City of Reading to
cover the costs of plan reviews including, but not limited to, legal,
engineering, and planning consultant reviews and site inspections. Tlte fee
schedule shall be maintained by the City Clerk or other official designated by
the City of Reading.
   B.   The proposed application shall not be considered by the City of Reading
until all pertinent fees and escrow are paid in full. All such fees shall be
utilized to pay for all administrative costs and review fees for any
professional consultants appointed by the City of Reading, and reasonable
overhead expenses as set forth in the fee schedule.
   C.   The applicant shall be required to pay any review fees required by the
Berks County Planning Commission, as well as any other local, state, county or
federal agency, which have been requested to review the proposed application in
accordance with the provisions established by the City of Reading. Such fees
shall be paid directly by the applicant to the agency.
   D.   If the expenses incurred by the City of Reading for the review of an
application exceed the total fees that have been paid by the applicant, such
excess expenses shall be paid by the applicant within 30 days of receipt, and
prior to the endorsement and release of the final plans by the City of Reading.
   E.   The applicant shall be responsible for all fees and expenses that are
required for site inspections and/or field observations that are relevant to
the subdivision or land development plan application.
[Amended 3-22-2021 by Ord. No. 22-2021]
§ 515-704. Modifications.
[Amended 5-29-2001 by Ord. No. 14-2001]
   A.   The Planning Commission may grant a modification of the requirements of
one or more provisions of this chapter if the literal enforcement will exact
undue hardship because of peculiar conditions pertaining to the land in
question, provided that such modification will not be contrary to the public
interest and that the purpose and intent of this chapter is observed.
   B.   All requests for a modification shall be in writing and shall accompany
and be a part of the application for development. The request shall state in
full the grounds and facts of unreasonableness or hardship on which the request
is based, the provision or provisions of this chapter involved and the minimum
modification necessary.
   C.   The request for modification shall be referred to the Planning
Commission for advisory comments.
   D.   The City Council shall keep a written record of all action on all
requests for modifications.
§ 515-705. Reconsideration.
Any subdivider aggrieved by a finding, decision or recommendation of the
Planning Commission may request and shall receive an opportunity to appear
before the Planning Commission to present additional relevant information and
request reconsideration of the original finding, decision or recommendation.
§ 515-706. Challenges.
   A.   Landowner; general provisions. A landowner desiring to challenge the
validity of any provision of this chapter or any amendment thereof shall not be
required to make or file any application for development as a condition to
pursuing any available judicial or administrative relief, except in the
following cases:
      (1)   When the power to grant relief against the challenged provision is
lodged in any administrative agency or officer and the application is necessary
to a decision upon the appropriate relief. For purposes of this subsection, the
term "administrative agency or officer" includes the local governing body when
acting upon the approval of plans.
      (2)   When an application is necessary to define the controversy and to
aid in its proper disposition. An application for subdivision approval or for a
building permit is not necessary to define the controversy or to aid in its
proper disposition within the meaning of this subsection when the challenge is
addressed solely to a minimum lot size or maximum density requirement, nor
shall an application relating to buildings be required when the challenge is
confined to site planning or subdivision improvement matters, nor shall a
subdivision application be required when the challenge is confined to building
or land use matters.
   B.   Landowner; scope of judicial relief. Notwithstanding any provision
contained in Subsection A hereof, a landowner desiring to challenge the
validity of any provision of this chapter or any amendment thereof may elect to
file a complete application for development, either preliminary or final, with
the Planning Commission and demand that it decide in what respects the
application accords with the provisions of this chapter and in what respects it
conflicts therewith.
      (1)   The determination pursuant to such demand shall be made in
accordance with the procedures and within the time prescribed for acting upon
the application in question. But where the procedures otherwise applicable do
not require this, a decision pursuant to a demand made under this section shall
be in writing and shall note the matters deemed to be in conflict with this
chapter and cite to the provisions of such ordinance relied upon. A copy of the
decision shall be furnished the applicant personally or mailed to him not later
than the day after the decision is rendered.
      (2)   Upon receipt of the decision, the landowner may immediately pursue
the administrative and judicial proceeding available to challenge the
provisions found to be in conflict with his application. In addition, he may
elect to serve a copy of the decision upon the City together with copies of his
application and notice of his intention to secure the special relief authorized
by this section and §
515-707H(2). If the landowner elects to serve such notice, the City shall have
60 days from the receipt thereof within which it may amend the challenged
provisions of the regulations. If no amendment is adopted within the sixty-day
period, the Court rendering the decision upon the challenge shall disregard any
subsequent amendment and may, if it holds challenged provisions invalid, enter
judgment ordering the Planning Commission to approve the landowner's
application as filed. If any amendment is adopted within the sixty-day period,
the landowner may accept the amendment and dismiss his action without prejudice
to his right to raise the same issues in another action; or he may amend his
complaint and challenge the amended provisions, and if such amended provisions
are held invalid by the Court, the Court shall have power to enter judgment
ordering the Planning Commission to approve the landowner's application as
filed.
      (3)   When the landowner is unaware of the conflict between his
application for development and the provisions of this chapter at the time of
filing thereof and files a complete application, preliminary or final, without
serving demand for a decision thereon as provided in this section, and
thereafter the application is disapproved on the grounds that it conflicts with
provisions of this chapter, the landowner may elect at that time to demand a
decision in the terms required by this section, whereupon the procedures set
forth in this section and the powers granted to the Court shall be applicable
as if a demand had been served at the time the application was filed.
§ 515-707. Appeals.
   A.   The decisions of the Planning Commission with respect to the approval
or disapproval of plans may be appealed directly to the County Court of Common
Pleas and shall be filed not later than 30 days after issuance of the decision
of the Planning Commission.
   B.   Subdivision appeals shall be entered by the Prothonotary upon the
filing of a subdivision appeal notice which concisely sets forth the grounds on
which the appellant relies, verified to the extent that it contains averments
of fact. The subdivision appeal notice shall be accompanied by a true copy
thereof.
   C.   Upon filing of a subdivision appeal, the Prothonotary shall forthwith
send to the Planning Commission by registered or certified mail a copy of the
subdivision appeal notice together with a writ of certiorari commanding the
Planning Commission within 20 days after receipt thereof to certify to the
Court its entire record in the matter in which the subdivision appeal has been
taken, or a true and complete copy thereof, including any transcript of
testimony in existence and owned by the Planning Commission at the time it
received the writ of certiorari.
   D.   If the appellant is a person other than the owner of the property
directly involved in the decision of the Planning Commission, the appellant,
within five days after the subdivision appeal is filed, shall serve a true copy
of the subdivision appeal notice upon such owner in the manner specified by the
Rules of Civil Procedure for the service of a complaint in equity and shall
file proof of such service. For identification of such owner, the appellant may
rely upon the record of the Planning Commission and, in the event of good faith
mistakes as to such identity, may make such service nunc pro tunc by leave of
court.
   E.   Within the 30 days first following the filing of a subdivision appeal,
the City and any owner or tenant of property directly involved in the decision
of the Planning Commission may intervene as of course by filing a notice of
intervention, accompanied by proof of service of the same, upon each appellant
or each appellant's counsel of record. All other intervention shall be governed
by the Rules of Civil Procedure relating to intervention actions.
   F.   The appellant, before proceeding to hearing or argument upon the
subdivision appeal, shall obtain and file with the Court a transcript thereof.
   G.   At any time during the pendency of a subdivision appeal, the Court or a
Judge thereof may grant an order of supersedeas upon such terms and conditions,
including the filing of security, as the Court or Judge thereof may prescribe.
   H.   If no verbatim record of testimony before the Planning Commission was
made or if, upon motion, it is shown that proper consideration of the
subdivision appeal requires the presentation of additional evidence, a Judge of
the Court may hold a hearing to receive such evidence or may remand the case to
the Planning Commission or refer it to a referee to receive such evidence.
Final decision in each subdivision appeal shall be made by the Court or a Judge
thereof considering the record and finding of fact made by the Planning
Commission, as supplemented and replaced by findings of fact made by a judge or
referee. The final decision shall contain conclusions of law:
      (1)   Where the appeal is from the decision of the Planning Commission,
the Court may reverse, affirm or modify the decision appealed.
      (2)   Where the appeal involves a challenge to the validity of this
chapter, the Court shall have power to declare this chapter and any provisions
thereof invalid and, in addition thereto, shall have power to enter judgment in
favor of the landowner as provided in §
515-706B(2) or stay the effect of its judgment for a limited time to give the
City an opportunity to modify or amend this chapter in accordance with the
opinion of the Court.
   I.   No costs shall be allowed against the City unless it shall appear to
the Court that the Planning Commission acted with gross negligence or in bad
faith or with malice.
§ 515-708. Preventative remedies.
[Amended 5-29-2001 by Ord. No. 14-2001]
   A.   In addition to other remedies, the City may institute and maintain
appropriate actions by law or in equity to restrain, correct or abate
violations, to prevent unlawful construction, to recover damages and to prevent
illegal occupancy of a building, structure or premises. The description by
metes and bounds in the instrument of transfer or other documents used in the
process of selling or transferring shall not exempt the seller or transferor
from such penalties or from the remedies herein provided.
   B.   The City may refuse to issue any permit or grant any approval necessary
to further improve or develop any real property which has been developed or
which has resulted from a subdivision of real property in violation of this
chapter. This authority to deny such a permit or approval shall apply to any of
the following applicants:
      (1)   The owner of record at the time of such violation.
      (2)   The vendee or lessee of the owner of record at the time of such
violation, without regard as to whether such vendee or lessee had actual or
constructive knowledge of the violation.
      (3)   The current owner of record who acquired the property subsequent to
the time of violation, without regard as to whether such current owner had
actual or constructive knowledge of the violation.
      (4)   The vendee or lessee of the current owner of record who acquired
the property subsequent to the time of violation without regard as to whether
such vendee or lessee had actual or constructive knowledge of the violation.
   C.   As an additional condition for issuance of a permit or the granting of
an approval to any such owner, current owner, vendee or lessee for the
development of any such real property, the City may require compliance with the
conditions that would have been applicable to the property at the time the
applicant acquired an interest in such real property.
§ 515-709. Enforcement remedies.
[Added 5-29-2001 by Ord. No. 14-2001]
   A.   Any person, partnership or corporation who or which has violated the
provisions of this chapter shall, upon being found liable therefor in a civil
enforcement proceeding commenced by the City, pay a judgment of not more than
$500 plus all court costs, including reasonable attorneys' fees incurred by the
City as a result thereof. No judgment shall commence or be imposed, levied or
payable until the date of the determination of a violation by the Magisterial
District Judge. If the defendant neither pays nor timely appeals the judgment,
the City may enforce the judgment pursuant to the applicable Rules of Civil
Procedure. Each day that a violation continues shall constitute a separate
violation, unless the Magisterial District Judge determining that there has
been a violation further determines that there was a good faith basis for the
person, partnership or corporation violating this chapter to have believed that
there was no such violation, in which event there shall be deemed to have been
only one such violation until the fifth day following the date of the
determination of a violation by the Magisterial District Judge, and thereafter
each day that a violation continues shall constitute a separate violation.
   B.   The Court of Common Pleas, upon petition, may grant an order of stay,
upon cause shown, tolling the per-diem judgment pending a final adjudication of
the violation and judgment.
   C.   Nothing contained in this section shall be construed or interpreted to
grant to any person or entity other than the City the right to commence any
action for enforcement pursuant to this section.
   D.   Magisterial District Judges shall have initial jurisdiction in
proceedings brought under this section.
Chapter 521
SUSTAINABILITY
The Code of the City of Reading contains provisions pertaining to
sustainability, such as the following:
Construction codes – See
Ch. 180.
Quality of life – See
Ch. 180, Part 13.
Rain barrels – See
Ch. 438.
Stormwater management – See
Ch. 505.
Subdivision and land development – See
Ch. 515.
Zoning – See
Ch. 600.
Alternative Energy – See
Ch. 600, Part 8.
Floodplain Overlay Zone – See
Ch. 600, Part 18.
Riparian Buffer – See
Ch. 600, § 600-818.
Steep Slope Overlay District — See Ch. 600, §
600-819.
Chapter 536
TAMPERING WITH PUBLIC PROPERTY
§
536-101.   Scattering rubbish.
§
536-102.   Tampering with City property.
§
536-103.   Ignoring barriers.
§
536-104.   Obstructing a passageway.
§
536-105.   Violations and penalties.
[HISTORY: Adopted by the City Council of the City of Reading 9-23-1953 by Ord.
No. 27-1953 (Ch. 6, Part 4B, of the 2001 Code of Ordinances). Amendments noted
where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Litter and advertising material — See
Ch. 346.
Parks and recreation — See
Ch. 396.
Streets and sidewalks — See
Ch. 508.
STATE LAW REFERENCES
Protecting public property; criminal mischief — See 18 Pa.C.S.A. § 3304.
§ 536-101. Scattering rubbish.
[Amended 3-18-1967 by Ord. No. 5-1967]
No person shall throw, discharge, dump, deposit, place or leave or cause to be
thrown, discharged, dumped, deposited, placed or left upon any sidewalk, alley,
street, bridge, public property, public passageway or public parking lot any
waste material, garbage, refuse or any other trash of any kind. Such
prohibition shall apply to the aforesaid enumerated places in the City of
Reading or other places owned by or under control of the City.
§ 536-102. Tampering with City property.
[Amended 6-7-1961 by Ord. No. 12-1961]
   A.   No person shall wilfully remove, injure or deface any sign, notice,
marker or topographical survey monument erected or placed by the City.
   B.   No person shall willfully deface, injure, destroy or mar or attempt
willfully to deface, injure, destroy or mar any parking meter, traffic light
standard or any other device to or for the regulation of governing traffic or
the enforcement of traffic regulations within the City.
§ 536-103. Ignoring barriers.
No person shall drive any vehicle of any type whatsoever on any alley, street,
bridge or public passageway in violation of any sign or barrier prohibiting or
controlling the passage of any vehicle or limiting the weight of any vehicle.
§ 536-104. Obstructing a passageway.
No person shall place or erect upon any sidewalk, alley, street, bridge or
public passageway in any building any obstruction of any type; provided, that
this chapter shall not be held to restrict the placing of temporary barriers or
warning signs for the purpose of safeguarding the public.
§ 536-105. Violations and penalties.
[Amended 5-29-2001 by Ord. No. 14-2001]
Any person or persons who shall violate any provision of this chapter shall,
upon conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $1,000
plus costs and, in default of payment of said fine and costs, to imprisonment
for a term not to exceed 30 days. Each day that a violation of this chapter
continues shall constitute a separate offense.
Chapter 540
TATTOO AND PIERCING ESTABLISHMENTS
§
540-101.   Title.
§
540-102.   Purpose.
§
540-103.   Word usage and definitions.
§
540-104.   Health permit.
§
540-105.   Documents required to be posted.
§
540-106.   Inspections.
§
540-107.   Regulations for establishments and operators.
§
540-108.   Suspension and revocation of tattoo establishment permit.
§
540-109.   Violations and penalties.
[HISTORY: Adopted by the City Council of the City of Reading 9-23-2013 by Ord.
No. 41-2013. Amendments noted where applicable.]
§ 540-101. Title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as "The City of Reading Tattoo and
Body Piercing Ordinance."
§ 540-102. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to protect the public health, safety and general
welfare by regulating individuals and establishments providing tattooing and
body piercing services and by providing a uniform set of guidelines for the
provision of those services and the operation of those establishments.
§ 540-103. Word usage and definitions.
[Amended 2-12-2018 by Ord. No. 5-2018]
   A.   In the administration of this chapter, words in the present tense
include the future, the singular number includes the plural and the plural the
singular; the masculine includes the feminine; the words "shall" and "will" are
mandatory; and the word "may" is permissive.
   B.   For the purposes of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall
have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section:
   AFTERCARE — Written and verbal instructions given to the client, specific to
the body art procedure(s) rendered, on caring for the body art and its
surrounding area.
   ANTISEPTIC — An agent that destroys disease-causing microorganisms on human
skin or mucosa.
   APPRENTICE — An individual being taught a trade.
   ARTIST/OPERATOR/TECHNICIAN/PRACTITIONER — Any person who controls, operates,
manages, conducts or practices body art activities at a body art establishment.
The term includes technicians and apprentices who work under the operator and
perform body art activities.
   AUTOCLAVE — An apparatus for sterilization, utilizing steam pressure at a
specific temperature over a period of time.
   BLOODBORNE PATHOGENS — Standard OSHA guidelines as defined in 29 CFR
1910.103, "Occupational Exposure to Bloodborne Pathogens."
   BODY ART — The practice of body piercing and tattooing.
   BODY ART ESTABLISHMENT OR FACILITY — Any space where body piercing or
tattooing is conducted.
   BODY PIERCING — The perforation of human tissue, excluding ear piercing, for
a nonmedical purpose.
   CLIENT — A person who requests a body art procedure at a body art
establishment.
   CLIENT RECORD — A file kept by the establishment maintaining information
regarding the client and the body art procedures provided to the client.
   CONTAMINATED WASTE/BIOLOGICAL WASTE/BIOHAZARD WASTE - Any liquid or
semiliquid blood or other potentially infectious materials; contaminated items
that would release blood or other potentially infectious materials in a liquid
or semiliquid state if compressed; items that are caked with dried blood or
other potentially infectious materials and are capable of releasing these
materials during handling; sharps and any wastes containing blood and other
potentially infectious materials, as defined in 29 CFR Part 1910.1030 (latest
edition), known as "Occupational Exposure to Bloodborne Pathogens" and/or PA
Chapter 284 Infectious and Chemotherapeutic Waste.
   COSMETIC TATTOOING — (See "tattooing.") Permanent cosmetics and/or
micropigment implantation.
   DEPARTMENT — City of Reading Property Maintenance Division.
   DISINFECTION — The destruction of disease-causing microorganisms on
inanimate objects or surfaces, thereby rendering these objects safe for use or
handling.
   EAR PIERCING — The puncturing of the outer perimeter or lobe of the ear
using a presterilized single-use stud and clasp ear piercing system following
manufacturers' instructions.
   EQUIPMENT/FURNITURE — All machinery, including fixtures, containers,
vessels, tools, devices, implements, furniture, display and storage areas,
sinks and all other apparatus and appurtenances used in connection with the
operation of a body art establishment.
   EXPOSURE — Any event where there is an eye, mouth or other mucus membrane or
nonintact skin contact with the blood or body fluids of another person or
contact of eye, mouth or other mucus membrane, nonintact skin with other
potentially infectious matter and/or an occurrence whereby an individual is
exposed to medical waste.
   GAUGING — The deliberate expansion of a healed fistula (hole in the skin)
for the purpose of wearing body piercing jewelry.
   GLOVES — Disposable protective coverings for the hands.
   HANDSINK — A lavatory equipped with tempered hot and cold running water
under pressure, used solely for washing hands, arms or other portions of the
body.
   HEALTH OFFICER — The Health Officer of the City of Reading or his or her
designee.
   HEALTH PERMIT — The written authorization by the City of Reading to operate
a body art establishment and/or to provide body art services. This permit is
separate from any other licensing requirement that may exist within communities
or political subdivisions other than the City of Reading.
   HOT WATER — Water at a temperature greater than or equal to 110° F. but not
greater than 125° F.
   INFECTIOUS WASTE —
      (1)   Blood and body fluids in a liquid or semiliquid state;
      (2)   Items contaminated with blood or body fluids, which, if compressed
or disturbed, may release liquid or semiliquid blood or body fluids;
      (3)   Sharps which have been used in performing body art;
      (4)   Other waste which contains pathogenic microbial agents or other
biologically active materials in sufficient concentrations that exposure to the
waste directly or indirectly creates a significant risk of disease.
   INSTRUMENTS USED FOR BODY ART — Hand pieces, needles, sharps, needle bars
and other instruments that may come in contact with a client's body or may be
exposed to bodily fluids during body art procedures.
   INVASIVE — Entry into the body either by incision or insertion of an
instrument into or through the skin or mucosa, or by any other means intended
to puncture, break or compromise the skin or mucosa.
   JEWELRY — Any personal ornament inserted into a newly pierced area.
   LIQUID CHEMICAL GERMICIDE — A sanitizer registered with the Environmental
Protection Agency or an approximate 1:100 dilution of household chlorine bleach
made fresh daily and dispensed from a spray bottle (500 ppm, 1/4 cup per gallon
or two tablespoons per quart of tap water).
   MEDICAL WASTE —
      (1)   Blood and body fluids in a liquid or semiliquid state;
      (2)   Items contaminated with blood or body fluids, which, if compressed
or disturbed, may release liquid or semiliquid blood or body fluids;
      (3)   Sharps which have been used in performing body art;
      (4)   Other waste which contains pathogenic microbial agents or other
biologically active materials in sufficient concentrations that exposure to the
waste directly or indirectly creates a significant risk of disease.
   MINOR — Any individual under the age of 18.
   OPERATOR — The term "operator" shall mean:
      (1)   Any individual, firm, company, corporation, or association that
owns or operates an establishment where tattooing is performed.
      (2)   Any individual who performs or practices the art of tattooing on a
human being. This definition shall not apply to:
         (a)   Licensed physicians, dentists, or doctors of veterinary medicine
in performance of their professional duties.
         (b)   Funeral directors.
         (c)   Corrective cosmetics establishments physically located within a
licensed physician's office.
   PERMIT HOLDER — A person who holds a permit to operate a body art
establishment or to provide body art services.
   PERSON — An individual, any form of business or social organization or any
other nongovernmental legal entity including but not limited to a corporation,
partnership, limited-liability company, association, trust or unincorporated
organization.
   PHYSICIAN — A health professional who has earned a degree of Doctor of
Medicine (M.D.) or Doctor of Osteopathy (D.O.) after completing an approved
course of study. A physician is required to obtain a license from the state in
which professional services will be performed.
   PIERCING — The term "piercing" refers to piercing of skin with insertion of
a device. Individuals who pierce only ear lobes are exempt from the
regulations.
   PROCEDURE SURFACE — Any surface of an inanimate object that contacts the
client's skin during a body art procedure, skin preparation of the area
adjacent to and including the body art procedure or any associated work area,
which may require sanitizing.
   RECORD/REGISTER — List.
   SANITARY — Clean and free of agents of infection or disease.
   SANITIZE/SANITIZATION PROCEDURE — A process of reducing the numbers of
microorganisms on cleaned surfaces and equipment to a safe level as judged by
public health standards and which has been approved by the Property Maintenance
Division and/ or by the Center for Disease Control and Prevention.
   SHARPS — Any object (sterile or contaminated) that may purposefully or
accidentally cut or penetrate the skin or mucosa including, but not limited to,
presterilized, single-use needles, scalpel blades and razor blades.
   SHARPS CONTAINER/BIOHAZARD CONTAINER — A puncture-resistant, leakproof
container that can be closed for handling, storage, transportation and disposal
and is labeled with the international biohazard symbol.
   SINGLE USE — Products or items that are intended for one-time, one-person
use and are disposed of after use on each client including, but not limited to,
cotton swabs or balls, tissues or paper products, paper or plastic cups, gauze
and sanitary coverings, razors, piercing needles, scalpel blades, stencils, ink
cups and gloves.
   STERILIZATION — A process approved by the Property Maintenance Division
resulting in the destruction of all forms of microbial life, including highly
resistant bacterial spores.
   TATTOO — The indelible mark, figure, or decorative design introduced by the
insertion of dyes or pigments into or under the subcutaneous portion of the
skin.
   TATTOO ESTABLISHMENT — A place where tattooing is performed.
   TATTOOING — The term "tattooing" refers to one or more of the following:
      (1)   Any method of placing indelible mark(s), figure(s), letter(s),
scroll(s), symbol(s), or decorative design(s) upon or under the skin of a
living human being with ink or any other substance, resulting in the coloration
of the skin by the aid of needles or any other instrument designed to touch or
puncture the skin.
      (2)   An indelible design made upon the skin of a living human being by
production of scars other than by branding.
      (3)   All forms of cosmetic tattooing.
   TATTOOIST — Any person who applies a tattoo to the body of another person.
   TEMPORARY BODY ART ESTABLISHMENT — Any place or premises operating at a
fixed location where an operator performs body art procedures for no more than
14 days consecutively in conjunction with a single event or celebration.
   THREE-DIMENSIONAL BODY ART — The form of body art consisting of or requiring
the placement, injection or insertion of an object, device or other thing made
of material such as steel, titanium, rubber, latex, plastic, glass or any other
material, beneath the surface of the skin of a person.
   UNIVERSAL PRECAUTIONS — A set of guidelines and controls, published by the
Center for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) as "Guidelines for Prevention
of Transmission of Human Immunodeficiency Virus and Hepatitis B Virus to
Health-care and Public-safety Workers" in Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report
(MMWR), June 23, 1989, Vol. 38, No. S-6, and as "Recommendations for Preventing
Transmission of Human Immunodeficiency Virus and Hepatitis B Virus to Patients
During Exposure-prone Invasive Procedures," in MMWR, July 12, 1991, Vol. 40,
No. RR-8. This method of infection control requires the employer and the
employee to assume that all human blood and specified human body fluids are
infectious for HIV, HBV and other blood pathogens. Precautions include
handwashing, gloving, personal protective equipment, injury prevention, and
proper handling and disposal of needles, other sharp instruments, and blood and
body fluid contaminated products.
   WAIVER — A written document issued by the Health Officer with the consent of
the Board which authorizes a modification or waiver of one or more of the
requirements of this chapter if, in the opinion of the Health Officer and
Property Maintenance Division, a health hazard or nuisance will not result from
the modification or waiver.
§ 540-104. Health permit.
   A.   It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in the business of
operating a tattoo establishment performing body art, body piercing, or
tattooing without first obtaining a permit to engage in such business, in
accordance with the provisions of this chapter and unless abiding by the
provisions hereof. A permit application may be refused and an establishment may
be closed summarily by a Health Officer or his designee.
   B.   Health permit applications.
      (1)   Any person wishing to obtain a permit pursuant to the provisions of
this chapter for said establishment (whether initially or for renewal thereof)
shall submit the following information to the Department:
         (a)   Name of the body art establishment;
         (b)   Address and phone number of the body art establishment; name,
address and phone number of the owner of the establishment;
         (c)   For each employee of the establishment:
            [1]   Full name;
            [2]   Home address;
            [3]   Home phone number;
            [4]   Certificate of completion of OSHA bloodborne pathogens
training dated no more than one year prior to date of permit application;
         (d)   Proof of liability insurance with a minimum of $150,000;
         (e)   Phone number of the establishment;
         (f)   Method of sterilization to be utilized at the establishment;
         (g)   A description of all body art procedures performed at the
establishment;
         (h)   Proof of payment of current fiscal year's applicable
occupational and business privilege taxes; and
         (i)   Proof that the applicant is at least 18 years of age.
      (2)   Any person wishing to obtain a permit pursuant to the provisions of
this chapter must be an owner, operator, manager, or corporate officer of the
business itself, not merely of the physical structure in which the business is
located.
   C.   Fee/expiration. Fees are set by City Council and are as listed in the
Code of the City of Reading Fee Schedule. 1
   D.   Transferability.
      (1)   The health permit is nontransferrable. It may not under any
circumstances be transferred to another individual and/or address. A new health
permit must be sought in such a circumstance.
1.   Editor's Note: See
Ch. 212, Fees.
§ 540-105. Documents required to be posted.
The following must be displayed in a prominent and conspicuous area readily
observable to patrons:
   A.   Permit provided for in this chapter.
   B.   Most current inspection sheet.
   C.   Literature explaining aftercare.
   D.   Name, address, and phone number of Property Maintenance Division/Health
Office.
   E.   Emergency plan for contacting fire, police, or emergency services and a
phone readily available for such use.
   F.   Plan for exiting the premises in case of a fire or disaster.
   G.   Zoning permit.
§ 540-106. Inspections.
When application for permit is complete, the applicant shall be referred to the
Property Maintenance Division. The Property Maintenance Division shall inspect
the proposed location to determine if it complies with the health and sanitary
provisions of this chapter. Inspections must occur at least twice per year and
can be unannounced. It shall be unlawful for any person or operator of a
tattooing establishment to willfully prevent or restrain the Health Officer or
his designee from entering any permit-issued establishment where tattooing is
being performed for the purpose of inspecting said premises after proper
identification is presented to the operator. The Health Officer or his designee
may give written warning for violations and, if the establishment does not
correct the deficiency within 10 days, the establishment shall be closed until
compliance is achieved.
§ 540-107. Regulations for establishments and operators.
Every person who operates a tattooing establishment within the City of Reading
shall comply with the following requirements:
   A.   Records required.
      (1)   In order for the operator to properly assess the client's condition
for receiving body art procedures and not violate the client's rights or
confidential medical information, the operator must obtain a client record
containing the following information regarding each client:
         (a)   Name, address, date of birth and photocopy of ID (acceptable
forms of ID are driver's license, passport, state ID or military ID);
         (b)   Any known allergies;
         (c)   Any condition that may affect/hamper the healing process;
         (d)   The name of the artist who performed the procedure;
         (e)   The date of the procedure;
         (f)   The location of the procedure on the client's body;
         (g)   A description of the type of procedure provided;
         (h)   A description of any unusual circumstances or complications
occurring during the procedure.
      (2)   The following forms must be completed by each client and kept as
part of the client record:
         (a)   Signed statement by client acknowledging that he or she may be
temporarily prohibited from donating blood under rules and regulations of the
Red Cross;
         (b)   Signed statement by client attesting that, at the time of the
procedure, he or she is not intoxicated from legal or illegal drug use or
alcohol consumption;
         (c)   For all persons under the age of 18, signed consent of the
minor's parent or legal guardian permitting the minor to undergo the body art
procedure. (For anyone under the age of 18, a notarized affidavit and a copy of
the parent/guardian ID is required).
      (3)   The holder of a body art establishment permit must ensure that the
foregoing client records are kept and retained for a minimum of four years and
shall be made available to the Health Officer or designee upon request.
      (4)   All infections or complications resulting from body art performed
by the establishment which become known to the establishment shall be recorded
in the client file, and the details of the infection or complication must be
promptly reported to the Property Maintenance Division.
   B.   General provisions. The holder of a body art establishment permit must
ensure that the body art establishment conforms at all times with the following
requirements:
      (1)   The levels where body art procedures are being performed and where
instruments and sharps are assembled shall be well-lit at all times with an
artificial light source.
      (2)   All walls, floors and procedure surfaces in rooms or areas where
body art procedures are performed must be smooth, nonporous, washable, and in
good repair. Floors shall be cleaned daily. Cleaning shall not occur while
procedures are being performed.
      (3)   All body art establishments must have a dedicated physical address.
      (4)   All body art establishments must have:
         (a)   An entrance leading directly into the establishment;
         (b)   No direct opening between the establishment and any building or
portion of a building used as living or sleeping quarters or as a food, liquor,
or tobacco establishment; and
         (c)   Notwithstanding the foregoing, body art establishments located
in a nail salon, barbershop or cosmetology salon may share an entrance into the
establishment. However, the body art portion of the establishment must be
separated by a wall extending from floor to ceiling.
      (5)   Each establishment shall have an area that will be screened from
public view for customers requesting privacy or for all genitalia body art
procedures. Dividers, curtains or partitions at a minimum shall separate
multiple body art stations.
      (6)   A consistent fresh air supply must be provided to the
establishment. Furnace or air conditioners shall be maintained to allow for
airflow. Filters shall be cleaned or replaced annually or more frequently if
necessary.
      (7)   No domestic or wild animals of any kind shall be present in a body
art establishment; fish aquariums and service animals used by persons with
disabilities are permitted in nonprocedural areas.
      (8)   The doors to the establishment shall be self-closing and kept
closed to prevent entrance by vermin and foreign particles.
      (9)   The establishment must at all times have a supply of hot and cold
running water in sufficient quantities to conduct the facility in a sanitary
manner.
      (10)   The establishment must have emergency exits marked for easy
escape.
      (11)   Electrical appliances or apparatus must be clean and have no worn
or bare wiring to avoid fires, shocks and electrocution and all electrical
outlets in operator areas, cleaning areas and bathroom facilities must be
equipped with ground fault (GF) protected receptacles.
      (12)   Water or product spills on the floor shall be removed immediately
and the floor dried to avoid falls.
   C.   Equipment. The establishment must have the following equipment, all of
which shall be in good repair, easily cleanable and kept in a sanitary manner
at all times:
      (1)   Sinks. A minimum of two sinks, one designated for handwashing and
the other for employee use only to clean equipment. Both must be kept clean and
include:
         (a)   Hot and cold running water, preferably with wrist- or foot-
operated controls;
         (b)   Liquid pump soap;
         (c)   Single-use paper towels; and
         (d)   Waste receptacle.
      (2)   Sharps container. Contaminated sharps must be disposed of in an
approved sharps container to prevent cross-contamination.
      (3)   Biohazard waste container. Biohazard waste must be disposed of in
an approved biohazard waste container to prevent cross-contamination.
      (4)   Autoclave(s). The autoclave shall be used, cleaned and maintained
according to the manufacturer's instructions. A copy of the manufacturer's
recommended procedures for the operation of the autoclave must be available for
inspection by the Health Officer. Autoclaves shall be positioned away from
workstations or areas available to the public. Cleaning and logbooks are to be
available for inspection. Each owner of the body art establishment shall
demonstrate that the autoclave is capable of attaining sterilization by monthly
spore tests. These tests shall be verified through an independent laboratory.
These records shall be kept by the owner for three years and made available to
the Health Officer or his designee upon request. Each body art establishment is
to be equipped with an autoclave which is a design, style or
      (5)   Alternate sterilizing equipment may only be used when specifically
approved in writing by the Property Maintenance Division. After each use and
before use on another customer, all needle bars, grips and tubes and needles
shall be processed by the following procedure: cleaned, packaged in a self-
sealing autoclave bag which is dated with an expiration date not to exceed six
months, and arranged in an autoclave which is operated in strict accordance
with the manufacturer's recommendations. As the operation time of the autoclave
may vary with the type of instrument, the packaging of that item and the
arrangement of items in the autoclave, it is critical that the manufacturer's
operation manual be followed. This will assure that each item placed in the
autoclave achieves the proper temperature for sterilization. Temperature-
sensitive autoclave tape, autoclave bags with a chemical color indicator on the
bag or any other temperature-sensitive medium approved for autoclaves by the
Property Maintenance Division must be applied to each load every time the
autoclave is used. To further confirm that the autoclave is operated in a
manner to assure sterility of the processed instruments, it must be tested
monthly using a biological indicator such as spore strips or spore suspensions
which are processed by a laboratory. The operator must maintain records
documenting such testing for three years. A copy of the manufacturer's
recommended procedures for the operation of the autoclave is to be available
for inspection by the Property Maintenance Division. An autoclave, which has
received a positive spore test, must be immediately removed from service and
all instruments allegedly sterilized by that autoclave shall not be utilized on
any client. Prior to using, the operator must ensure that there is evidence of
one negative spore test. If the autoclave requires repair work, it cannot be
utilized until it has received two negative spore tests. Autoclaves must be
cleaned and serviced at the frequency recommended by the manufacturer. A copy
of the manufacturer's cleaning and servicing instructions must be maintained in
the body art establishment.
      (6)   Waste receptacles. Each workstation shall have a waste receptacle,
which is covered and lined with a disposable bag.
      (7)   Disposable ink caps. Ink caps are required if providing tattooing
and permanent color technology procedures. Ink cap holders shall be smooth,
nonporous and disposable.
      (8)   First aid kit. Body art establishments are required to have a
complete first aid kit. Chairs. All chairs for operators, as well as clients,
shall be made of smooth, cleanable materials. Cloth is not permitted.
      (9)   Cabinets or containers for storage. All cabinets and containers
shall be maintained and shall be kept in a clean and sanitary manner.
      (10)   Toilet facilities. Toilet facilities shall be offered and
conveniently located during all business hours for all operators, employees and
clients. A hand wash sink shall be offered, and signage shall be visible
reminding employees to wash their hands.
   D.   Special requirements for single-use items, inks, dyes and pigments.
      (1)   All products applied to the skin, including but not limited to body
art stencils, applicators, gauze, razors and markers, shall be considered
single-use items.
      (2)   Single-use items shall not be used on more than one client for any
reason.
      (3)   Single-use sharps shall be immediately disposed of in an approved
sharps container.
      (4)   Hollow bore needles or needles with cannula shall not be reused,
whether on the same client or a different client, unless it is a single
piercing.
      (5)   All inks, dyes, pigments, solid core needles, and equipment shall
be specifically manufactured for performing body art procedures and shall be
used according to the manufacturer's instructions.
      (6)   Inks, dyes, or pigments may be mixed and may only be diluted with
water from an approved potable source.
      (7)   Immediately before a tattoo is applied, the quantity of the dye to
be used shall be transferred from the dye bottle and placed into single-use
paper or plastic cups or caps. Upon completion of the tattoo, these single-use
cups or caps and their contents shall be discarded.
      (8)   The holder of the body art establishment permit shall maintain all
the furniture and equipment in the establishment in good working order and keep
it in a clean and sanitary manner.
      (9)   The holder of the body art establishment permit must ensure that
storage within the establishment and body artists comply with the following
requirements:
         (a)   Flammable and combustible chemicals shall be stored away from
potential sources of ignition such as an open flame or an electrical device.
         (b)   All chemicals shall be stored in closed bottles or containers
and clearly labeled.
         (c)   No cleaning/sterilizing products shall be stored:
            [1]   Where food is kept;
            [2]   In the restroom, unless in a locked cabinet; or
            [3]   With single-use supplies.
         (d)   Storage units. All cabinets, drawers, and containers used for
storage of supplies, instruments and towels shall be kept clean.
         (e)   Supplies.
            [1]   Unused supplies shall be stored in a clean, enclosed
container or drawer;
            [2]   Used/soiled disposable supplies shall be discarded
immediately in a clean, closed waste receptacle with a plastic liner; and
            [3]   Shall be labeled accordingly.
         (f)   Instrument storage.
            [1]   Instruments that have been used on a client or soiled in any
manner shall be placed in a properly labeled covered receptacle until
sterilized;
            [2]   Sterilized instruments shall be individually packed and
stored in a clean, closed container or drawer until used and are to be stored
six to 12 inches off the floor, dated with an expiration date not to exceed 180
days; and
            [3]   Sterile instruments may not be used if the package has been
breached or after the expiration date without first resterilizing.
         (g)   Contaminated sharps must be stored and disposed of in approved
sharps container to prevent cross-contamination.
         (h)   Infectious waste must be:
            [1]   Handled and stored so that human exposure is prevented;
            [2]   Discarded in double-lined plastic bags in a covered waste
receptacle or in an approved red bag marked with the international biohazard
symbol and stored safely until transported by a licensed infectious waste
hauler to an appropriate treatment or disposal facility; and
            [3]   Records of infectious waste disposed of shall be retained for
one year.
      (10)   The holder of a body art establishment permit must ensure that the
use of towels/ linens in the establishment meets the following requirements and
that body artists working therein comply with the following requirements:
         (a)   Cloth linens, after use, shall be disposed of in a labeled
receptacle that has a cover;
         (b)   Used cloth linens shall not be used again until they are
laundered and sanitized;
         (c)   Single-use towels may be used for body art procedures and must
be discarded in a labeled receptacle that has a cover, with a disposable
plastic liner, immediately following each body art procedure; and
         (d)   Linens to be laundered shall be laundered either by a commercial
washer which includes immersion in laundry detergent and either chlorine bleach
or water at 160° F., for not less than 15 minutes during the washing and
rinsing operation. Linen service from a source approved by the Health Officer
or his designee may be substituted as an alternative method.
      (11)   The holder of a body art establishment permit must ensure that the
use of products in the establishment meets the following requirements and that
all body artists providing services therein comply with the following
requirements:
         (a)   All liquids, cosmetics, creams, gels, pastes, powders, and other
products are kept in clean, closed containers;
         (b)   Original product bottles and containers have an original
manufacturer label;
         (c)   When only a portion of the product is to be used on a client,
the product shall be removed from the container by a spatula, scoop, spoon, or
dropper so that the product does not come in direct contact with the client and
to assure that the remaining product is not contaminated;
         (d)   If a product is poured into another container, such as a shaker,
dispenser pump container, or spray container, the container is labeled to
identify the product;
         (e)   Supplies and implements which come in direct contact with a
client and cannot be disinfected, such as cotton pads, cotton balls, pads, Q-
tips, sponges, bandages, tapes, surgical dressing and other similar items,
shall be disposed of in a covered waste receptacle, with a plastic liner, or,
if contaminated with body fluids, in a hazardous waste container, immediately
after use;
         (f)   All products applied to the skin, including stencils, must be
single-use and disposable. Petroleum jellies, soaps, and other products used in
the application of stencils must be dispensed and applied on the area to be
tattooed with sterile gauze or in a manner to prevent contamination; and
         (g)   Only petroleum jelly, United States Pharmacopoeia or National
Formulary shall be applied to the area to be tattooed and it shall be in a
collapsible metal or plastic tube. The application may be spread by the use of
sterile gauze or another sterile object but not directly with the fingers.
      (12)   All permit holders must ensure that after use by each operator
and/or a client, all nondisposable instruments and procedure work surfaces are
cleaned and sterilized with a sanitizer that has a demonstrated antimicrobial
activity, as indicated by the product label and that the following requirements
are complied with:
         (a)   Jewelry used for new body piercing must be sterilized with an
autoclave or chem-clave. Acrylic jewelry cannot be used for a new piercing.
Jewelry used in healed body piercing does not have to be sterilized, but must
be used according to product label;
         (b)   Clippers must be disinfected with a liquid chemical sterilant
after each use;
         (c)   All nondisposable instruments used for body art must be cleansed
and sterilized after each use. Autoclave or chem-clave sterilization must be
conducted for the cycle of time and corresponding operating pressure
recommended by the manufacturer of the autoclave. Sanitizers used in the
cleaning process must have demonstrated antimicrobial activity, as indicated by
the product label and be registered with the U.S. Environmental Protection
Agency;
         (d)   Instruments that are to be autoclaved within the facility must
be packed in a single-use autoclave bag with the date of sterilization. The
expiration date must not exceed 90 days from the date autoclaved;
         (e)   All sterilized instruments must remain stored in sterilized
packages until just prior to performing a body art procedure. Where several
instruments are sterilized at the same time in the same package, such as in a
single-use setup, once the container is opened any instrument not used
immediately in a procedure must be resterilized;
         (f)   Every batch of sterilized equipment must be monitored for
sterilization by use of a heat-sensitive indicator that is capable of
indicating approximate time and temperature achieved; and scratches or
irregular surfaces and which has been properly sterilized prior to use may be
inserted into a newly pierced area.
      (13)   Pigments, colors and dyes used from stock solutions for each
client must be placed in a single-use receptacle and the receptacle and
remaining solution must be discarded and disposed of after each use.
         (a)   All dyes, inks and pigments shall be from a source of supply
which complies with applicable U.S. Food and Drug Administration regulations
when available. Dyes, inks and pigments are to be used in accordance with the
manufacturer's directions and are not to be adulterated with any substance not
recommended by the manufacturer.
         (b)   A client must not receive body art procedures on areas which are
irritated/ inflamed or have moles, rash, broken skin, infection or any other
evidence of an unhealthy condition such as TB, influenza, HIV, impetigo,
syphilis, mumps, hepatitis, scleral jaundice or rubella.
         (c)   Permit holders and all other operators must be able to
demonstrate knowledge in anatomy and skin diseases, infections, disease control
and universal precautions.
      (14)   Every body artist must wash his/her hands thoroughly with liquid
antibacterial soap and water and dry them with single-use disposable towels,
before and after serving each client and at any time during the procedure when
the hands may become contaminated.
      (15)   The owner of a body art establishment must ensure that each
employee wears gloves, and each operator shall wear gloves in accordance with
the following:
         (a)   When performing body art procedures, the operator must wash his/
her hands prior to gloving;
         (b)   Gloves must be disposed of after the completion of each
procedure on each client; and
         (c)   If gloves become torn, punctured or otherwise contaminated,
operators must remove and dispose of the gloves, wash his/her hands with liquid
soap and water, and dry with a disposable towel, and then put on a new pair of
gloves before resuming the body art procedure.
      (16)   Single-use items must not be used on more than one client. After
use, all single- use needles, razors, razor blades and other sharps must be
immediately disposed of in an approved sharps disposal container in accordance
with medical waste removal guidelines as applicable.
      (17)   No body art procedure shall be performed until the following
inspections, shavings and preparations of the body art area have occurred:
         (a)   No body piercing shall be done on skin surfaces which have any
rash, pimples, boils, infections or any other evidence of an unhealthy
condition;
         (b)   If the skin is to be shaved, the skin surface must first be
washed with soap and warm water. Disposable razors, for each client, shall be
used for preparation of the areas to be pierced;
         (c)   Prior to piercing, the area to be pierced shall be gently
scrubbed with an approved surgical scrub material or a sterile gauze pad soaked
in a germicidal preparation registered with the Environmental Protection Agency
and applied in accordance with the manufacturer's recommendations;
         (d)   Only medical grade markers or ink and sterile toothpicks are to
be used to identify the areas to be pierced. Gentian violet may be utilized for
marking oral piercings; and
         (e)   The use of styptic pencils, alum blocks or other solid styptic
to check the flow of blood is prohibited.
      (18)   All permit holders must ensure that the body art establishment,
operators and employees use liquid chemical germicide solution in accordance
with the manufacturer's directions. Body artists must comply with the following
requirements:
         (a)   Label the liquid chemical germicide solution; and
         (b)   Keep the liquid chemical germicide solution covered at all
times.
      (19)   While in the body art establishment, permit holders must not
engage in or allow any other person to engage in any of the following
activities:
         (a)   Consuming food or beverages in any area where body art is
performed;
         (b)   Storing food in the same area where chemical supplies are used
or stored;
         (c)   Using, consuming, serving, or in any manner possessing or
distributing intoxicating beverages or controlled substances upon its premises
during the hours the facility is open to the public and/or any body art
procedures are being performed; and
         (d)   Performing body art when she/he is under the influence of
alcohol, narcotic drugs, stimulants, or depressants or on any person who
appears to be under the influence of alcohol, narcotic drugs, stimulants, or
depressants.
      (20)   All jewelry to be used in body art procedures is to be made from
one of the following grades: 316LVM and/or surgical implant grade stainless
steel AST F138; solid yellow or white gold which is 14K or 18K; titanium
meeting ASTM TiA4V ELI, F136; niobium; platinum; high-density, low-porosity
nontoxic plastics meeting FDA standards where applicable (Tygon and PTFE); and
autoclavable borosilicate glass (Pyrex). Certification of the quality of the
jewelry is to be obtained from the manufacturer/supplier and made available for
inspection. Substandard jewelry such as that which is damaged, scratched,
intended for earlobes or not expressly designed for body piercing, jewelry made
of silver, gold plated or filled or other corrosive metal shall not be used.
When stored in a closed clean, dry container, jewelry stored in paper autoclave
bags may be stored up to three months and up to one year when a full plastic
autoclave bag is used.
      (21)   No person may perform a body art procedure on or to any person
under 18 years of age without prior written consent of the parent or court-
appointed guardian of such person. The person giving consent must be present
during the procedure.
         (a)   The person providing the body art procedure must retain a copy
of the consent for four years.
         (b)   Artists have the right to refuse to perform body art procedures
on a person at their discretion.
      (22)   All recipients of a body art procedure shall receive from the body
artist and/or the body art establishment both written and verbal aftercare
which shall include, inter alia, circumstances under which the client should
seek medical treatment.
      (23)   Only dentists/physicians can split tongues.
      (24)   All patrons must be given verbal and written instructions or
pictures demonstrating care of the tattooed area and a recommendation to
consult a physician in the event of any sign of infection.
      (25)   Artists shall also be free of skin and infectious diseases to
include:
         (a)   Boils.
         (b)   Infected wounds.
         (c)   Open sores.
         (d)   Acute respiratory infection.
         (e)   Other communicable disease or condition.
         (f)   Nausea.
         (g)   Vomiting.
         (h)   Diarrhea.
      (26)   Artists cannot work on a customer if, in the artist's opinion,
that person is intoxicated from drug or alcohol use.
      (27)   The use of styptic pencils, alum blocks, or other solid styptics
to check the flow of blood is prohibited.
      (28)   Artists cannot administer anesthetic injections or other
medications or prescription drugs.
      (29)   Liquid chemical germicide solutions must be labeled and dated at
time of opening, covered at all times and changed weekly (daily in the case of
a hypochlorite solution) or when it becomes visibly cloudy or dirty.
      (30)   Items in autoclave bags must have date sterilized and date of
expiration and may not be used more than 180 days after sterilization date.
      (31)   MSDS sheets for all compounds utilized must be available to all
employees and to patrons if requested.
      (32)   Animals may not be tattooed with any of the instruments used in
tattooing human patrons.
   E.   Updating of chapter. In order to carry out the intent of this chapter,
the Board of Health in consultation with the Health Officer may promulgate,
from time to time, rules and regulations pertaining to the requirements of
sanitation, cleanliness, adequacy of facilities, equipment, and operation of a
tattooing establishment consistent with current good practices and this
chapter.
§ 540-108. Suspension and revocation of tattoo establishment permit.
   A.   A tattoo establishment permit may be suspended or revoked by the Health
Officer or his designee upon the occurrence of any of the following events:
      (1)   The application for such permit contained a false statement(s).
      (2)   The operator has violated the provisions of this chapter.
      (3)   The operator is convicted or pleads guilty or nolo contendere to an
offense listed under the Pennsylvania Crimes Code related to the conduct of
business in the tattoo establishment.
      (4)   The operator is unable to demonstrate qualifications or standards
for registration.
      (5)   The operator is unable to practice with reasonable skill and safety
due to illness, addiction to drugs or alcohol, or being convicted of a felony
related to the use of controlled substances.
      (6)   The operator violates a lawful regulation or order of the Property
Maintenance Division previously entered in a disciplinary proceeding.
      (7)   The operator knowingly maintains a professional connection or
association with a person in violation of the act or aiding an unregistered
person to practice the profession.
      (8)   The operator acts in such a manner as to present an immediate and
clear danger to public health or safety.
      (9)   If recordkeeping provision is violated, the City can revoke the
permit for two years. The operator cannot register for a new permit for two
years from date of violation or date of revocation, whichever is later.
      (10)   Failure to pay permit fees.
   B.   The Health Officer or his designee may suspend the operator permit
immediately if in his discretion he determines that continued operation poses a
serious health risk.
   C.   The Health Officer or his designee shall close the establishment by
affixing a placard to the door of the business. The placard cannot be removed
until violations are remedied. Removal of the placard after compliance has been
met carries a removal fee of $150.
   D.   The Health Officer or his designee shall serve the tattoo establishment
with written notice of said suspension or revocation, specifying the reasons
therefor, before said suspension or revocation shall become effective. Service
of said notice shall be deemed effective if delivered to the person in apparent
charge of the tattoo establishment.
   E.   The operator whose permit is revoked must surrender it to the Property
Maintenance Division.
§ 540-109. Violations and penalties.
   A.   In addition to the revocation and suspension of any permit, as provided
in this chapter, any person violating or failing to comply with any section or
provision hereof, or any regulation made under this authority and any person
who hinders, obstructs, or interferes with a Health Officer or any of his
assistants in the discharge of their duties, shall, on conviction, be fined not
less than $50 nor more than $300 plus the costs of their prosecution for the
first offense and not less than $200 nor more than $1,000 plus the costs of
prosecution for each succeeding offense and, in default of payment of such
fines and costs, shall be imprisoned for not more than 90 days.
   B.   All fees and fines imposed or collected under the provisions of this
chapter shall be paid into the City Treasury for the use of the City.
   C.   Failure to observe any of the provisions of this chapter is basis for
revocation of a permit or denial of a renewal of a permit. Unless a permit is
being temporarily and immediately revoked for health reasons in accordance with
the provisions of this chapter, prior to the revocation or denial of renewal,
the City shall give 10 days' written notice to the permit holder of his
violation of or his failure to observe a general condition as set forth herein.
If the permit holder requests a hearing prior to the expiration of that ten-day
notice period, either the Health Officer or a representative of the Property
Maintenance Division shall hold a hearing to determine if the revocation or
renewal denial should occur. In order to request a hearing, the permit holder
must do so in writing. The permit holder may present evidence in his behalf at
such hearing. A written decision shall be rendered within 45 days of the
hearing. If the permit holder fails to request such a hearing, the revocation
or renewal denial shall be effective upon the expiration of the ten-day period
or upon expiration of the term of the existing permit, as will be set forth in
the written notice.
   D.   Any person convicted of two violations of the provisions of this
chapter within any twelve- month period shall have his permit suspended for one
full year and shall not be eligible for another permit until the expiration of
one full year.
   E.   This chapter and the foregoing penalties shall not be construed to
limit or deny the right of the City or any person to such equitable or other
remedies as may be otherwise available with or without process of law.
Chapter 543
TAX ABATEMENTS
Part 1
Residential Tax Abatement.
§
543-101.   Short title.
§
543-102.   Purpose.
§
543-103.   Definitions.
§
543-104.   Exemption for improvement relating to deteriorated neighborhoods;
permits and compliance with law required.
§
543-105.   Exemption schedule relating to improvements to deteriorated property
in deteriorated neighborhoods; termination for tax delinquency.
§
543-106.   Exemption procedure and applicable schedule relating to improvements
to deteriorated property in deteriorated neighborhoods.
§
543-107.   Exemption for new residential construction relating to deteriorating
areas; permits and compliance with law required.
§
543-108.   Exemption schedule relating to new residential construction in
deteriorating areas; termination for tax delinquency.
§
543-109.   Exemption procedure and applicable schedule relating to new
residential construction in deteriorating areas.
§
543-110.   Subsequent reduction in assessment.
§
543-111.   Authority to administer.
§
543-112.   Termination.
Part 2
Local Economic Revitalization Tax Assistance Program
§
543-201.   Short title.
§
543-202.   Purpose.
§
543-203.   Definitions.
§
543-204.   Exemption for new construction and improvements; permits and
compliance with law required.
§
543-205.   Exemption schedule; termination for tax delinquency.
§
543-206.   Exemption procedure; applicable schedule.
§
543-207.   Subsequent reduction assessment.
§
543-208.   Authority to administer.
§
543-209.   Termination.
Part 3
Enterprise Zone LERTA Opportunity
§
543-301.   Short title.
§
543-302.   Purpose.
§
543-303.   Definitions.
§
543-304.   Exemption for new construction and improvements; permits and
compliance with law required.
§
543-305.   Exemption schedule; termination of exemption upon tax delinquency.
§
543-306.   Procedure for obtaining exemption.
§
543-307.   Subsequent reduction assessment.
§
543-308.   Authority to administer.
§
543-309.   Termination.
[HISTORY: Adopted by the City Council of the City of Reading as indicated in
part histories. Amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Tax amnesty program — See
Ch. 546.
Taxation — See
Ch. 549.
STATE LAW REFERENCES
Improvement of deteriorating real property or areas tax exemptions — See 72
P.S. § 4711-101 et seq.
Local Economic Revitalization Tax Assistance Act — See 72 P.S. § 4722 et seq.
Part 1
Residential Tax Abatement. 1
[Adopted 12-18-1985 By Ord. No. 97-1985; Amended In Its Entirety 1-6-1988 By
Ord. No. 110-1987; 2-13-2023 by Ord. No. 14-2023 (Ch. 24, Part 7A, Of The 2001
Code Of Ordinances)]
1.   Editor's Note: Res. No. 828-1979, Adopted 12-12-1979, Has Established The
Boundaries Of The Areas Qualifying For The Tax Abatement Program To Be
Coextensive With The City Boundaries So As To Include All City Wards.
§ 543-101. Short title.
This Part shall be known as and may be cited as the "Reading Residential Tax
Abatement Ordinance."
§ 543-102. Purpose.
The purpose of this Part is to encourage investment and reinvestment in the
housing inventory of the City, pursuant to the authority contained in an Act of
July 9, 1971, P.L. 206, No. 34, as reenacted and amended by Act 42 of August 5,
1977.2
2.   Editor's Note: See 72 P.S. § 4711-101 et seq.
§ 543-103. Definitions.
[Amended 12-27-1989 by Ord. No. 122-1989]
For the purposes of this Part, all words used in the present tense include
future tense, all words in the plural number include the singular number and
all words in singular number include the plural number, unless the natural
construction of the sentence clearly indicates otherwise. The word "shall" is
mandatory and not directory. As used in this Part, certain terms are defined as
follows:
ASSESSMENT AGENCY - The Berks County Board of Assessment Appeals.
CITY - The City of Reading.
DETERIORATED AREA - That portion of the City which has been determined to be
physically blighted on the basis of one or more of the following standards:
   A.   The residential buildings, by reason of age, obsolescence, inadequate
or outmoded design or physical deterioration have become economic and/or social
liabilities.
   B.   The residential buildings are substandard or unsanitary for healthful
and safe living purposes.
   C.   The residential buildings are overcrowded, poorly spaced or are so
lacking light, space and air as to be conducive to unwholesome living.
   D.   The residential buildings are faultily arranged, cover the land to an
excessive extent, show a deleterious use of land or exhibit any combination of
the above which is detrimental to health, safety or welfare.
   E.   A significant percentage of buildings used for residential purposes is
more than 20 years of age.
   F.   A substantial amount of unimproved, overgrown and unsightly vacant land
exists which has remained so for a period of five years or more indicating a
growing or total lack of utilization of land for residential purposes.
   G.   A disproportionate number of tax exempt or delinquent properties exists
in the area.
DETERIORATED NEIGHBORHOOD - A deteriorated neighborhood as defined in the Act
of July 9, 1971, P.L. 206, No. 34, and re-enacted and amended by Act 42 on
August 5, 1977.3 For the purpose of this Part, Wards 1 through 19,
respectively, constitute deteriorated neighborhoods and deteriorating areas
within the purview of the previously cited Act 42.
DETERIORATED PROPERTY - A dwelling unit located in a deteriorated neighborhood,
as hereinafter provided, or a dwelling unit which has been or upon request is
certified by a health, housing or building inspection agency as unfit for human
habitation for rent withholding, or other health or welfare purposes, or has
been the subject of an order by such an agency requiring the unit to be
vacated, condemned or demolished by reason of noncompliance with laws,
ordinances or regulations.
DWELLING UNIT - A house, double house or duplex, townhouse or row house,
apartment or any building intended for occupancy as living quarters by an
individual, a family or families or other groups of persons, which living
quarters contain a kitchen or cooking equipment for the exclusive use of the
occupant or occupants. For purposes of this definition, any structure that
contains less than three units, and which would otherwise meet the definition
of a dwelling unit set forth herein, shall be treated as residential real
property subject to the terms of this Part.
IMPROVEMENT - Repair, construction or reconstruction commencing after the
effective date of this Part, including alterations and additions, having the
effect of rehabilitating a structure so that it becomes habitable or attains
higher standards of housing safety, health or amenity, or is brought into
compliance with laws, ordinances or regulations governing housing standards.
Ordinary upkeep and maintenance shall not be deemed an improvement. Improvement
shall include construction to convert a multifamily structure to a single-
family building, if the multifamily structure had originally been designed and
built to serve as a single-family house. [Amended 7-12-2010 by Ord. No. 32-
2010]
NEW RESIDENTIAL CONSTRUCTION - The building or erection, commencing after the
effective date of this Part, of dwelling units, as defined in "dwelling unit"
hereof, upon vacant land or land specifically prepared to receive such
structures.
OWNER - Any person having a legal or equitable interest in the property as
recorded in the official records of the state, county or municipality as
holding title to the property. [Amended 7-12-2010 by Ord. No. 32-2010]
3.   Editor's Note: See 72 P.S. § 4711-101 et seq.
§ 543-104. Exemption for improvement relating to deteriorated neighborhoods;
permits and compliance with law required.
   A.   There is hereby exempted from real estate taxation, in the amounts and
in accordance with the provisions and limitations hereinafter provided, that
portion of the assessment attributable to the improvements made to deteriorated
property within a deteriorating neighborhood, as defined in § 543-103. [Amended
12-27-1989 by Ord. No. 122-1989]
   B.   In all cases, the exemption from real estate taxes shall be limited to
that portion of the additional assessment attributable to the actual cost of
the improvement not in excess of the maximum cost per dwelling unit specified
herein, and for which a separate assessment has been made by the Berks County
Board of Assessment Appeals and for which an exemption has been separately
requested. The maximum cost shall be $10,000 per dwelling unit for improvements
constructed during 1971. Maximum cost for improvements constructed each year
thereafter shall be the maximum cost for the preceding year multiplied by the
ratio of the United States Bureau of the Census New One-Family Houses Price
Index for the current year to such index for the preceding year. The date of
the construction shall be the date of the issuance of the building permit. No
tax exemption shall be granted under the provision of this Part for the
improvement of any dwelling unit in excess of the maximum cost specified above.
[Amended 12-27-1989 by Ord. No. 122-1989]
   C.   No property shall be entitled to a tax exemption as herein provided
unless the necessary and proper permits prior to improving the property have
been applied for and obtained in accordance with the requirements of § 205 of
P.L. 206, No. 34, as reenacted and amended by Act 42 of August 5, 1977.4
   D.   No tax exemption shall be granted if the improvements as completed do
not comply with all ordinances, rules, regulations, statutes and other
applicable laws.
4.   Editor's Note: See 72 P.S. § 4711-205.
§ 543-105. Exemption schedule relating to improvements to deteriorated property
in deteriorated neighborhoods; termination for tax delinquency.
[Amended 12-27-1989 by Ord. No. 122-1989]
   A.   The portion of the assessment of a property attributable to
improvements as determined by the assessment agency to be exempted from
taxation each year for 10 years shall be in accordance with the schedule below:
[Amended 7-12-2010 by Ord. No. 32-2010]
 
Year   Percentage Exempted
First  100%
Second 80%
Third  60%
Fourth 40%
Fifth  20%
   B.   The exemption from real estate taxes authorized by this Part shall be
upon the property exempted and shall not terminate upon the sale or exchange of
the property.
   C.   The exemption from real estate taxes authorized by this Part shall
terminate irrevocably upon default in the payment of current real estate taxes,
together with accrued penalties and/or interest, due to be paid upon the
deteriorated property exempted. For purposes of this Part, a default shall be
considered to have occurred if such payment is not made in accordance with the
tax bill issued upon the deteriorated property on or before February 15 of the
year following the year in which such tax bill is issued. The provisions of
this section shall apply prospectively only to terminate the continued
exemption of the real estate taxes upon the deteriorated property commencing
with the first fiscal year following the year for which the tax bill was issued
upon which the default occurred. [Amended 12-6-1995 by Ord. No. 124-1995]
§ 543-106. Exemption procedure and applicable schedule relating to improvements
to deteriorated property in deteriorated neighborhoods.
   A.   Requests for tax exemption as herein provided shall be made in writing
on a form provided by the City at the time a building permit is secured, but in
no event shall a request for tax exemption be accepted any later than 6 months
after the Assessment Agency issues its increased assessment on the Dwelling
Unit or if no building permit or other notification of improvements is
required, at the time s/he commences construction. [Amended 7-12-2010 by Ord.
No. 32-2010]
   B.   The Chief Building Official shall forward a copy of the request for
exemption to the Berks County Board of Assessment Appeals. [Amended 12-27-1989
by Ord. No. 122-19895]
   C.   The Berks County Board of Assessment Appeals shall, after the
improvement is completed, assess the improvement separately, calculate the
amount of the assessment eligible for tax exemption in accordance with the
limits established by the City and notify the taxpayer and the City of the
reassessment and the amount of the assessment eligible for exemption. All
abatements shall begin following notification to the City from the Board of an
increase in the assessment attributable to the improvement. Appeals from the
reassessment and the amounts determined to be eligible for the exemption may be
taken by the taxpayer or the City as provided by law. [Amended 12-27-1989 by
Ord. No. 122-1989]
   D.   The cost of improvements to be exempted, and the schedule of taxes
exempted existing at the time of the initial request for tax exemption, shall
be applicable to that exemption request, and subsequent amendments to this
Part, if any, shall not apply to requests initiated prior to their adoption.
5.   Editor's Note: Amended during codification (see
Ch. 1, General Provisions, Part 2).
§ 543-107. Exemption for new residential construction relating to deteriorating
areas; permits and compliance with law required.
   A.   There is hereby exempted from real estate taxation, in the amounts and
in accordance with the provisions and limitations hereinafter provided, the
assessed valuation of any new residential construction built in a deteriorating
area, as defined in § 543-103.
   B.   In all cases, the exemption from real estate taxes shall apply to the
total assessed valuation attributable to the actual cost of the new residential
construction, for which an assessment has been made by the Berks County Board
of Assessment Appeals and for which an exemption has been requested. The date
of the construction shall be the date of the issuance of the building permit.
   C.   No property shall be entitled to a tax exemption as herein provided
unless the necessary and proper permits prior to building the property have
been applied for and obtained in accordance with the requirements of § 205 of
P.L. 206, No. 34, as reenacted and amended by Act 42 of August 5, 1977.6
   D.   No tax exemption shall be granted if the improvements as completed do
not comply with all ordinances, rules, regulations, statutes and other
applicable laws. [Amended 12-27-1989 by Ord. No. 122-1989]
6.   Editor's Note: See 72 P.S. § 4711-205.
§ 543-108. Exemption schedule relating to new residential construction in
deteriorating areas; termination for tax delinquency.
[Added 12-27-1989 by Ord. No. 122-1989]
   A.   The eligible assessed valuation of the property attributable to new
residential construction as determined by the assessment agency to be exempted
from taxation each year for three years, shall be in accordance with the
schedule below: [Amended 7-12-2010 by Ord. No. 32-2010]
 
Year   Percentage Exempted
First  100%
Second 100%
Third  100%
After the third year, the exemption shall terminate.
 
   B.   The exemption from real estate taxes authorized by this Part shall be
upon the duly constructed dwelling unit or units exempted and shall not
terminate upon the sale or exchange of the property.
   C.   The exemption from real estate taxes authorized by this Part shall
terminate irrevocably upon default in the payment in full of all current real
estate taxes, together with accrued penalties and/or interest, due to be paid
upon the new residential construction exempted. For purposes of this Part, a
default shall be considered to have occurred if such payment is not made in
accordance with the tax bill issued upon the new residential construction on or
before February 15 of the year following the year in which such tax bill is
issued. The provisions of this section shall apply prospectively only to deny
the continued exemption of the real estate taxes upon the new residential
construction commencing with the first fiscal year following the year for which
the tax bill was issued upon which the default occurred. [Amended 12-6-1995 by
Ord. No. 124-1995]
§ 543-109. Exemption procedure and applicable schedule relating to new
residential construction in deteriorating areas.
[Added 12-27-1989 by Ord. No. 122-1989; amended 6-8-1998 by Ord. No. 20-1998]
   A.   Requests for tax exemption as herein provided shall be made in writing
on a form provided by the City; the form shall be submitted at the time the
person desiring tax exemption secures the building permit or at the time he
commences construction. [Amended 7-12-2010 by Ord. No. 32-2010]
   B.   The Chief Building Official shall forward a copy of the request for
exemption to the Berks County Board of Assessment Appeals.
   C.   The Berks County Board of Assessment Appeals shall, after completion of
the construction, assess separately the dwelling unit and the land upon which
the new residential construction stands and calculate the amounts of the
assessment eligible for tax exemption in accordance with the limits established
by the City and notify the taxpayer and the City of the amounts of the
assessment eligible for exemption. Appeals for the assessment and/or the
amounts eligible for exemption may be taken by the taxpayer or the City as
provided by law.
   D.   The cost of construction per dwelling unit to be exempted in the
schedules of taxes exempted existing at the time of the initial request for tax
exemption shall be applicable to the exemption request, and subsequent
amendment to the ordinance, if any, shall not apply to requests initiated prior
to their adoption.
7.   Editor's Note: Amended during codification (see
Ch. 1, General Provisions, Part 2).
§ 543-110. Subsequent reduction in assessment.
[Added 12-27-1989 by Ord. No. 122-1989]
In the event that the taxpayer shall receive, by whatever means, a reduced
assessment with regard to part or all of their property which is currently the
subject of the tax exemption provided in this Part, such reduced assessment
shall be applied proportionately to the portion of the assessed value which is
subject to a tax exemption and the portion of the assessed value which is not
subject to a tax exemption, and shall result in a reduction of the tax
exemption which was initially granted for purposes of the number of exemption
years still remaining on the exemption schedule.
§ 543-111. Authority to administer.
[Added 12-27-1989 by Ord. No. 122-1989; amended 5-29-2001 by Ord. No. 14-2001 8
]
The Finance Director of the City shall have the authority for administering and
monitoring the tax exemption program covered by this Part, and shall have the
authority to deny any and all tax exemption requests when they do not meet or
comply with the terms of this Part.
8.   Editor's Note: Amended during codification (see
Ch. 1, General Provisions, Part 2).
§ 543-112. Termination.
[Amended 12-27-1989 by Ord. No. 122-1989; 11-9-1994 by Ord. No. 123-94; 6-8-
1998 by Ord. No. 20-1998; 12-13-2004 by Ord. No. 55-2004; 7-12-2010 by Ord. No.
32-2010]
Unless otherwise repealed by Council, this Part shall terminate December 31,
2032. Any property tax exemption created under the provision of this Part shall
be permitted to continue even if this Part expires or is repealed.
Part 2
Local Economic Revitalization Tax Assistance Program
[Adopted 12-31-1985 by ord. No. 107-1985; amended in its entirety 1-6-1988 by
Ord. No. 111-1987 (Ch. 24, Part 7B, of the 2001 Code of Ordinances)]
§ 543-201. Short title.
This Part shall be known as and may be cited as the "Reading LERTA Ordinance,"
which is a short form of the "Reading Local Economic Revitalization Tax
Assistance Ordinance."
§ 543-202. Purpose.
The purpose of this Part is to encourage investment and reinvestment in
industrial, commercial and other business property in the City pursuant to the
authority contained in the Local Economic Revitalization Tax Assistance Act
enacted December 1, 1977. 9
9.   Editor's Note: See 72 P.S. § 4722 et seq.
§ 543-203. Definitions. [Amended 3-28-1990 by Ord. No. 27-1990]
For the purpose of this Part, all words used in the present tense include
future tense, all words in the plural number include the singular number and
all words in singular number include the plural number, unless the natural
construction of the sentence clearly indicates otherwise. The word "shall" is
mandatory and not directory. As used in this Part, certain terms are defined as
follows:
   ASSESSMENT AGENCY — The Berks County Board of Assessment Appeals.
   CITY — The City of Reading.
   DETERIORATED PROPERTY — Any industrial, commercial or other business
property owned by an individual, association or corporation, and located in an
investment opportunity area, as hereinafter defined, or any such property which
has been the subject of an order by a government agency requiring the unit to
be vacated, condemned or demolished by reason of noncompliance with laws,
ordinances or regulations.
   IMPROVEMENT — Repair, construction or reconstruction commencing after the
effective date of this Part, including alterations and additions having the
effect of rehabilitating a structure so that it becomes habitable or attains
higher standards of housing safety, health or amenity, or is brought into
compliance with laws, ordinances or regulations governing housing standards.
Ordinary upkeep and maintenance shall not be deemed an improvement.
   INVESTMENT OPPORTUNITY AREAS — Deteriorated areas as defined in the Local
Economic Revitalization Tax Assistance Act, enacted as of December 1, 1977. 10
For the purpose of this Part, Wards 1 through 19 of the City, respectively,
constitute investment opportunity areas within the purview of the Local
Economic Revitalization Tax Assistance Act.
10.   Editor's Note: See 72 P.S. § 4722 et seq.
§ 543-204. Exemption for new construction and improvements; permits and
compliance with law required.
[Amended 3-28-1990 by Ord. No. 27-1990]
   A.   There is hereby exempted from real estate taxation, in the amounts and
in accordance with the provisions and limitations hereinafter provided, that
portion of the assessment attributable to new construction in an investment
opportunity area and to the improvements made to deteriorated property, as
defined herein.
   B.   In all cases, the exemption from real estate taxes shall be limited to
that portion of the additional assessment attributable to the actual cost of
the improvement to deteriorated property for which a separate assessment has
been made by the Berks County Board of Assessment Appeals and for which an
exemption has been separately requested, and for the assessed valuation of new
construction within the designated investment opportunity area.
   C.   No property shall be entitled to a tax exemption as herein provided
unless the necessary and proper permits prior to new construction or improving
the deteriorated property have been applied for and obtained in accordance with
the requirements of § 6 of the Local Economic Revitalization Tax Assistance
Act. 11
   D.   No tax exemption shall be granted if the new construction or
improvements to deteriorated property as completed do not comply with all
ordinances, rules, regulations, statutes and other applicable laws.
   E.   For purposes of this Part, any new structure or improvement to an
existing structure that contains three or more dwelling units and that
otherwise qualifies under the terms of this Part shall be treated as commercial
real property subject to the terms of this Part.
11.   Editor's Note: See 75 P.S. § 4727.
§ 543-205. Exemption schedule; termination for tax delinquency.
   A.   A portion of the assessment of a property attributable to new
construction or improvements to deteriorated property as determined by the
Assessment Agency to be exempted from taxation each year for 10 years shall be
in accordance with the schedule below: [Amended 7-12-2010 by Ord. No. 30-2010;
Amended 12-28-2020 by Ord. No. 95-2020]
 
Year   Percentage Exempted
First  100%
Second 80%
Third  60%
Fourth 40%
Fifth  20%
After the fifth year, the exemption shall terminate.
 
   B.   The exemption from real estate taxes authorized by this Part shall be
upon the property exempted and shall not terminate upon the sale or exchange of
the property.
   C.   The exemption from real estate taxes authorized by this Part shall
terminate irrevocably upon default in the payment in full of current real
estate taxes, together with accrued penalties and/or interest, due to be paid
upon the new construction or improvements to deteriorated property exempted.
For purposes of this Part, a default shall be considered to have occurred if
such payment is not made in accordance with the tax bill issued upon the new
construction or improvements to deteriorated property on or before February 15
of the year following the year in which such tax bill is issued. The provisions
of this section shall apply prospectively only to deny the continued exemption
of the real estate taxes upon the new construction or improvements to
deteriorated property commencing with the first fiscal year following the year
for which the tax bill was issued upon which the default occurred. [Amended 12-
6-1995 by Ord. No. 125-1995]
§ 543-206. Exemption procedure; applicable schedule.
[Amended 3-28-1990 by Ord. No. 27-1990; 5-29-2001 by Ord. No. 14-2001; Amended
12-28-2020 by Ord. No. 95-2020]
   A.   Requests for tax exemption as herein provided shall be made in writing
on a form provided by the City at the time a building permit is secured or if
no building permit or other notification of improvements is required, at the
time s/he commences construction. [Amended 7-12-2010 by Ord. No. 30-2010]
   B.   The Finance Director shall forward a copy of the request for exemption
to the Berks County Board of Assessment Appeals.12
   C.   The Board shall, after the new construction or improvement to
deteriorated property is completed, assess the new construction or assess the
improvement separately and calculate the amount of the assessment eligible for
tax exemption in accordance with the limits established by the City and notify
the taxpayer and the City of the reassessment and the amount of the assessment
eligible for exemption. All abatements shall begin following notification to
the City from the Board of an increase in the assessment attributable to the
improvement or the new construction. Appeals from the reassessment in the
amounts determined to be eligible for the exemption may be taken by the
taxpayer or the City as provided by law.
   D.   The assessment attributable to the cost of new construction or
improvements to deteriorated property to be exempted and the schedule of taxes
exempted existing at the time of the initial request for tax exemption, shall
be applicable to that exemption request, and subsequent amendments to this
Part, if any, shall not apply to requests initiated prior to their adoption.
12.   Editor's Note: Amended during codification (see
Ch. 1, General Provisions, Part 2).
§ 543-207. Subsequent reduction assessment.
[Added 3-28-1990 by Ord. No. 27-1990]
In the event that the taxpayer shall receive by whatever means, a reduced
assessment with regard to part or all of his, her or its property which is
currently the subject of the tax exemption provided in this Part, such reduced
assessment shall be applied proportionately to the portion of the assessed
value which is subject to a tax exemption and the portion of the assessed value
which is not subject to a tax exemption, and shall result in a reduction of tax
exemption which was initially granted for purposes of the number of exemption
years still remaining on the exemption schedule.
§ 543-208. Authority to administer.
[Added 3-28-1990 by Ord. No. 27-1990; amended 5-29-2001 by Ord. No. 14-2001 13
]
The Finance Director of the City shall have the authority for administering and
monitoring the tax exemption program covered by this Part and shall have the
authority to deny any and all tax exemption requests when they do not meet or
comply with the terms of this Part.
13.   Editor's Note: Amended during codification (see
Ch. 1, General Provisions, Part 2).
§ 543-209. Termination.
[Amended 12-27-1989 by Ord. No. 121-1989; 3-28-1990 by Ord. No. 27-1990; 12-24-
1991 by Ord. No. 131-1991; 12-29-1993 by Ord. No. 126-1993; 12-6-1995 by Ord.
No. 125-1995; 6-8-1998 by Ord. No. 21-1998; 2-28-2000 by Ord. No. 3-2000; 12-
13-2004 by Ord. No. 54-2004; 7-12-2010 by Ord. No. 30-2010; Amended 12-28-2020
by Ord. No. 95-2020]
Unless otherwise repealed by Council, this Part shall terminate December 31,
2025. Any property tax exemptions created under the provisions of this Part
shall be permitted to continue even if this Part expires or is repealed.
Part 3
Enterprise Zone LERTA Opportunity
[Adopted 12-9-1996 by Ord. No. 40-1996 (Ch. 24, Part 7C, of the 2001 Code of
Ordinances)]
§ 543-301. Short title.
This Part shall be known as and may be cited as the "Enterprise Zone LERTA
Opportunity Ordinance," which is a short form of the "Enterprise Zone Local
Economic Revitalization Tax Assistance Opportunity Ordinance."
§ 543-302. Purpose.
The purpose of this Part is to serve as an additional encouragement of
investment and reinvestment in industrial, commercial and other business
property in the City of Reading, pursuant to the authority contained in the
Local Economic Revitalization Tax Assistance Act, enacted December 1, 1977, 14
by creating a special opportunity area within the area covered by the current
Reading LERTA Ordinance [Part 2 of this chapter].
14.   Editor's Note: See 72 P.S. § 4722 et seq.
§ 543-303. Definitions.
For the purposes of this Part, all words used in the present tense include
future tense, all words in the plural number include the singular number and
all words in singular number include the plural number, unless the natural
construction of the sentence clearly indicates otherwise. The word "shall" is
mandatory and not directory. As used in this Part, certain terms are defined as
follows:
   ASSESSMENT AGENCY — The Berks County Board of Assessment Appeals.
   CITY — The City of Reading.
   DETERIORATED PROPERTY — Any industrial, commercial or other business
property owned by an individual, association or corporation, and located in an
investment opportunity area, as hereinafter defined, or any such property which
has been the subject of an order by a government agency requiring the unit to
be vacated, condemned, or demolished by reason of noncompliance with laws,
ordinances or regulations.
   ENTERPRISE ZONE INVESTMENT OPPORTUNITY AREAS — Deteriorated areas as defined
in the Local Economic Revitalization Tax Assistance Act, enacted as of December
1, 1977. For the purposes of this Part, the geographic area of the City
outlined on Exhibit "A" attached hereto and incorporated herein by reference,
15  and identified as the "enterprise zone tax abatement opportunity area,"
constitutes the investment opportunity area within the purview of this Part.
   IMPROVEMENT — Repair, construction or reconstruction commencing after the
effective date of this Part, including alterations and additions having the
effect of rehabilitating a structure so that it becomes habitable or attains
higher standards of housing safety, health or amenity, or is brought into
compliance with laws, ordinances or regulations governing housing standards.
Ordinary upkeep and maintenance shall not be deemed an improvement.
15.   Editor's Note: Exhibit A is on file in the City offices.
§ 543-304. Exemption for new construction and improvements; permits and
compliance with law required.
   A.   There is hereby exempted from real estate taxation, in the amounts and
in accordance with the provisions and limitations hereinafter provided, that
portion of the assessment attributable to new construction in an enterprise
zone investment opportunity area and to the improvements made to deteriorated
property, as defined herein.
   B.   In all cases, the exemption from real estate taxes shall be limited to
that portion of the additional assessment attributable to the actual cost of
the improvement to deteriorated property for which a separate assessment has
been made by the Berks County Board of Assessment Appeals and for which an
exemption has been separately requested, and for the assessed valuation of new
construction within the designated investment opportunity area.
   C.   No property shall be entitled to a tax exemption as herein provided
unless the necessary and proper permits prior to new construction or improving
the deteriorated property have been applied for and obtained in accordance with
the requirements of § 6 of the Local Economic Revitalization Tax Assistance
Act. 16
   D.   No tax exemption shall be granted if the new construction or
improvements to deteriorated property as completed do not comply with all
ordinances, rules, regulations, statutes and other applicable laws.
   E.   For purposes of this Part, any new structure or improvement to an
existing structure that contains three or more dwelling units and that
otherwise qualifies under the terms of this Part, shall be treated as
commercial real property subject to the terms of this Part.
16.    Editor's Note: See 72 P.S. § 4727.
§ 543-305. Exemption schedule; termination of exemption upon tax delinquency.
   A.   A portion of the assessment of a property attributable to new
construction or improvements to deteriorated property as determined by the
Assessment Agency to be exempted from taxation shall be in accordance with the
schedule below unless sooner terminated in accordance with Subsection C below:
Year Percentage Exempted
Year                                                  Percentage Exempted
First                                                 100%
Second                                                100%
Third                                                 100%
Fourth                                                100%
Fifth                                                 80%
Sixth                                                 60%
Seventh                                               40%
Eighth                                                20%
Ninth                                                 0%
After the eighth year, the exemption shall terminate.
   B.   The exemption from real estate taxes authorized by this Part shall be
upon the property exempted and shall not terminate upon the sale or exchange of
the property.
   C.   The exemption from real estate taxes authorized by this Part shall
terminate irrevocably upon default in the payment in full of all current real
estate taxes, together with accrued penalties and/or interest, due to be paid
upon the deteriorated property exempted. For purposes of this Part, a default
shall be considered to have occurred if such payment is not made in accordance
with the tax bill issued upon the deteriorated property on or before February
15 of the year following the year in which such tax bill is issued. The
provisions of this section shall apply prospectively only to deny the continued
exemption of the real estate taxes upon the deteriorated property commencing
with the first fiscal year following the year for which the tax bill was issued
upon which the default occurred.
§ 543-306. Procedure for obtaining exemption.
   A.   Requests for tax exemption as herein provided shall be made in writing
on a form provided by the City at the time a building permit is secured, but in
no event shall a request for tax exemption be accepted any later than six
months after the Berks County Board of Assessment Appeals has issued their
assessment on the new construction or improvement.
   B.   The Community Development Department shall forward a copy of the
Request for Exemption to the Berks County Board of Assessment Appeals.
   C.   The Board shall, after the new construction or improvement to
deteriorated property is completed, assess the new construction or assess the
improvement separately and calculate the amount of the assessment eligible for
tax exemption in accordance with the limits established by the City and notify
the taxpayer and the City of the reassessment and the amount of the assessment
eligible for exemption. All abatements shall begin following notification to
the City from the Board of an increase in the assessment attributable to the
improvement or the new construction. Appeals from the reassessment in the
amounts determined to be eligible for the exemption may be taken by the
taxpayer or the City as provided by law.
   D.   The assessment attributable to the cost of new construction or
improvements to deteriorated property to be exempted and the schedule of taxes
exempted existing at the time of the initial request for tax exemption, shall
be applicable to that exemption request, and subsequent amendments to this
Part, if any, shall not apply to requests initiated prior to their adoption.
   E.   Notwithstanding anything to the contrary in this Part, no request for
tax exemption under this Part shall be granted concerning any deteriorated
property until all past due real estate taxes, together with accrued penalties
and/or interest, which have been returned to the Berks County Tax Claim Bureau
upon that property have been paid in full and satisfactory evidence thereof has
been provided to the Finance Department of the City. All requests shall be
denied irrevocably if such taxes, penalties and interest are not paid and
satisfactory evidence thereof provided prior to six months after the Berks
County Board of Assessment Appeals has issued their assessment on the new
construction or improvement.
§ 543-307. Subsequent reduction assessment.
In the event that the taxpayer shall receive, by whatever means, a reduced
assessment with regard to part or all of his, her or its property which is
currently the subject of the tax exemption provided in this Part, such reduced
assessment shall be applied proportionately to the portion of the assessed
value which is subject to a tax exemption and the portion of the assessed value
which is not subject to a tax exemption, and shall result in a reduction of tax
exemption which was initially granted for purposes of the number of exemption
years still remaining on the exemption schedule.
§ 543-308. Authority to administer.
The Finance Department of the City shall have the authority for administering
and monitoring the tax exemption program covered by this Part and shall have
the authority to deny any and all tax exemption requests when they do not meet
or comply with the terms of this Part.
§ 543-309. Termination. [Amended 2-28-2000 by Ord. No. 4-2000]
Unless otherwise repealed by Council, this Part shall terminate December 31,
2003. Any property exemptions granted under the provisions of this Part shall
be permitted to continue even if this Part expires or is repealed.
Chapter 546
TAX AMNESTY PROGRAM
§
546-101.   Rules and regulations.
§
546-102.   Terms of program.
§
546-103.   Agreement with taxpayer.
[HISTORY: Adopted by the City Council of the City of Reading 5-14-2012 by Ord.
No. 54-2012. Amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Tax abatements — See
Ch. 543.
Taxation — See
Ch. 549.
§ 546-101. Rules and regulations.
The City of Reading shall promulgate rules and regulations to implement the tax
amnesty program, applicable to any tax authorized by the City of Reading Code
that is collected internally or externally.
§ 546-102. Terms of program.
The administration shall define the terms of the program including the tax or
taxes covered in each tax amnesty program period, define the amnesty period and
define the amount of penalty and interest charges, in whole or in part, that
will be set aside, which will be approved by an ordinance enacted by Council.
§ 546-103. Agreement with taxpayer.
The City shall execute an agreement with a participating taxpayer that sets
forth the taxpayer's obligation during the amnesty period to make payment of
all delinquent taxes. At the conclusion of the amnesty period, all penalties
and interest charges shall apply.
Chapter 549
TAXATION
Part 1
Discounts and Penalties
§
549-101.   Discounts for prepayment.
§
549-102.   Payment months.
§
549-103.   Penalties for delinquency.
§
549-104.   Notices of tax due.
Part 2
Earned Income Tax
§
549-201.   Definitions.
§
549-202.   Imposition of tax.
§
549-203.   Returns and payment.
§
549-204.   Employers' collection at source.
§
549-205.   Employers' failure to deduct; deduction held as trust fund.
§
549-206.   Suit for collection of tax, interest and penalties.
§
549-207.   Disputes; refunds.
§
549-208.   Income Tax Officer.
Part 3
Realty Transfer Taxes
A   Realty Transfer Taxes
§
549-301.   Short title.
§
549-302.   Authority.
§
549-303.   Definitions.
§
549-304.   Imposition of tax; interest.
§
549-305.   Exempt parties.
§
549-306.   Excluded transactions.
§
549-307.   Documents relating to associations or corporations and members,
partners, stockholders or shareholders thereof.
§
549-308.   Acquired company.
§
549-309.   Credits against tax.
§
549-310.   Extension of lease.
§
549-311.   Proceeds of judicial sale.
§
549-312.   Duties of Recorder of Deeds.
§
549-313.   Statement of value.
§
549-314.   Civil penalties.
§
549-315.   Lien.
§
549-316.   Enforcement.
§
549-317.   Regulations.
B   Home Rule Realty Transfer Tax
§
549-318.   Definitions.
§
549-319.   Tax levy and rate.
§
549-320.   Properties partially within the City.
§
549-321.   Due date.
§
549-322.   Instrument of conveyance contents.
§
549-323.   Exceptions.
§
549-324.   Instrument of conveyance to be stamped upon payment.
§
549-325.   Enforcement by Finance Director.
§
549-326.   Finance Director to furnish stamp.
§
549-327.   Collection by Recorder of Deeds.
§
549-328.   Lien authorized.
§
549-329.   Authority to enact.
§
549-330.   Prohibited activities.
§
549-331.   Effective date.
§
549-332.   Violations and penalties.
Part 4
Business Privilege Tax
§
549-401.   Short title.
§
549-402.   Definitions.
§
549-403.   Tax levied; rate; business volume computed; exemptions.
§
549-404.   Returns; payment; interest penalty.
§
549-405.   Business privilege license.
§
549-406.   Violations and penalties.
§
549-407.   Duties of City Finance Director.
§
549-408.   Confidential nature of information.
§
549-409.   Suit on collection; costs.
§
549-410.   Savings clause; separability.
Part 5
Business Privilege Tax Regulations
§
549-501.   Purpose.
§
549-502.   Definitions.
§
549-503.   Business.
§
549-504.   What constitutes doing business in the City.
§
549-505.   Allocation of business done and gross volume of business.
§
549-506.   Interstate commerce.
§
549-507.   Contractors performing building or construction work outside the
City of Reading.
§
549-508.   Brokers and agents with out-of-City offices.
§
549-509.   Tax rate.
§
549-510.   Persons, businesses and receipts exempted.
§
549-511.   State tax or license.
§
549-512.   Utilities.
§
549-513.   Properties subject to state tax.
§
549-514.   Products manufactured or grown in the City.
§
549-515.   Determination of gross or whole volume of business.
§
549-516.   Partial exemptions.
§
549-517.   When same tax is imposed by two taxing bodies.
§
549-518.   Records.
§
549-519.   Returns.
§
549-520.   License.
§
549-521.   Violations and penalties.
§
549-522.   Continuing offense.
§
549-523.   Powers and duties of business administrator.
§
549-524.   Confidential nature of returns, etc.
§
549-525.   Suit on collection and penalty.
Part 6
Per Capita Tax
§
549-601.   Definitions.
§
549-602.   Levy and collection.
§
549-603.   Amount.
§
549-604.   Notice.
§
549-605.   Discount, penalty and interest.
§
549-606.   Enforcement by Finance Director.
§
549-607.   Not a substitute tax.
§
549-608.   (Reserved)
§
549-609.   Violations and penalties.
Part 7
Amusement Tax
§
549-701.   Establishment of an admission tax.
§
549-702.   Definitions.
§
549-703.   Permits.
§
549-704.   Imposition of tax.
§
549-705.   Collection and payment of tax.
§
549-706.   Reports, interest and penalties.
§
549-707.   Audits.
§
549-708.   Violations and penalties.
Part 8
Local Services Tax
§
549-801.   Definitions.
§
549-802.   Levy of tax.
§
549-803.   Penalty and interest.
§
549-804.   Exemption and refunds.
§
549-805.   Duty of employers to collect.
§
549-806.   Returns.
§
549-807.   Dates for determining tax liability and payment.
§
549-808.   Self-employed individuals.
§
549-809.   Individuals engaged in more than one occupation or employed in more
than one political subdivision.
§
549-810.   Nonresidents subject to tax.
§
549-811.   Administration of tax.
§
549-812.   Suits for collection.
§
549-813.   Violations and penalties.
§
549-814.   Interpretation.
Part 9
Nonresident Earned Income and Net Profits Tax
§
549-901.   Tax on nonresidents subject to tax in domicile.
§
549-902.   Tax on nonresidents not subject to tax in domicile.
§
549-903.   Tax percentage to equal 1.3%.
§
549-904.   Imposition of tax.
§
549-905.   Tax not shared with school district; credit for tax paid to home
municipality.
§
549-906.   Use of revenue.
§
549-907.   Collection.
§
549-908.   Effective date.
Part 10
Home Rule Earned Income Tax
§
549-1001.   Definitions.
§
549-1002.   Imposition of tax.
§
549-1003.   Annual returns of taxpayers.
§
549-1004.   Declaration and payment of tax.
§
549-1005.   Collection at source.
§
549-1006.   Income Tax Officer; powers and duties.
§
549-1007.   Suit for collection of tax.
§
549-1008.   Interest on unpaid tax.
§
549-1009.   Payment and refunds.
§
549-1010.   Applicability.
§
549-1011.   Effective term.
§
549-1012.   Rules and regulations.
§
549-1013.   Hearing Officer.
§
549-1014.   Violations and penalties.
Part 11
Home Rule Per Capita Tax
§
549-1101.   Imposition of tax.
§
549-1102.   Discount, penalty and interest.
§
549-1103.   Exploration of alternatives.
§
549-1104.   Authority.
[HISTORY: Adopted by the City Council of the City of Reading as indicated in
part histories. Amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Business privilege license — See
Ch. 339, Part 2.
Tax amnesty program — See
Ch. 546.
STATE LAW REFERENCES
Local Tax Collection Law — See 72 P.S. § 5511.1 et seq.
Power to tax — See 53 P.S. § 6924.101 et seq.
Real estate transfer tax — See 72 P.S. § 8101-C and D et seq.
Administration, collection and enforcement — See 53 P.S. § 6924.101 et seq.
Exonerations — See 72 P.S. § 5511.37.
Amusement tax — See 53 P.S. § 6924.301.1.
Part 1
Discounts and Penalties
[Adopted 11-28-1945 by Ord. No. 33-1945 (Ch. 24, Part 8, of the 2001 Code of
Ordinances)]
§ 549-101. Discounts for prepayment.
All persons or corporations owing City taxes who make payment thereof during
the months of March or April in each year shall be entitled to a reduction or
abatement of 2% from the amount thereof.
§ 549-102. Payment months.
All City taxes shall be payable in full during the months of May and June of
each year.
§ 549-103. Penalties for delinquency.
[Amended 10-13-1976 by Ord. No. 33-1976; 8-26-2002 by Ord. No. 44-2002]
   A.   All bills to owners for delinquent real estate taxes shall be subject
to interest, penalty and collection fees.
   B.   A 10% penalty shall attach to and be added to the gross amount of any
unpaid real estate tax bill on July 1 of the tax year and interest at the rate
of 10% per annum shall also accrue beginning July 1 of the tax year.
   C.   Any unpaid real estate tax bill on July 1 of the tax year shall be
subject to collection fees consisting of reasonable attorney's fees and other
costs incurred by the City.
§ 549-104. Notices of tax due.
[Amended 5-29-2001 by Ord. No. 14-2001]
It shall be the duty of the City Finance Director as Tax Collector to notify
all taxpayers with a tax notice prepared in conformity with § 6 of Act 394 of
May 25, 1945, P.L. 1050 (72 P.S. § 5511.6), through the mails, prior to March 1
of each and every year.
Part 2
Earned Income Tax 1
[Adopted 12-18-1968 by Ord. No. 57-1968 (Ch. 24, Part 2A, of the 2001 Code of
Ordinances)]
1.   Editor's Note: Res. No. 666-1992, 11-10-1992, Approved Rules And
Regulations For The Administration And Enforcement Of The Earned Income Tax
Ordinance As Prescribed And Adopted By The Income Tax Officer.
§ 549-201. Definitions.
The following words and phrases as defined in § 13 of the Local Tax Enabling
Act (53 P.S. § 6913), 2  when used in this Part, shall have the meanings
ascribed to them in Local Tax Enabling Act.
   A.   Association.
   B.   Business.
   C.   Corporation.
   D.   Current year (Note: for the year 1969, "current year" shall commence
January 18, 1969).
   E.   Domicile.
   F.   Earned income.
   G.   Employer.
   H.   Income Tax Officer or Officer.
   I.   Net profits.
   J.   Nonresidents.
   K.   Person or individual.
   L.   Preceding year.
   M.   Resident.
   N.   Succeeding year.
   O.   Taxpayer.
2.   Editor's Note: See now 53 P.S. § 6924.301.
§ 549-202. Imposition of tax.
   A.   A tax for general revenue purposes of 1% is hereby imposed on the
following:
      (1)   Earned income received on and after January 18, 1969, by individual
residents of the City of Reading.
      (2)   Earned income received on and after January 18, 1969, by individual
nonresidents of the City of Reading in the City of Reading.
      (3)   Net profits, earned on and after January 18, 1969, by residents of
the City of Reading.
      (4)   Net profits, earned on and after January 18, 1969, by nonresidents
of the City of Reading.
   B.   The tax levied under Subsection A(1) and (2) herein shall relate to and
be imposed upon earned income paid by an employer or on his behalf to a person
who is employed by him. The tax levied under Subsection A(3) and (4) herein
shall relate to and be imposed on the net profits of any business, profession
or other activity carried on by any person or persons.
   C.   The tax levied by this Part shall be applicable to earned income tax
received and to net profits earned in the period beginning January 18, 1969,
and ending December 31, 1969. Thereafter, this tax shall continue in force on a
calendar year or taxpayer fiscal year basis without annual reenactment.
§ 549-203. Returns and payment.
[Amended 11-26-1969 by Ord. No. 66-1969]
   A.   Every taxpayer earning net profits or receiving earned income in the
current year shall, on or before April 15 of the succeeding year, make and file
with the Income Tax Officer a final return thereof (on forms, and furnishing
information, prescribed by the Income Tax Officer) and pay the tax (or balance
thereof after crediting employers' withholding and quarterly payments on net
profits and earned income not subject to withholding) due thereon.
   B.   Further details concerning taxpayers' payment and making returns on tax
levied by this Part are set forth in mandatory provisions, and also in the
optional provisions (hereby adopted by this City Council) relating to quarterly
returns and payment and final returns and payments of tax in § 13(III) of the
Enabling Act. This City Council hereby adopts the optional provisions in § 13
(III) relating to filing of declarations of estimated net profits and quarterly
returns and payments of tax by taxpayers; and further adopts the optional
provisions of § 13(III)(B)(2) relating to quarterly returns and payments of
earned income not subject to withholding.
   C.   When the return of a taxpayer is made for a fiscal year different from
the calendar year, the quarterly returns and payments and final returns and
payments shall be made in the same manner as a taxpayer on the calendar-year
basis, except that the return and payment dates shall correspond to the fiscal
year in the same manner as the return and payment dates correspond to the
calendar year.
§ 549-204. Employers' collection at source.
[Amended 6-25-2001 by Ord. No. 23-2001; 8-8-2005 by Ord. No. 50-2005; 8-22-2005
by Ord. No. 54-2005]
   A.   Every employer within the City is required to register, to deduct tax
from employees' earned income, to file quarterly reports and make remittances
and to do other acts as set forth in § 13(IV) of the Local Tax Enabling Act.
   B.   In addition, every employer having a factory, workshop, branch,
warehouse or other place of business within the City is required to register to
deduct tax from the earned income of the employees employed outside the City
but domiciled within the City, to file quarterly reports and make remittances
and do other acts as fully set forth in § 13(IV) of the Local Tax Enabling Act.
   C.   Employers, or their representatives, who are required to file 50 or
more W-2 forms with the City of Reading must file those forms in accordance
with the City of Reading Magnetic Media Reporting and Electronic Filing
Guidelines. An employer who does not comply with the requirements for filing
will be penalized by the Income Tax Officer at a rate of $20 per W-2 submitted
exceeding 50.
§ 549-205. Employers' failure to deduct; deduction held as trust fund.
   A.   The failure or omission of any employer to make the deduction required
by §
549-204 hereof shall not relieve any employee from the payment of the tax or
from complying with the requirements of this Part relating to the filing of
declarations and returns.
   B.   If an employer makes a deduction of tax as required by this Part, the
amount deducted shall constitute in the hands of such employer, a trust fund
held for the account of the City as beneficial owner thereof and the employee
from whose salaries, wages, commissions or other compensation such tax was
deducted shall be deemed to have paid such tax.
§ 549-206. Suit for collection of tax, interest and penalties.
   A.   Suits for collection of tax are hereby authorized and interest and
penalties shall be imposed as provided in § 13(VII) and (VIII) of the Enabling
Act.
   B.   The failure of any person to receive or procure forms required for
making the declaration or returns required by this Part shall not excuse him
from making such declaration or return.
   C.   Notwithstanding prior mention in this Part, for convenience of
reference only, of specific subsections of § 13 of said Act, all provisions of
the entire § 13 of said Act, except optional provisions specifically excluded
in §
549-203Bof this Part, are hereby incorporated into this Part by this reference
as required by the Enabling Act. Any provisions which any future supplements to
or amendments of the Enabling Act may require to be included in or construed to
be a part of any tax on earned income or net profits, or any ordinance levying
the same, shall automatically become a part of this Part upon the effective
date of such supplement or amendment, without the need for formal amendment of
this Part by the Council of the City of Reading.
§ 549-207. Disputes; refunds.
The Income Tax Officer is hereby authorized to accept payment of the amount of
tax claimed by the City in any case where any person disputes the validity or
amount of the City's claim for the tax. If it is thereafter judicially
determined by a court of competent jurisdiction that there has been an
overpayment to the Income Tax Officer, the amount of the overpayment shall be
refunded to the person who paid.
§ 549-208. Income Tax Officer.
The Income Tax Officer shall perform all the duties, be subject to all the
requirements, and have all the powers prescribed by § 13(V) of the Enabling
Act. Such Income Tax Officer shall receive such compensation for his services
and expenses as determined by the Council of the City.
Part 3
Realty Transfer Taxes
[Adopted 12-31-1968 by Ord. No. 65-1968; amended in its entirety 5-29-2001 by
Ord. No. 14-2001 (Ch. 24, Part 3A, of the 2001 Code of Ordinances)]
A   Realty Transfer Taxes
§ 549-301. Short title.
This Part shall be known as the "Realty Transfer Tax Ordinance" of the City of
Reading.
§ 549-302. Authority.
A realty transfer tax for general revenue purposes is hereby imposed upon the
transfer of real estate or interest in real estate situated within or without
the City, regardless of where the documents making the transfer are made,
executed or delivered, or where the actual settlements on such transfer took
place, as authorized by 72 P.S. §§ 8101-D et seq.
§ 549-303. Definitions.
As used in this Part, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
   ASSOCIATION — A partnership, limited partnership or any other form of
unincorporated enterprise owned or conducted by two or more persons other than
a private trust or decedent's estate.
   CITY — The City of Reading.
   CORPORATION — A corporation, joint-stock association, business trust or
banking institution which is organized under the laws of this commonwealth, the
United States or any other state, territory, foreign country or dependency.
   DOCUMENT — Any deed, instrument or writing which conveys, transfers,
demises, vests, confirms or evidences any transfer or demise of title of real
estate, but does not include wills, mortgages, deeds of trust or other
instruments of like character given as security for a debt and deeds of release
thereof to the debtor, land contracts whereby the legal title does not pass to
the grantee until the total consideration specified in the contract has been
paid or any cancellation thereof unless the consideration is payable over a
period of time exceeding 30 years, or instruments which solely grant, vest or
confirm a public utility easement. "Document" shall also include a declaration
of acquisition required to be presented for recording under §
549-302.
   FAMILY FARM CORPORATION — A corporation of which at least 75% of its assets
are devoted to the business of agriculture and at least 75% of each class of
stock of the corporation is continuously owned by members of the same family.
The business of agriculture shall not be deemed to include:
   A.   Recreational activities such as, but not limited to, hunting, fishing,
camping, skiing, show competition or racing.
   B.   The raising, breeding or training of game animals or game birds, fish,
cats, dogs or pets or animals intended for use in sporting or recreational
activities.
   C.   Fur farming.
   D.   Stockyard and slaughterhouse operations.
   E.   Manufacturing or processing operations of any kind.
   MEMBERS OF THE SAME FAMILY — Any individual, such individual's brothers and
sisters, the brothers and sisters of such individual's parents and
grandparents, the ancestors and lineal descendants of any of the foregoing, a
spouse of any of the foregoing, and the estate of any of the foregoing.
Individuals related by the half-blood or legal adoption shall be treated as if
they were related by the whole-blood.
   PERSON — Every natural person, association, or corporation. Whenever used in
any clause prescribing and imposing a fine or imprisonment, or both. The term
"person" as applied to associations, shall include the responsible members or
general partners thereof, and as applied to corporations, the officers thereof.
   REAL ESTATE —
   A.   All lands, tenements or hereditaments within this City including,
without limitation, buildings, structures, fixtures, mines, minerals, oil, gas,
quarries, spaces with or without upper or lower boundaries, trees and other
improvements, immovables or interests which by custom, usage or law pass with a
conveyance of land, but excluding permanently attached machinery and equipment
in an industrial plant.
   B.   A condominium unit.
   C.   A tenant-stockholder's interest in a cooperative housing corporation,
trust or association under a proprietary lease or occupancy agreement.
   REAL ESTATE COMPANY — A corporation or association which is primarily
engaged in the business of holding, selling or leasing real estate, 90% or more
of the ownership interest in which is held by 35 or fewer persons and which:
   A.   Derives 60% or more of its annual gross receipts from the ownership or
disposition of real estate; or
   B.   Holds real estate, the value of which comprises 90% or more of the
value of its entire tangible asset holdings exclusive of tangible assets which
are freely transferable and actively traded on an established market.
   TITLE TO REAL ESTATE —
   A.   Any interest in real estate which endures for a period of time, the
termination of which is not fixed or ascertained by a specific number of years
including, without limitation, an estate in fee simple, life estate or
perpetual leasehold; or
   B.   Any interest in real estate enduring for a fixed period of years but
which, either by reason of the length of the term or the grant of a right to
extend the term by renewal or otherwise, consists of a group of rights
approximating those of an estate in fee simple, life estate or perpetual
leasehold including, without limitation, a leasehold interest or possessory
interest under a lease or occupancy agreement for a term of 30 years or more or
a leasehold interest or possessory interest in real estate in which the lessee
has equity.
   TRANSACTION — The making, executing, delivering, accepting or presenting for
recording of a document.
   VALUE —
   A.   In the case of any bona fide sale of real estate at arm's length for
actual monetary worth, the amount of the actual consideration therefor, paid or
to be paid, including liens or other encumbrances thereon existing before the
transfer and not removed thereby, whether or not the underlying indebtedness is
assumed, and ground rents, or a commensurate part thereof where such liens or
other encumbrances and ground rents also encumber or are charged against real
estate; provided, that where such documents shall set forth a nominal
consideration, the "value" thereof shall be determined from the price set forth
in or actual consideration for the contract of sale.
   B.   In the case of a gift, sale by execution upon a judgment or upon the
foreclosure of a mortgage by a judicial officer, transactions without
consideration or for consideration less than the actual monetary worth of the
real estate, a taxable lease, an occupancy agreement, a leasehold or possessory
interest, any exchange of properties, or the real estate of an acquired
company, the actual monetary worth of the real estate determined by adjusting
the assessed value of the real estate for local real estate tax purposes for
the common level ratio factor developed by the Pennsylvania Department of
Revenue for Pennsylvania realty transfer tax base calculations.
   C.   In the case of an easement or other interest in real estate, the value
of which is not determinable under Subsection A or B, the actual monetary worth
of such interest.
   D.   The actual consideration for or actual monetary worth of any executory
agreement for the construction of buildings, structures or other permanent
improvements to real estate between the grantor and other persons existing
before the transfer and not removed thereby or between the grantor, the agent
or principal of the grantor of a related corporation, association or
partnership and the grantee existing before or effective with the transfer.
§ 549-304. Imposition of tax; interest.
   A.   Every person who makes, executes, delivers, accepts or presents for
recording any document or in whose behalf any document is made, executed,
delivered, accepted or presented for recording, shall be subject to pay for and
in respect to the transaction or any part thereof, a tax at the rate of 1% of
the value of the real estate represented by such document, which tax shall be
payable at the earlier of the time the document is presented for recording or
within 30 days of acceptance of such document or within 30 days of becoming an
acquired company.
   B.   The payment of the tax imposed herein shall be evidenced by the
affixing of an official stamp or writing by the Recorder of Deeds whereon the
date of the payment of the tax, amount of the tax and the signature of the
collecting agent shall be set forth.
   C.   It is the intent of this Part that the entire burden of the tax imposed
herein on a person or transfer shall not exceed the limitations prescribed in
the Local Tax Enabling Act, Act of December 31, 1965, P.L. 1257, 53 P.S. § 6901
et seq., so that if any other political subdivision shall impose or hereafter
shall impose such tax on the same person or transfer, then the tax levied by
the City Council under the authority of that Act shall during the time such
duplication of the tax exists, except as hereinafter otherwise provided, be 1/
2 of the rate and such 1/2 shall become effective without any action on the
part of the City Council; provided, however, that the City and any other
political subdivision which impose such tax on the same person or transfer may
agree that, instead of limiting their respective rates to 1/2 of the rate
herein provided, they will impose respectively different rates, the total of
which shall not exceed the maximum rate permitted under the Local Tax Enabling
Act.
   D.   If for any reason the tax is not paid when due, interest at the rate in
effect at the time the tax is due shall be added and collected.
§ 549-305. Exempt parties.
The United States, the Commonwealth or any of their instrumentalities, agencies
or political subdivisions shall be exempt from payment of the tax imposed by
this Part. The exemption of such governmental bodies shall not, however,
relieve any other party to a transaction from liability for the tax.
§ 549-306. Excluded transactions.
   A.   The tax imposed by §
549-304 shall not be imposed upon:
      (1)   A transfer to the Commonwealth, or to any of its instrumentalities,
agencies or political subdivisions, by gift, dedication or deed in lieu of
condemnation or deed or confirmation in connection with condemnation
proceedings, or a reconveyance by the condemning body of the property condemned
to the owner of record at the time of condemnation which reconveyance may
include property line adjustments, provided said reconveyance is made within
one year from the date of condemnation.
      (2)   A document which the City is prohibited from taxing under the
Constitution or statutes of the United States.
      (3)   A conveyance to a municipality, township, school district or county
pursuant to acquisition by the municipality, township, school district or
county of a tax delinquent property at sheriff sale or tax claim department
sale.
      (4)   A transfer for no or nominal actual consideration which corrects or
confirms a transfer previously recorded, but which does not extend or limit
existing record legal title or interest.
      (5)   A transfer or division in kind for no or nominal actual
consideration of property passed by testate or intestate succession and held by
cotenants; however, if any of the parties take shares greater in value than
their undivided interest, tax is due on the excess.
      (6)   A transfer between husband and wife, between persons who were
previously husband and wife who have since been divorced, provided the property
or interest therein subject to such transfer was acquired by the husband and
wife or husband or wife prior to the granting of the final decree in divorce,
between parent and child or the spouse of such child, between brother or sister
or spouse of a brother or sister, and between a grandparent and grandchild or
the spouse of such grandchild, except that a subsequent transfer by the grantee
within one year shall be subject to tax as if the grantor were making such
transfer.
      (7)   A transfer for no or nominal actual consideration of property
passing by testate or intestate succession from a personal representative of a
decedent to the decedent's devisee or heir.
      (8)   A transfer for no or nominal actual consideration to a trustee of
an ordinary trust where the transfer of the same property would be exempt if
the transfer was made directly from the grantor to all of the possible
beneficiaries, whether or not such beneficiaries are contingent or specifically
named. No such exemption shall be granted unless the Recorder of Deeds is
presented with a copy of the trust instrument that clearly identifies the
grantor and all possible beneficiaries.
      (9)   A transfer for no or nominal actual consideration from a trustee to
a beneficiary of an ordinary trust.
      (10)   A transfer for no or nominal actual consideration from trustee to
successor trustee.
      (11)   A transfer for no or nominal actual consideration between
principal and agent or straw party; or from or to an agent or straw party
where, if the agent or straw party were his principal, no tax would be imposed
under this Part. Where the document by which title is acquired by a grantee or
statement of value fails to set forth that the property was acquired by the
grantee from, or for the benefit of, his principal, there is a rebuttable
presumption that the property is the property of the grantee in his individual
capacity if the grantee claims an exemption from taxation under this
subsection.
      (12)   A transfer made pursuant to the statutory merger or consolidation
of a corporation or statutory division of a nonprofit corporation, except where
the department reasonably determines that the primary intent for such merger,
consolidation or division is avoidance of the tax imposed by this Part.
      (13)   A transfer from a corporation or association of real estate held
of record in the name of the corporation or association where the grantee owns
stock of the corporation or an interest in the association in the same
proportion as his interest in or ownership of the real estate being conveyed
and where the stock of the corporation or the interest in the association has
been held by the grantee for more than two years.
      (14)   A transfer from a nonprofit industrial development agency or
authority to a grantee of property conveyed by the grantee to that agency or
authority as security for a debt of the grantee or a transfer to a nonprofit
industrial development agency or authority.
      (15)   A transfer from a nonprofit industrial development agency or
authority to a grantee purchasing directly from it, but only if: the grantee
shall directly use such real estate for the primary purpose of manufacturing,
fabricating, compounding, processing, publishing, research and development,
transportation, energy conversion, energy production, pollution control,
warehousing or agriculture; and the agency or authority has the full ownership
interest in the real estate transferred.
      (16)   A transfer by a mortgagor to the holder of a bona fide mortgage in
default in lieu of a foreclosure or a transfer pursuant to a judicial sale in
which the successful bidder is the bona fide holder of a mortgage, unless the
holder assigns the bid to another person.
      (17)   Any transfer between religious organizations or other bodies or
persons holding title for a religious organization if such real estate is not
being or has not been used by such transferor for commercial purposes.
      (18)   A transfer to a conservancy which possesses a tax exempt status
pursuant to § 501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, [68A Stat. 3, 26
U.S.C. § 501(c)(3)] and which has as its primary purpose preservation of land
for historic, recreational, scenic, agricultural or open space opportunities.
      (19)   A transfer of real estate devoted to the business of agriculture
to a family farm corporation by a member of the same family which directly owns
at least 75% of each class of the stock thereof.
      (20)   A transfer between members of the same family of an ownership
interest in a real estate company or family farm corporation.
      (21)   A transaction wherein the tax is $1 or less.
      (22)   Leases for the production or extraction of coal, oil, natural gas
or minerals and assignments thereof.
   B.   In order to exercise any exclusion provided in this section, the true,
full and complete value of the transfer shall be shown on the statement of
value. A copy of the Pennsylvania Realty Transfer Tax Statement of Value may be
submitted for this purpose. For leases of coal, oil, natural gas or minerals,
the statement of value may be limited to an explanation of the reason such
document is not subject to tax under this Part.
§ 549-307. Documents relating to associations or corporations and members,
partners, stockholders or shareholders thereof.
Except as otherwise provided in §
549-306, documents which make, confirm or evidence any transfer or demise of
title to real estate between associations or corporations and the members,
partners, shareholders or stockholders thereof are fully taxable. For the
purposes of this section, corporations and associations are entities separate
from their members, partners, stockholders and shareholders.
§ 549-308. Acquired company.
   A.   A real estate company is an acquired company upon a change in the
ownership interest in the company, however effected, if the change does not
affect the continuity of the company; and of itself or together with prior
changes has the effect of transferring, directly or indirectly, 90% or more of
the total ownership interest in the company within a period of three years.
   B.   With respect to real estate acquired after February 16, 1986, a family
farm corporation is an acquired company when, because of voluntary or
involuntary dissolution, it ceases to be a family farm corporation or when,
because of issuance or transfer of stock or because of acquisition or transfer
of assets that are devoted to the business of agriculture, it fails to meet the
minimum requirements of a family farm corporation under this Part.
   C.   Within 30 days after becoming an acquired company, the company shall
present a declaration of acquisition with the recorder of each county in which
it holds real estate for the affixation of documentary stamps and recording.
Such declaration shall set forth the value of real estate holdings of the
acquired company in such county. A copy of the Pennsylvania Realty Transfer Tax
Declaration of Acquisition may be submitted for this purpose.
§ 549-309. Credits against tax.
   A.   Where there is a transfer of a residential property by a licensed real
estate broker, which property was transferred to him within the preceding year
as consideration for the purchase of other residential property, a credit for
the amount of the tax paid at the time of the transfer to him shall be given to
him toward the amount of the tax due upon the transfer.
   B.   Where there is a transfer by a builder of residential property which
was transferred to the builder within the preceding year as a consideration for
the purchase of new, previously unoccupied residential property, a credit for
the amount of the tax paid at the time of the transfer to the builder shall be
given to the builder toward the amount of the tax due upon the transfer.
   C.   Where there is a transfer of real estate which is leased by the
grantor, a credit for the amount of tax paid at the time of the lease shall be
given the grantor toward the tax due upon the transfer.
   D.   Where there is a conveyance by deed of real estate which was previously
sold under a land contract by the grantor, a credit for the amount of the tax
paid at the time of the sale shall be given the grantor toward the tax due upon
the deed.
   E.   If the tax due upon the transfer is greater than the credit given under
this section, the difference shall be paid. If the credit allowed is greater
than the amount of tax due, no refund or carryover credit shall be allowed.
§ 549-310. Extension of lease.
In determining the term of a lease, it shall be presumed that a right or option
to renew or extend a lease will be exercised if the rental charge to the lessee
is fixed or if a method for calculating the rental charge is established.
§ 549-311. Proceeds of judicial sale.
The tax herein imposed shall be fully paid, and have priority out of the
proceeds of any judicial sale of real estate before any other obligation,
claim, lien, judgment, estate or costs of the sale and of the writ upon which
the sale is made except the state realty transfer tax, and the sheriff, or
other officer, conducting said sale, shall pay the tax herein imposed out of
the first moneys paid to him in connection therewith. If the proceeds of the
sale are insufficient to pay the entire tax herein imposed, the purchaser shall
be liable for the remaining tax.
§ 549-312. Duties of Recorder of Deeds.
   A.   As provided in 16 P.S. § 11011-6, as amended by Act of July 7, 1983,
(P.L. 40, No. 21), the Recorder of Deeds shall be the collection agent for the
local realty transfer tax, including any amount payable to City based on a
redetermination of the amount of tax due by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania of
the Pennsylvania realty transfer tax, without compensation from the City.
   B.   In order to ascertain the amount of the taxes due when the property is
located in more than one political subdivision, the recorder shall not accept
for recording such a deed unless it is accompanied by a statement of value
showing what taxes are due each municipality.
   C.   On or before the 10th of each month, the recorder shall pay over to the
City all local realty transfer taxes collected, less 2% for use of the county,
together with a report containing the information as is required by the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania in reporting collections of the Pennsylvania
realty transfer tax. The 2% commission shall be paid to the county.
   D.   Upon a redetermination of the amount of realty transfer tax due by the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, the recorder shall rerecord the deed or record
the additional realty transfer tax form only when both the state and local
amounts and a rerecording or recording fee has been tendered.
§ 549-313. Statement of value.
Every document lodged with or presented to the Recorder of Deeds for recording
shall set forth therein and as a part of such document the true, full and
complete value thereof, or shall be accompanied by a statement of value
executed by a responsible person connected with the transaction showing such
connection and setting forth the true, full and complete value thereof or the
reason, if any, why such document is not subject to tax under this Part. A copy
of the Pennsylvania Realty Transfer Tax Statement of Value may be submitted for
this purpose. The provisions of this section shall not apply to any excludable
real estate transfers which are exempt from taxation based on family
relationship. Other documents presented for the affixation of stamps shall be
accompanied by a certified copy of the document and statement of value executed
by a responsible person connected with the transaction showing such connection
and setting forth the true, full and complete value thereof or the reason, if
any, why such document is not subject to tax under this Part.
§ 549-314. Civil penalties.
   A.   If any part of any underpayment of taxes imposed by this Part is due to
fraud, there shall be added to the tax an amount equal to 50% of the
underpayment.
   B.   In the case of failure to record a declaration required under this Part
on the date prescribed therefor, unless it is shown that such failure is due to
reasonable cause, there shall be added to the tax 5% of the amount of such tax
if the failure is for not more than one month, with an additional 5% for each
additional month or fraction thereof during which such failure continues, not
exceeding 50% in the aggregate.
§ 549-315. Lien.
The tax imposed by this Part shall become a lien upon the lands, tenements or
hereditaments, or any interest therein, lying, being situated, wholly or in
part within the boundaries of the City, which lands, tenements, hereditaments
or interest therein, are described in or conveyed by or transferred by the deed
which is the subject of the tax imposed, assessed and levied by this Part, said
lien to begin at the time when the tax under this Part is due and payable, and
continue until discharged by payment, or in accordance with the law, and the
City Solicitor is authorized to file a municipal or tax claim in the Court of
Common Pleas of Berks County, in accordance with the provisions of the
Municipal Claims and Liens Act of 1923, 53 P.S. § 7101 et seq., its supplements
and amendments.
§ 549-316. Enforcement.
All taxes imposed by this Part, together with interest and penalties prescribed
herein, shall be recoverable as other debts of like character are recovered.
§ 549-317. Regulations.
The Recorder of Deeds of Berks County is charged with enforcement and
collection of tax and is empowered to promulgate and enforce reasonable
regulations for enforcement and collection of the tax. The regulations which
have been promulgated by the Pennsylvania Department of Revenue under 72 P.S. §
8101-C et seq. are incorporated into and made a part of this Part.
B   Home Rule Realty Transfer Tax
[Adopted 11-27-2006 by Ord. No. 80-2006 (Ch. 24, Part 3B, of the 2001 Code of
Ordinances)]
§ 549-318. Definitions.
   A.   As used in this Part 8B, certain terms are defined as follows except
where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
   DEED — Any deed, instrument or writing whereby any lands, tenements or
hereditaments within the City or any interest therein shall be granted,
bargained, sold or otherwise conveyed to the grantee, purchaser or any other
person, but does not include wills, mortgages, transfers between husband and
wife, transfers between parent and child or the spouse of such child and
leases.
   PERSON — Every natural person, association, partnership or corporation.
Whenever used in any clause prescribing and imposing a fine or imprisonment, or
both, the term "person," as applied to associations, shall mean the partners or
members thereof, and, as applied to corporations, the officers thereof.
   TRANSACTION — The making, executing, delivering, accepting or presenting for
recording of a document of any type or kind transferring title to or any
interest in real property located within the City.
   VALUE — In the case of any document granting, bargaining, selling or
otherwise conveying any land, tenement or hereditament, or interest therein,
the amount of the actual consideration therefor, including liens or other
encumbrances thereon and ground rents, or a commensurate part of the liens or
other encumbrances thereon and ground rents where such liens or other
encumbrances and ground rents also encumber or are charged against other lands,
tenements or hereditaments; provided, that where such documents shall set forth
a small or nominal consideration, the "value" thereof shall be determined from
the price set forth in or actual consideration for the contract of sale, or, in
the case of a gift, or any other document without consideration, from the
actual monetary worth of the property granted, bargained, sold or otherwise
conveyed, which in either event, shall not be less than the amount of the
highest assessment of such lands, tenements or hereditaments for local tax
purposes.
   B.   The singular shall include the plural, and the masculine shall include
the feminine and the neuter.
§ 549-319. Tax levy and rate.
   A.   Rate and time of payment. A tax in the amount of 3.5% of the value is
hereby imposed upon each transfer of any interest in real property situated
within the City regardless of where the document is made, executed or
delivered, or where the actual settlement on each transfer takes place. The tax
shall be payable at the time of delivery of the document.
   B.   Determination of tax liability. Every person who accepts delivery of
any document, or on whose behalf delivery of any document is accepted, shall be
liable for the payment of the tax, except that where any document is delivered
to the commonwealth, a political subdivision or to an authority created by the
commonwealth or a political subdivision, the person by whom the document was
made, executed, issued or delivered shall be liable for the payment of the tax.
   C.   Relation to § 24-804. The tax levied by this Part 8B shall be in
addition to the tax imposed under §
549-304 of this chapter.
§ 549-320. Properties partially within the City.
Where land lying partly within the boundaries of the City and partly without
such boundaries of the City are transferred, the tax herein imposed shall be
calculated upon such portion of the value as shall be represented by the
portion of such lands lying within the boundaries of the City, such
apportionment of value to be evidenced by the affidavit or certificate of value
hereinafter provided for, but shall in no event be less than the highest
assessed valuation for local tax purposes, placed upon the same in the
assessment of property within the City.
§ 549-321. Due date.
The tax levied hereunder shall be due and payable and shall be paid at the time
of delivery of the instrument of transfer.
§ 549-322. Instrument of conveyance contents.
Every instrument of conveyance, effecting a transfer of title to real property
or interest therein, located in the City, shall set forth as part of such
instrument the full, complete and actual consideration for the transfer of real
property described therein, or shall be accompanied by a certificate of any
attorney at law or an affidavit executed by a responsible person connected with
the transaction showing such connection and setting forth the true, full,
complete and actual value thereof and if the privilege of making such transfer
is not taxable hereunder, the facts by reason of which such nontaxability
exists. Every transaction subject to the realty transfer tax under Act 77, 72
P.S. § 8101-D et seq. of the General Assembly of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania, approved July 2, 1986, shall be subject to the tax herein
imposed.
§ 549-323. Exceptions.
The real property transfer tax shall not be imposed upon the following
transfers:
   A.   Wills.
   B.   Leases.
   C.   Mortgages.
   D.   Conveyances to a trustee under a recorded trust agreement for the
express purpose of holding title in trust as security for debt contracted at
the time of the conveyance, under which the trustee is not the lender, and
requiring the trustee to make reconveyance to the grantor-borrower upon the
payment of the debt.
   E.   Transfers between husband and wife.
   F.   Transfers between persons who were previously husband and wife but who
have since been divorced, provided the property or interest therein subject to
such transfer was acquired by the husband and wife or husband or wife prior to
the granting of the final decree in divorce, except that a subsequent transfer
by the grantee within one year shall be subject to tax as if the grantor were
making such transfer.
   G.   Transfer between parent and child or the spouse of such child, between
brother or sister or spouse of a brother or sister and brother or sister or the
spouse of a brother or sister and between a grandparent and grandchild or the
spouse of such grandchild, except that a subsequent transfer by the grantee
within one year shall be subject to tax as if the grantor were making such
transfer.
   H.   Correctional deeds without consideration.
   I.   Transfers by and between a principal and straw party for the purpose of
placing a mortgage, or ground rent upon the premises.
   J.   Transfers from a purchase money mortgagor to the vendor holding the
purchase money mortgage, whether pursuant to a foreclosure or in lieu thereof.
   K.   Transfers from the commonwealth or political subdivisions or from
authorities created by the commonwealth or political subdivision to any of such
public bodies.
   L.   Conveyances to political subdivisions pursuant to acquisition by the
political subdivision of tax delinquent properties at any sheriff's sale.
   M.   Transfers to the United States, the commonwealth, or to any of their
instrumentalities by gift or dedication, or by deed of confirmation in
connection with a gift, dedication, condemnation proceeding or in lieu thereof,
or reconveyance by a condemning body of the property condemned to the owner of
record at the time of condemnation, which reconveyance may include property
line adjustments, provided the reconveyance is made within one year of the date
of condemnation.
   N.   Transfers between religious organizations or other bodies or persons
holding title to real estate for a religious organization if the real estate is
not being or has not been used by such transferor for commercial purposes.
   O.   Transfer between corporations operating housing projects pursuant to
the Housing and Redevelopment Assistance Law 3  and the shareholders thereof.
   P.   Transfers to nonprofit industrial development agencies.
   Q.   Transfers between nonprofit industrial development agencies and
industrial corporations purchasing from them.
   R.   Transfers from a political subdivision or public authority, created
under the laws of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, of a multipurpose stadium
to a private entity or person.
   S.   Transfers for no or nominal actual consideration.
      (1)   Transfer for no or nominal actual consideration to a trustee of a
living trust from the settlor of the living trust. No such exemption shall be
granted unless the Recorder of Deeds is presented with a copy of the living
trust instrument.
      (2)   Transfer for no or nominal actual consideration from a trustee of a
living trust after the death of the settlor of the trust or from a trustee of a
trust created pursuant to the will of a decedent to a beneficiary to whom the
property is devised or bequeathed.
      (3)   Transfer for no or nominal actual consideration from the trustee of
a living trust to the settlor of the living trust if such property was
originally conveyed to the trustee by the settlor.
3.   Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 1661 et seq.
§ 549-324. Instrument of conveyance to be stamped upon payment.
The payment of the tax imposed by this Part 8B shall be evidenced by a stamp
impressed upon or affixed to every instrument or deed of conveyance, and the
Finance Director, or his agent, using such stamp shall indelibly write thereon
his name, the amount of the tax paid and the date of payment.
§ 549-325. Enforcement by Finance Director.
The Tax Administrator or his agent, for the time the tax is due and payable, is
hereby charged with the enforcement of the provisions of this Part 8B, and is
hereby authorized and empowered to prescribe, adopt and enforce rules and
regulations relating to the registration and notation of such transactions and
the payment and receipt of such taxes and any other matter pertaining to the
administration and enforcement of the provisions of this Part 8B.
§ 549-326. Finance Director to furnish stamp.
The Finance Director shall prescribe, prepare and furnish the stamp of metal or
rubber which shall dearly show that the tax assessed under this Part 8B has
been paid.
§ 549-327. Collection by Recorder of Deeds.
Unless otherwise designated by Council, the Recorder of Deeds of Berks County,
or any of his deputies, shall be the agent of the Finance Director and City
Treasury Division for the collection of the tax herein imposed by virtue of
this Part 8B at the time any deed, as hereinbefore defined, is presented for
recording in the Office of the Recorder of Deeds in and for Berks County. The
Recorder shall receive a commission of 1% upon the amount of tax collected by
him, or any of his deputies, by virtue of this Part 8B, which percent shall be
deducted before remitting monthly to the City Treasury Division his statement
of taxes collected under and by virtue of this Part 8B.
§ 549-328. Lien authorized.
If any person fails to pay the tax in the amount and at the time required under
this Part 8B, the City Solicitor is authorized to file a lien against the
property which is the subject of the transfer in the amount of the deficiency.
§ 549-329. Authority to enact.
This Part 8B is enacted under the authority vested in home rule and optional
plan governments by 53 Pa.C.S.A. § 2962. The enactment of this Part 8B shall
not affect any act done, liability incurred or right accrued or vested, or
affect any suit or prosecution pending, or to be instituted to enforce any
right or penalty, or to punish any offense under the authority of §
549-330.
§ 549-330. Prohibited activities.
No person shall:
   A.   Make, execute, issue, deliver or accept, or cause to made, executed,
issued, delivered or accepted, any document without the full amount of the tax
thereon being duly paid.
   B.   Fraudulently cut, tear or remove from any document any documentary
stamp, receipt or other evidence of payment.
   C.   Fraudulently affix to any document upon which a tax is imposed by this
Part 8B any documentary stamp, receipt or other evidence of payment which has
been cut, torn or removed from any other document upon which this tax is
imposed by this or any documentary stamp or receipt or any impression of any
forged or counterfeited stamp, receipt, die, plate or any other article.
   D.   Willfully remove or alter the cancellation marks of any documentary
stamp or receipt, or restore any documentary stamp or receipt with intent to
use or cause the same to be used after it has already been used, or knowingly
buy, sell, offer for sale or give away any such altered or restored stamp or
receipt to any person for use, or knowingly use the same.
   E.   Knowingly have in his or her possession an altered or restored
documentary stamp or receipt removed from any document upon which a tax is
imposed by this Part 8B.
   F.   Knowingly or willfully prepare, keep, sell, offer for sale or have in
his possession, any forged or counterfeited documentary stamps or receipts.
   G.   Fail, neglect or refuse to comply with or violate the rules and
regulations adopted by the Finance Director under the provisions of this Part
8B.
§ 549-331. Effective date.
This Part 8B shall become effective on the 15th day of January 2007, and shall
be effective for the duration of the fiscal year beginning on the first day of
January 2008, and shall thereafter continue in force on a calendar year basis
without annual reenactment.
§ 549-332. Violations and penalties.
Any person who violates the terms or provisions of this Part 8B or of any
regulation or requirement pursuant hereto, and authorized hereby, shall, in
addition to other penalties provided by law, be fined not more than $300 for
each offense and/or be incarcerated for a period not to exceed 30 days.
Part 4
Business Privilege Tax
[Adopted 12-3-1975 by Ord. No. 52-1975 (Ch. 24, Part 5A, of the 2011 Code of
Ordinances)]
§ 549-401. Short title.
This Part shall be known as the "Business Privilege Tax Ordinance."
§ 549-402. Definitions. [Amended 5-29-2001 by Ord. No. 14-2001]
As used in this Part, certain terms are defined as follows except where the
context clearly indicates a different meaning:
   BUSINESS - Any activity carried on or exercised for gain or profit in the
City including, but not limited to, the sale of merchandise or other tangible
personalty or the performance of services and the rental of personalty and/or
realty.
   CALENDAR YEAR - The period January 1 to December 31, inclusive.
   CITY - The City of Reading.
   FINANCE DIRECTOR - The person duly appointed by Council to administer the
tax.
   LICENSE YEAR - The period from January 1 to December 31, inclusive.
   PERSON - Any individual, partnership, limited partnership, association, firm
or corporation. Whenever used in any clause prescribing or imposing a penalty,
the term "person" as applied to associations shall mean the partners or members
thereof, and as applied to corporations, the officers thereof.
   TAXPAYER - A person subject to the payment of the tax imposed by this Part.
   TAX YEAR - The period from January 1 to December 31, inclusive.
   TREASURER - The Finance Director of the City of Reading.
   WHOLESALE DEALER or WHOLESALE VENDOR - Any person who sells to dealers in or
vendors of goods, wares and merchandise and to no other person.
§ 549-403. Tax levied; rate; business volume computed; exemptions.
[Amended 5-29-2001 by Ord. No. 14-2001]
There is hereby levied for the tax year 1976 and annually thereafter a tax for
general revenue purposes on the privilege of doing business as herein defined
in the City as follows:
   A.   Rate and basis of tax. The rate of the tax on each dollar volume of
gross annual receipts of every person engaged in occupations or business in the
City shall be 1 1/2 mills; 1 1/2 mills shall mean $1.50 per $1,000 volume of
gross annual receipts, except that the rate of the tax on each dollar volume of
gross annual receipts by wholesale dealers or wholesale vendors engaged in
business in the City shall be one mill. All nonwholesale businesses of such
wholesale dealers or wholesale vendors shall be taxed at the general rate of 1
1/2 mills. [Amended 1-22-2007 by Ord. No. 10-2007]
   B.   Computation of volume of business.
      (1)   Every person subject to the payment of the tax hereby imposed who
has commenced his business prior to the full calendar year prior to the tax
year shall compute his annual estimated gross volume of business upon the
actual gross amount of business transacted by him during the immediately
preceding calendar year.
      (2)   Every person subject to the payment of the tax hereby imposed who
has commenced or who commences his business before the beginning of the tax
year but after the beginning of the full calendar year prior to the tax year,
shall compute his estimated annual gross volume of business for the tax year
upon the gross volume of business transacted by him during prior calendar year,
taking the monthly average during such period and multiplying the same by 12.
In the event that he shall be in business fewer than 90 days in the prior
calendar year, he shall be permitted to use sufficient days in calendar year in
which the tax year begins to equal 90 successive days after commencement of
business, to take a monthly average thereon, and to multiply the average by 12.
      (3)   Every person subject to the payment of the tax hereby imposed who
has commenced or commences his business subsequent to the beginning of the tax
year, if there shall be less than three months from the commencement of his
business to the end of the tax year, shall compute his annual gross volume of
business upon the actual gross amount of business transacted by him during the
tax year; if there shall be more than three months from the commencement of his
business to the end of the tax year, he shall compute his estimated gross
volume of business for such tax year upon the gross volume of business
transacted by him during the period from the commencement of his business to
the end of the tax year, taking the monthly average during the first three
months of business and multiplying the same by the number of months from the
commencement of business to the end of the tax year.
      (4)   Every person subject to the payment of the tax hereby imposed who
engages in a business temporary, seasonal or itinerant by nature, shall compute
his estimated gross amount of business to be transacted by him for the period
such person engages in such temporary, seasonal or itinerant business within
the City by a method to be determined by the Finance Director.
      (5)   The Finance Director is hereby authorized to accept payment under
protest of the amount of business privilege tax claimed by the City in any case
where the taxpayer disputes the validity or amount of the City's claim for tax.
If it is thereafter judicially determined by a court of competent jurisdiction
that the City has been overpaid, the amount of the overpayment shall be
refunded to the taxpayer. The provisions of this section shall be applicable to
cases in which the facts are similar to those in a case litigated in a court of
competent jurisdiction.
      (6)   Payments made under the mercantile license tax for business to
which this tax is applicable shall be credited to this tax and vice versa.
   C.   Persons, business and receipts exempted.
      (1)   Persons and businesses. Persons employed for a wage or salary,
nonprofit corporations or associations organized for religious, charitable or
educational purposes, agencies of the government of the United States or of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania and the business of any political subdivision, or
of any authority created or organized under and pursuant to any act of assembly
are exempt from the provisions of this Part.
      (2)   No such tax shall be assessed and collected on a privilege,
transaction, subject, or occupation which is subject to a state tax or license
fee, and which tax or license fee has been held by the Courts of Pennsylvania
to be the basis for exemption from the imposition of a business privilege tax
by a municipality.
      (3)   Utilities. No such tax shall be assessed and collected on the gross
receipts from utility service of any person or company whose rates of service
are fixed and regulated by the Pennsylvania Public Utility Commission; or on
any public utility service rendered by any such person or company or on any
privilege or transaction involving the rendering of any such public utility
service.
      (4)   State tax on tangible property. No such tax shall be assessed and
collected on the privilege of employing such tangible property as is subject to
a state tax except on sales of admission to places of amusement or on sales or
other transfers of title or possession of property.
      (5)   Production and manufacture. No such tax shall be assessed and
collected on goods, articles and products, or on by-products of manufacture, or
on minerals, timber, natural resources and farm products manufactured, produced
or grown in the City, or on the preparation or processing thereof for use or
market, or on any privilege, act or transaction relating to the business of
manufacturing, the production, preparation or processing of minerals, timber
and natural resources or farm products, by manufacturers, producers and farmers
with respect to the goods, articles and products of their own manufacture,
production or growth or any privilege, act or transaction relating to the
business of processing by-products of manufacture or on the transportation,
loading, unloading, dumping or storage of such goods, articles, products or by-
products.
   D.   Determination of gross or whole volume business. Gross or whole volume
of business upon which the tax hereunder is computed shall include the gross
consideration credited or received for or on account of sales made, rentals
and/or services rendered, subject only to the following allowable deductions
and exemptions:
      (1)   The dollar volume of business transacted by wholesale and retail
dealers derived from the resale of goods, wares and merchandise taken by any
dealer as trade-in or as part payment for other goods, wares and merchandise,
except to the extent that the resale price exceeds the trade-in allowance.
      (2)   Refunds, credits or allowances given by a taxpayer to a purchaser
on account of defects in goods, wares or merchandise sold, or on account of
goods, wares or merchandise returned.
      (3)   Any commissions paid by a broker to another broker on account of a
purchase or sales contract initiated, executed or cleared with such other
broker.
      (4)   Bad debts, where the deduction is also taken in the same year for
federal income taxation purposes.
      (5)   Taxes collected as agent for the United States of America,
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania or the City.
   E.   Partial exemptions. Where gross or whole volume of business in its
entirety cannot be subjected to the tax imposed by this Part by reason of the
provisions of the Constitution of the United States or any other provision law,
the Finance Director with the approval of Council shall establish rules and
regulations and methods of allocation and evaluation so that only that part of
the gross or whole volume of business which is properly attributable and
allowable to doing business in the City shall be taxed hereunder.
   F.   Rate when same tax is imposed by two taxing bodies. If any person is
liable for the same tax on the same subject imposed under the Local Tax
Enabling Act 1965, December 31, P.L. 1257, 4  and its amendments, to the City
and one or more political subdivisions of the state, then and in that event,
the tax shall be apportioned by such percentage as may be agreed upon by such
political subdivisions, but, in no event shall the combined taxes of both
subdivisions exceed a maximum rate of tax as fixed by the Enabling Act
permitting the imposition of such taxes.
   G.   Records. The taxpayer, to obtain the foregoing enumerated exclusions
and deductions, shall keep books and records of his business so as to show
clearly, accurately and separately the amount of such sales and services as are
excluded from the tax and the amounts of such sales and services which he is
entitled to deduct from the gross volume of business as hereinbefore provided.
4.   Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 6924.101 et seq.
§ 549-404. Returns; payment; interest penalty.
[Amended 12-22-1976 by Ord. No. 49-1976; 5-29-2001 by Ord. No. 14-2001]
   A.   Every return shall be made upon a form furnished by the Finance
Director. Every person making a return shall certify the correctness thereof by
affidavit.
   B.   Every person subject to the tax imposed by this Part who commenced his
business on or before January 1 of the full calendar year prior to the
beginning of any tax year shall on or before February 15 of the tax year file
with the Finance Director a return setting forth his name, his business,
business address and such other information as may be necessary in arriving at
the actual gross amount of business transacted by him during the preceding
calendar year, and the amount of the tax due.
   C.   Every person subject to the tax imposed by this Part who has commenced
his business before the beginning of the tax year but after January 1 of the
full calendar year previous to the beginning of the tax year shall on or before
February 15 of the tax year file with the Finance Director a return setting
forth his name, his business, business address and such other information as
may be necessary in arriving at the estimated gross amount of business
transacted by him as calculated under § 549-403B(2) and the amount of tax due,
provided 100 days have elapsed from the commencement of the business to
February 15 of the tax year. If a taxpayer has not been in business for 100
days as of February 15 of the tax year, whether or not he commenced business
within the tax year, his return shall be filed within 100 days of the
commencement of his business.
   D.   Every person subject to the payment of the tax imposed by this Part who
engages in a business temporary, seasonal or itinerant by its nature shall at
the time application is made for the business privilege license file a return
with the Finance Director setting forth his name, his business, his business
address and such information as may be necessary in arriving at the estimated
gross amount of business to be transacted by him as calculated in accordance
with §
549-403B(4).
   E.   Going out of business. Any person going out of or ceasing to do
business shall, within seven days from the date of ceasing to do business, file
a return showing the actual gross volume of business conducted and done by such
person during the tax year in which such person ceased doing business, and pay
the tax due as computed thereon at the rate herein provided for at the time of
filing such return. If such tax has been previously paid based upon estimated
gross receipts, the taxpayer shall be entitled to a refund, without interest,
of any excess tax paid for the tax year in which business was terminated.
   F.   Payment of tax and penalties for late payment. The business privilege
tax levied pursuant to this Part shall be due and payable on the date on which
the taxpayer is required to file a return as set forth above. If the tax is
paid within two months after the due date, a discount of 2% shall be allowed.
All taxpayers who shall fail to pay the tax for four months after the due date
shall be charged a penalty of 10% plus an additional 1% per month or fractional
part of a month, commencing with the penalty period, until the tax is paid.
   G.   Receipt. The City Finance Director shall, upon payment to him of the
business privilege tax, give the person paying the same a receipt therefor.
§ 549-405. Business privilege license.
[Amended 12-10-1986 by Ord. No. 96-1986; 11-24-1997 by Ord. No. 26-1997; 12-9-
2002 by Ord. No. 67-20025]
Any person desiring to conduct or to continue to conduct any business, as
herein defined, within the City shall obtain a business privilege license as
set forth in
Ch. 339, Part 2. 6
5.   Editor's Note: Amended during codification (see
Ch. 1, General Provisions, Part 2).
6.   Editor's Note: Original § 24-506, Posting licenses, which immediately
followed this section, was repealed during codification (see
Ch. 1, General Provisions, Part 2).
§ 549-406. Violations and penalties.
[Amended 6-20-1984 by Ord. No. 53-1984; 5-29-2001 by Ord. No. 14-2001]
   A.   Whoever conducts, transacts or engages in any of the businesses subject
to the tax imposed by this Part, without having first secured a business
privilege license for the year, or who fails to file a tax return as required
by the provisions of this Part or who willfully files a false return, or who
fails to maintain such records and books of account as shall enable him to make
a true and correct return in accordance with the provisions of this Part, or
any person or persons subject to, or supposed to be subject to, the tax imposed
by this Part who refuses to allow the Finance Director or his deputies to
examine the books, papers and records of any such person or persons or who
fails to comply with any other provisions of this Part shall be, upon
conviction thereof, sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $600 plus costs
and, in default of payment of said fine and costs, to a term of imprisonment
not to exceed 30 days.
   B.   Each day on which such person violated this Part may be considered as a
separate offense and punishable as such as aforeprovided.
§ 549-407. Duties of City Finance Director.
[Amended 5-29-2001 by Ord. No. 14-2001]
   A.   The City Finance Director is charged with the duties of collecting and
receiving the taxes, fines and penalties imposed by this Part. It shall be his
duty to keep a record showing the amount received by him from each person
paying the tax and the date of such receipt.
   B.   The Finance Director and his duly appointed deputies under the
direction of the Director of Accounts and Finance are hereby empowered with the
approval of Council to prescribe, adopt and promulgate rules and regulations
relating to any matter pertaining to the administration and enforcement of this
Part, including provisions for the examination and correction of returns and
payments alleged or found to be incorrect, or as to which an overpayment is
claimed or found to have occurred, and charged with enforcing the provisions of
this Part and any rules and/or regulations promulgated pursuant hereto.
   C.   In the event the person to be assessed neglects or refuses to make a
return, then in such case, the Finance Director or his duly appointed deputies
shall assess such person or persons on such an amount of whole or gross volume
of business as the Finance Director or his deputies deem reasonable and
appropriate. In all cases of assessment, the Finance Director or his duly
appointed deputies shall give the parties assessed a notice in which shall be
stated the trade, business, occupation or class, and the amount of the business
privilege tax imposed or levied.
   D.   The taxpayer shall maintain such records and books of account as shall
enable him to make a true and accurate return in accordance with the provisions
of this Part. Such accounts and records shall disclose in detail the gross
receipts and other date pertaining to the taxpayer's gross volume of business,
and shall be sufficiently complete to enable the Finance Director or his
deputies to verify all transactions. The Finance Director or his deputies are
hereby authorized to examine the books, papers and records of any person or
persons subject to or supposed to be subject to the tax imposed by this Part,
in order to verify the accuracy of the return made, or if no return was made,
ascertain the tax due.
   E.   Any person aggrieved by any decision of the Finance Director shall have
the right to appeal to the Court of Common Pleas, as in other cases.
§ 549-408. Confidential nature of information.
[Amended 5-29-2001 by Ord. No. 14-2001]
Any information gained by the Finance Director or any other official, agent or
employee of the City, as a result of any returns, investigations, hearings or
verifications required or authorized by this Part, shall be confidential,
except in accordance with proper judicial order or as otherwise provided by
law.
§ 549-409. Suit on collection; costs.
[Amended 5-29-2001 by Ord. No. 14-2001]
   A.   The Finance Director or his duly appointed deputies shall have the
power in the name of the City to institute proceedings against any and all
persons who violate the provisions of this Part.
   B.   If for any reason the tax is not paid when due and suit is brought for
the recovery of any such tax, the person liable therefor, shall, in addition,
be liable for the costs of collection and interest and penalties herein
imposed.erein imposed.
§ 549-410. Savings clause; separability.
   A.   Nothing contained in this Part shall be construed to empower the City
to levy and collect the taxes hereby imposed on any person, or any business, or
any portion of any business not within the taxing power of the City under the
Constitution of the United States and the laws and Constitution of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
   B.   If the tax, or any portion thereof, imposed upon any person under the
provisions of this Part shall be held by any court of competent power or
jurisdiction to be in violation of the Constitution of the United States or of
the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania or any other provision of the law, the
decisions of the court shall not affect or impair the right to impose the
taxes, or the validity of the taxes so imposed upon other persons as herein
provided.
   C.   The provisions of this Part are severable, and if any of its provisions
shall be held illegal, invalid or unconstitutional, the decision of the court
shall not affect or impair any of the remaining provisions of this Part. It is
hereby declared to be the intention of Council that this Part would have been
adopted if such illegal, invalid or unconstitutional provisions had not been
included herein.
Part 5
Business Privilege Tax Regulations
[Adopted 12-3-1975 by Ord. No. 52-1975 (Ch. 24, Part 5B, of the 2011 Code of
Ordinances)]
§ 549-501. Purpose.
These regulations are enacted for the purpose of the administration of the
Business Privilege Tax Ordinance [Part 4].
§ 549-502. Definitions.
(See appropriate section of ordinance.) 7
§ 549-503. Business.
Carrying on or exercising for gain or profit, in the City of Reading, any
trade, business, profession, vocation or commercial activity or making sales in
the City of Reading. A profession or vocation or any rendering of personal
services in the City of Reading in any capacity, except as an employee of
another business.
7.   Editor's Note: See §
549-402.
§ 549-504. What constitutes doing business in the City.
[Amended 1-22-2007 by Ord. No. 9-2007]
Whether or not a person carries on a taxable activity within the meaning of the
Business Privilege Tax Act is essentially a question of fact. In general,
taxable activity includes any trade, business, profession, vocation, or
commercial activity that is carried on in the City of Reading. The tax is
imposed on any person who exercises the privilege of carrying on certain
activities in the City of Reading and is measured by receipts attributable to
the City of Reading.
   A.   Inter- and intrastate business. Doing business includes any trade,
business, profession, vocation or commercial activity of an intrastate or
interstate character.
   B.   Residence or domicile. A person who engages in a taxable activity in
the City of Reading is subject to this tax, whether or not he is a resident,
and whether or not he has a permanent place of business in the City of Reading.
   C.   Foreign corporations. A foreign corporation is subject to this tax if
it carries on a taxable activity in the City of Reading, whether or not it is
licensed to do business in Pennsylvania.
§ 549-505. Allocation of business done and gross volume of business.
   A.   General. Receipts from any transactions shall be attributable to the
City of Reading if the person's sole place of business is located in the City
of Reading. If a person has more than one place of business in Pennsylvania,
but no interstate commerce, the receipts attributable to the City of Reading
shall be equal to total receipts times a fraction, the numerator of which shall
be receipts from transactions within the City of Reading and the denominator of
which shall be receipts from transactions within the City of Reading and other
place(s) of business in Pennsylvania. If a person has more than one place of
business in Pennsylvania, and interstate commerce, the receipts attributable to
the City of Reading shall be equal to total receipts, less receipts
attributable outside of Pennsylvania, times a fraction, the numerator of which
shall be receipts from transactions within the City of Reading and the
denominator of which shall be receipts from transactions within the City of
Reading and other place(s) of business in Pennsylvania. [Amended 1-22-2007 by
Ord. No. 9-2007]
   B.   Persons rendering professional, commercial, industrial or personal
services. [Amended 1-22-2007 by Ord. No. 9-2007]
      (1)   General. Receipts from any service shall be attributable to the
City of Reading if the transaction or any activity in connection therewith
occurs within the City of Reading; or is generated, directed, managed, or
controlled by a place of business in the City of Reading and contributes to the
taxpayer's ultimate business purpose; or where there is no other place of
business.
      (2)   Out-of-City branch office. Where a taxpayer maintains a bona fide
branch office or place of business outside the City of Reading, he will
nevertheless be subject to business privilege tax liability on those receipts
which are the result of services rendered or business activities generated
within or attributable to the City of Reading. Said taxpayer will be permitted
to exclude his branch office receipts from his taxable gross receipts only
where he sustains the burden of proving that the City of Reading does not have
the requisite minimal contact or nexus with those receipts to sustain the
imposition of the business privilege tax.
   C.   Lessors of tangible personal property. Persons doing business within
the City of Reading who own and hold title to tangible personal property which
is leased to others are required to report gross receipts from the rental of or
license to use such property according to the following rules:
      (1)   Where the original situs of the property is within the City of
Reading, the receipts from tangible personal property leased to others are
deemed to be:
         (a)   Wholly taxable receipts, if the property is delivered to lessees
inside Pennsylvania.
         (b)   Nontaxable receipts, if the property is delivered to lessees
outside Pennsylvania.
      (2)   Where the original situs of the property is outside Pennsylvania,
the receipts from tangible personal property leased to others are deemed to be:
         (a)   Allocable receipts, if the property is delivered to lessees
within the City of Reading.
         (b)   Nonallocable and nontaxable receipts, if the property is
delivered to lessees outside the City of Reading, whether within or without the
United States.
         (c)   The term "original situs," as used herein, means the place at
which the property is warehoused when not leased to others and to which place
the property is returned upon termination of the lease. Where there is no such
established place, the term "original situs" shall mean the principal office of
the taxpayer.
      (3)   This subsection does not apply to conditional sales of tangible
personal property.
   D.   Lessors of real property. Persons doing business within the City of
Reading who own and hold title to real property which is leased to others are
required to report the gross receipts from the rental of all such property
which is situated in the City of Reading. This subsection does not apply to
conditional sales of real property. Where a lessor has no more than two rental
units in his principal place of residence such rentals are excluded from
taxable receipts provided he has no other rental units of realty located within
the City of Reading.
   E.   Place of origin and delivery outside of the City of Reading. Where the
sale of origin of goods, wares and merchandise in a sales transaction is a
location owned or leased by the seller outside of the City of Reading and the
place of delivery is a location outside of the City of Reading regularly
maintained by the other party to the transaction, the receipts are nonallocable
and nontaxable.
   F.   Location of vendee. Receipts from the sale of goods, wares and
merchandise delivered to a vendee located outside of the City of Reading by an
employee of the taxpayer who works in or from, or is attached to the City of
Reading place of business of the taxpayer, is fully taxable if the vendee is
located within Pennsylvania and nontaxable if the vendee and place of delivery
is located outside of Pennsylvania.
   G.   There will be no allocation for receipts generated in intrastate
commerce unless the receipts sought to be excluded from business privilege tax
returns are clearly allocable to a bona fide branch office or other place of
business located outside of the City of Reading. The burden of proving that any
receipt is allocable to an office or other place of business located outside of
the City of Reading is on the taxpayer and he must be able to support any such
exclusion of receipts from the City of Reading on the basis of clear and
objective evidence shown on his books, records and accounts. If a taxpayer does
not keep his books, records and accounts in a manner which will clearly and
objectively show the allocation of receipts to his various branch offices or
places of business, the business privilege tax will be based on the entire
amount of gross receipts from all intrastate sources. The receipts will not be
allocated on the basis of subjective and unrecorded data. [Amended 1-22-2007 by
Ord. No. 9-2007]
   H.   The following is a list of factors which are relevant, but not
conclusive, for determining whether a person maintains a bona fide non-City
branch office within the meaning of this section: [Amended 1-22-2007 by Ord.
No. 9-2007]
      (1)   Name of taxpayer in telephone directory, or building directory (if
applicable), or on door leading to entrance of office or otherwise displayed on
the office exterior.
      (2)   Stationery and calling cards showing address.
      (3)   Storage of inventories or display samples at location in question.
      (4)   A written lease for the space involved and the payment of rent.
      (5)   A written agreement for the maintenance of an office by an agent or
agency on behalf of the taxpayer.
      (6)   Employees based in or operating out of a location outside of the
City of Reading.
      (7)   The expenses attributable to an office located outside of the City
of Reading are allowed as deductions on the taxpayer's federal income tax
return.
      (8)   The office serves as a base of operations from which the person
manages, directs and controls business activities.
      (9)   No single factor will raise a presumption that a bona fide office
located outside of the City of Reading exists. Use by the taxpayer or his
agents or employees of facilities provided by the taxpayer's client, employer,
customer, or any other person, even for a protracted period of time and even
where such use constitutes part of the contractual or business arrangement
entered into by the taxpayer with the said client, employer, customer, or any
other person does not establish a branch office located outside of the City of
Reading for purposes of allocation of gross receipts.
   I.   A field trailer used by contractors can be considered a bona fide
branch office located outside of the City of Reading office only if all the
following activities are conducted therein: [Amended 1-22-2007 by Ord. No. 9-
2007]
      (1)   It bears the name of the taxpayer.
      (2)   It is staffed by taxpayer's employees who report directly to the
field site, and who control the operation from that site.
      (3)   At least one telephone is present and listed in the taxpayer's
name.
      (4)   It is maintained at the same site for no less than 60 days.
      (5)   It is owned and maintained by the taxpayer or has all the indicia
of ownership by the taxpayer.
      (6)   Business is solicited.
      (7)   Meetings are held.
      (8)   Mail is received.
      (9)   Supplies are stored.
      (10)   Accounting and other administrative duties are performed.
   J.   An office maintained in the taxpayer's home which is located outside of
the City of Reading is a bona fide office or place of business only if it meets
the test set forth in Subsection H above and if it is exclusively used on a
regular basis as such for federal income tax purposes under the United States
Internal Revenue Code of 1976, as amended. [Amended 1-22-2007 by Ord. No. 9-
2007]
   K.   A motel or hotel residence, used on a long-term basis, is not a bona
fide branch located outside the City of Reading unless it fulfills the criteria
set forth above. [Amended 1-22-2007 by Ord. No. 9-2007]
§ 549-506. Interstate commerce.
   A.   General. Receipts from transactions involving more than one state are
not exempt from the business privilege tax, but are to be included in the tax
base either in their entirety, excluded in their entirety, or apportioned as
provided in these regulations. [Amended 1-22-2007 by Ord. No. 9-2007]
   B.   What constitutes "interstate commerce." Transactions will be deemed to
involve interstate commerce only when there are significant transactions or
activities conducted in states other than Pennsylvania that contribute to the
generation of gross receipts. The citizenship or residence of the parties to
any transaction has no relevance in determining the interstate character of a
business. Where a sales transaction is involved, it is of no importance in
which state title to the goods passes, or whether the goods are shipped FOB one
state to another. [Amended 1-22-2007 by Ord. No. 9-2007]
   C.   Sale and delivery in Pennsylvania. Interstate commerce is not deemed to
be involved in sales made by a City of Reading seller to customers located
outside of Pennsylvania where the property is delivered directly to the
purchaser or his agent within Pennsylvania, notwithstanding the fact that the
purchaser or his agent intends to, and later does, transport the property to a
point outside Pennsylvania.
   D.   Shipment from Reading by seller. Sales will be considered as having
been made in interstate commerce when the seller, as a necessary incident to
the contract of the sale, agrees to, and does, deliver the property to the
purchaser at a point outside of Pennsylvania, or delivers the property to a
common carrier consigned to the purchaser at a point outside Pennsylvania.
   E.   Delivery to packing company in the City of Reading. Whenever property
is sold by seller to a customer located outside Pennsylvania and, pursuant to
the terms of the contract of sale, delivery is made from the seller's place of
business in the City of Reading to a packing company located in the City of
Reading for delivery to the purchaser at a point outside of Pennsylvania, said
transaction constitutes "interstate commerce."
   F.   Delivery to buyer's Pennsylvania place of business. Where a purchaser
maintains an office, warehouse or receiving station in Pennsylvania for the
purpose of receiving, or inspecting or assembling, or routing, or combining
shipments destined for out-of-state places of business, interstate commerce is
not deemed to be involved with respect to deliveries made to such premises by a
City of Reading seller, notwithstanding the fact that the purchaser intends to,
and later does, transport the property received at such premises to a point
outside Pennsylvania.
   G.   Shipments into the City of Reading from seller's out-of-state place of
business. With respect to sales made by a City of Reading seller, the
transaction will be considered to be one in interstate commerce if, by the
express terms of the contract of sale, or the established practice of doing
business, the seller is required to deliver by transporting or shipping the
property from his place of business situated outside of Pennsylvania directly
to the purchaser at a point within the City of Reading.
   H.   Shipments into the City of Reading from a third party's out-of-state
place of business. Interstate commerce is not deemed to be involved if the City
of Reading seller causes direct delivery to be made to the purchaser at a point
in the City of Reading from an out-of-state source of supply owned or operated
by a third party (one from whom the seller buys).
   I.   Delivery from seller's out-of-state place of business via his office.
Interstate commerce is not deemed to be involved with respect to sales made to
a Pennsylvania purchaser if the property is shipped from the seller's place of
business located outside of Pennsylvania to the seller's place of business in
the City of Reading from which point the goods are delivered to the purchaser.
   J.   Apportionment of receipts from interstate commerce. Where receipts
cannot be allocated as set forth above in Subsections C through I, receipts
from interstate commerce may be apportioned in a manner similar to the sales
factor for purposes of the Pennsylvania Corporate Net Income Tax under Article
IV of the Tax Reform Act of 1971, as amended, 8  and the regulations
thereunder. [Amended 1-22-2007 by Ord. No. 9-2007]
   K.   Apportionment for professional services. [Amended 1-22-2007 by Ord. No.
9-2007]
      (1)   Professional fees derived from services billed on an hourly basis
shall be apportioned by excluding receipts attributable to charges to the
client for services performed out- of-state.
      (2)   Professional services rendered on a flat or fixed-fee basis or a
contingent-fee basis shall be apportioned according to a ratio whose numerator
consists of hours spent on the engagement while out-of-state and whose
denominator consists of total hours spent on the same engagement for the same
client.
      (3)   Professional services performed under a contract which sets forth
the percentage or amount of the total contract price attributable to a specific
activity to be performed out-of-state shall be apportioned according to the
contract terms, as long as such amount is a reasonable allocation.
   L.   The following is a list of factors which are relevant but not
conclusive, for determining whether a person's activities in another state
constitute interstate commerce: [Amended 1-22-2007 by Ord. No. 9-2007]
      (1)   A nexus in the foreign jurisdiction sufficient to support the
imposition of a similar tax by the state.
      (2)   A provision in the contract or agreement between the taxpayer and
his client or customer which specifically assigns a reasonable portion of the
overall fee to activities required to be performed in the foreign jurisdiction.
      (3)   The length of time spent by the taxpayer in the out-of-state
location.
      (4)   The necessity for the services that are performed out-of-state in
generating the overall gross receipts.
      (5)   The inability of the taxpayer to perform the service which
generates gross receipts in its entirety in Pennsylvania.
      (6)   The number of employees who are required to perform the activities
in the foreign jurisdiction. Utilizing an independent contractor located in the
foreign jurisdiction to carry out of the taxpayer's out-of-state activities
does not constitute the taxpayer's presence in a foreign jurisdiction for
purposes of excluding receipts from the City of Reading's business privilege
tax.
      (7)   The person manages, directs and controls business activities in the
foreign jurisdiction.
8.   Editor's Note: See 72 P.S. § 7401 et seq.
§ 549-507. Contractors performing building or construction work outside the
City of Reading.
   A.   Contractors with field offices. City of Reading contractors or
subcontractors engaged in the performance of building and construction
contracts at a point outside the territorial limits of the City of Reading may
exclude from the measure of the tax the receipts derived therefrom, provided
that a field office was maintained on the premises of the project during the
performance of the contract to such an extent as to constitute doing local
business at the situs of the job.
   B.   Alterations and repairs. The provisions of this section apply only to
contractors engaged either in the erection of new buildings or in the complete
alteration and remodeling of old buildings. They do not apply to contractors
who engage in alteration or repair jobs of a limited scope, such as a roofer
repairing a damaged roof of a building situated outside the City of Reading, or
a painter renovating apartments in an apartment house located outside the City
of Reading.
   C.   Engineers and technicians. The exemption provisions of this section do
not apply to engineers and other technicians rendering personal services
outside the City of Reading.
   D.   Qualifications for exemptions. To qualify hereunder, the contractor
must show that he established a place of business at the situs of the job by
setting up a field office thereat with machinery and equipment for the use in
fulfillment of the contract, and performed such other acts as to constitute
doing local business at the situs of the job.
§ 549-508. Brokers and agents with out-of-City offices.
Where a general agent or broker of an insurance, real estate or other firm
maintains a branch office outside of Reading, the commissions attributable to
such branch office may be excluded from gross receipts. Commissions will be
deemed attributable to the Reading office, and hence subject to inclusion in
the measure of tax, if they result from the efforts of brokers, subagents or
employees who work in, or from, or are attached to the Reading office.
§ 549-509. Tax rate.
(See appropriate section of ordinance.)9
   A.   Persons in business during the entire previous calendar year. (See
appropriate section of ordinance.)
   B.   Persons who have commenced business before the beginning of the tax
year but after the beginning of the previous full calendar year. (See
appropriate section of the ordinance.)
   C.   Persons who commence business after the beginning of a tax year. (See
appropriate section of the ordinance.)
   D.   Business temporary, seasonal or itinerant by nature. (See appropriate
section of the ordinance.)
9.   Editor's Note: See §
549-403.
§ 549-510. Persons, businesses and receipts exempted.
   A.   Nonprofit corporations or associations, religious, charitable and
educational institutions. Business income not included. The exclusion from
taxation of receipts from the business of nonprofit religious, charitable or
educational organizations is limited to those receipts derived from activities
which are connected with the noncommercial operation of the organization.
Commercial activities carried on by such an organization are taxable. All
business income of nonprofit religious and charitable and educational
organizations is taxable.
   B.   Receipts from sales to governmental agencies and nonprofit
organizations. Sales to institutions. Receipts from sales made or services
rendered to governmental bodies and to religious charitable and educational
corporations and associations shall not be excluded from the tax base. The
statute does not grant any exemption to taxpayers transacting business with
such agencies or institutions.
§ 549-511. State tax or license.
   A.   Nominal or registration fees. The fact that a taxpayer receives a
certificate or other document which is designated a "license" from the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania for which the taxpayer pays a sum of money does
not exempt the taxpayer from the business privilege tax. Flat annual fees, fees
which are not related to gross income or amount of production, or fees that are
nominal in nature are not considered true license fees and hence payment of
such fees will not exempt the taxpayer from the business privilege tax.
   B.   Payment to the City of Reading for housing permits, building and
plumbing permits, etc. will not exempt the taxpayer from business privilege
tax.
   C.   Nonlicensed functions taxable. The receipts of any person who falls
within the state tax or license fee exemption which are derived from any
activity which if conducted separate and apart from other business activities
would be subject to the state tax or license fee shall not be excluded from the
tax base.
   D.   Local tax under state authority. Local taxes by counties,
municipalities, or other public bodies though authorized by state legislation
are not considered state taxes or license fees.
   E.   Monies returned to municipalities by the state. Any tax which is
collected by the state but which, with the exception of administrative costs,
is returned to the municipalities, is not considered a state tax or a license
fee. Such taxes include, but are not limited to:
      (1)   Gross receipts taxes of non-Pennsylvania fire and casualty
insurance companies.
      (2)   License fees for hotels, restaurant and club liquor licenses.
   F.   State license fees which exempt receipts earned thereunder include but
are not limited to those fees levied under the following acts:
      (1)   Consumer discount companies, Act of April 8, 1937, P.L. 262, as
amended, 7 P.S. § 6201 et seq.10
10.   Editor's Note: Original Subsection 6.A and B, regarding the Pennsylvania
Securities Act and Small loan companies, respectively, were repealed during
codification (see
Ch. 1, General Provisions, Part 2).
§ 549-512. Utilities.
Nonutility functions taxable. The receipts of any public utility, operating
under the rules and regulations of the Pennsylvania Public Utility Commission,
derived from supplying services at the rates specified in its tariffs shall be
excluded from the tax base. Public utilities shall not exclude from their tax
base receipts derived from sales of appliances, equipment, advertising, etc. A
contract carrier is not a public utility.
§ 549-513. Properties subject to state tax.
(See appropriate section of the ordinance.) 11
11.   Editor's Note: See §
549-403.
§ 549-514. Products manufactured or grown in the City.
[Amended 8-11-2008 by Ord. No. 50-2008]
If claiming a manufacturing exemption, a written request detailing the nature
of the operation must be made within 30 days of commencement of business to the
Finance Director. An inspection of the operation is required prior to a
decision being rendered. Acceptance or rejection of the request will be issued
by the Finance Director in writing. All gross receipts will be considered
taxable until said decision regarding an exemption is issued. Under no
circumstances will manufacturing exemptions be granted retroactively, nor will
any refunds be granted for any business privilege tax paid prior to a
manufacturing exemption being approved in writing.
§ 549-515. Determination of gross or whole volume of business.
(See appropriate section of the ordinance.)12
   A.   Generally.
      (1)   "Gross consideration" means gross receipts received in, or by
reason of, any sale made, or services rendered or commercial or business
transaction occurring in or attributable to the City of Reading including cash,
credits, and property of any kind or nature, without deduction on account of
the cost of materials, labor, services or other costs, interest or discount
paid, or any other expenses whatsoever.
      (2)   In general, the word "sale" as used in the definition of the term
"gross receipts" includes but is not limited to any transfer of title for a
consideration. It includes exchange, barter, and bailments.
   B.   Real estate brokers.
      (1)   Generally, real estate brokers and agents are required to report as
taxable receipts, the commissions and fees received for services rendered as
agent in promoting the purchase and sale of real property for others. Brokers
and agents not having an office in the City shall report as taxable receipts
commissions received on the sale of properties within the City. Such amount
does not include the gross selling price of the property, except as set forth
in Subsection B(3).
      (2)   Deduction of shared fee. A real estate broker or agent may exclude
from his tax base, any commissions paid by him to another broker, or agent, on
account of a contract of purchase or sale initiated, executed, or cleared in
conjunction with the broker, salesman or agent to whom the commission or part
of the commission is paid.
      (3)   Commissions paid to a salesman by a broker or agent when the
salesman is affiliated with the broker or agent are not excludable from the
broker's or agent's tax base.
Broker's sale of owned property. If a person is in the business of taking title
to real property and selling the property, he is required to include the gross
selling price of the property taxable receipts. The same person may be taxed
both as broker and as seller, depending on the nature of the transactions. If
he acts as broker, salesman or agent, his tax is based on commissions. If he
buys or sells real estate either in his own name or in the name of a straw
party, he is taxed on the gross selling price of the real estate.
   C.   Traveling expenses. Reimbursement of traveling expenses excluded from
gross receipts only if the taxpayer incurred such expenses as agent for another
from whom the taxpayer receives reimbursement for such expenses.
   D.   Trade discounts.
      (1)   Deductions allowed. Trade discounts allowed to customers may be
deducted from the gross amount charged in ascertaining the amount to be
reported as receipts from sales. Trade discounts include:
         (a)   Discounts deducted from the face amount of the bill as a method
of adjusting the list price.
         (b)   Discounts unconditionally deducted by customers at settlement of
their bills and allowed as a matter of established custom of the trade without
regard to the due date of such bills or the form or terms in which such
discounts are described or stated on bills.
   E.   Other discounts.
      (1)   Deductions allowed. Discounts allowed to customers as cash
discounts for prompt payment of their bills may be deducted from gross
receipts.
   F.   Freight delivery, or other transportation charges.
      (1)   If seller contracts to deliver. If the seller contracts to deliver
the property sold to some designated place, or is obligated under the terms of
the contract to pay transportation charges to some designated place, the
transportation services are rendered to the seller and the freight, delivery or
other transportation charges so incurred by the seller may not be deducted from
the receipts.
      (2)   If buyer deducts cost of delivery from payment. If property is sold
on terms requiring the seller to deliver such property to a designated place
but the purchaser pays the amount of freight, delivery or other transportation
charges in the first instance, and deducts such charges from the invoice price
in making remittance to the seller, no deduction from gross receipts may be
taken by the seller.
      (3)   If seller advances charges. Where the seller advances the freight,
delivery or other transportation charges for the account of the purchaser in
accordance with the terms of the contract of sale, such charges may be excluded
from gross receipts of the seller, provided:
         (a)   That such charges are the actual charges incurred and are billed
as such to the purchaser; and
         (b)   That the books and records of the taxpayer clearly indicate such
facts.
   G.   Principal and agent.
      (1)   General. Receipts from sales made, or services rendered, by an
agent for the account of his principal are to be reported by the principal. It
is immaterial in such cases whether the customer or the client remits directly
to the principal, or to the agent for transmittal to the principal. The agent
is required to report as gross receipts only the commission withheld by him as
compensations for his services before remitting to his principal and any
commissions paid to him after remitting to his principal. No deduction from
gross receipts may be taken by the principal for commission paid to or withheld
by the agent. A manufacturer's representative is taxable on his gross
commissions unless his relationship to the principal is that of employer and
employee. This relationship of employer and employee exists if the principal
pays social security and unemployment compensation taxes on behalf of the
person claiming exemption and if, in the event of an accident in the course of
employment, the manufacturer's representative might become entitled to
workmen's compensation.
      (2)   Undisclosed principal. A person selling property, including real
property, or rendering services for an unknown or undisclosed principal, is
subject to tax as a principal unless there is disclosed in the agent's return
the identity of the principal and the amount of the sale made on his behalf.
      (3)   Condition as to recognition of agency. A person will be regarded as
acting as agent or broker in promoting or soliciting sales or rendering
services for the account of a principal when it appears:
         (a)   That the contract or agreement between such persons clearly
establishes the relationship of principal and agent.
         (b)   That the books and records of the agent or broker show the name
of the actual owner of the property on whose behalf the sale is made.
         (c)   That the books and records of the agent or broker show the
amount of gross sales and the amounts of commission due thereon.
      (4)   Collection by agent. Money or property received by a taxpayer, as
agent, for transmittal to a third party is not to be reported by such taxpayer
as gross receipts, but any commission received by him for his services as agent
must be included in gross receipts.
   H.   Conditional and installment sales.
      (1)   Reported as cash sales. A person making conditional sales or other
installment sales of property is required to report the total selling price of
such sales as gross receipts for the tax year in which the contracts of sale
are entered into, without regard to the fact that the seller may arrange to
receive payment from the purchaser on an installment basis or that such
contracts may be discounted or pledged with, or sold to, a finance company.
      (2)   Property repossessed. Where tangible personal property, sold under
a conditional or other installment sales contract, is repossessed by the
seller, and the repossessed property is subsequently sold, the receipts from
such sales are to be included in the measure of the tax only to the extent that
the amount of the sale exceeds the balance due on the original sale at the time
of repossession. No deduction shall be allowed upon resale, if the resale price
is less than the unpaid balance.
Example: "A" sells personal property to "B" for $10,000 under a conditional
agreement of sale. "B" makes several installment payments to "A" totaling
$6,000. "B" subsequently defaults and the property is repossessed by "A." "A"
is required to report $10,000. He may not deduct from gross receipts the unpaid
balance of $4,000 due from "B" at the time of repossession. If the property
repossessed by "A" is subsequently sold, the receipts from the sale thereof are
to be reported only to the extent which the amount of the sale exceeds the
unpaid balance of $4,000. Thus, if the repossessed property sold for $5,000,
"A" is required to report only $1,000 as additional receipts; if the property
is sold for $3,000, "A" is not required to report any portion of such receipts
and is entitled to $1,000 deduction from his current year's gross receipts.
   I.   Exchanges between dealers in similar lines. Where dealers engaged in
similar lines of business exchange articles of tangible personal property and
one of them makes payment to the other in addition to the property exchanged by
him, the transactions constitute sales to each other. The receipt of each
dealer is measured by the gross value of the consideration received by him.
Where a dealer transfers property, such as an automobile, to another dealer
with the understanding that property of identical description will be returned
at a subsequent date, such transaction does not constitute a sale and the value
of the property exchanged need not be included in the gross receipts of either
dealer. Receipts by dealers from sales to other dealers in the same line where
the dealer transfers title or possession at the same price for which he
acquired the merchandise may be excluded from gross receipts.
   J.   Consignment transactions. The status of a person accounting for
receipts from consignment transactions will depend on the terms and conditions
expressly set forth in the contract between the consignor and the consignee. In
all cases, the substance rather than the form of the relationship between the
parties shall be the determining factor. Where the contract does not clearly
set forth the status of the parties thereto, the following principles shall
apply:
      (1)   City of Reading consignor. If the person located in the City of
Reading ships goods on consignment to a person located outside the City of
Reading for subsequent sale by such consignee, the consignor is not deemed to
be doing business at the location of the consignee, nor will such location be
recognized as a branch of the consignor. When the consignee makes a sale of the
consignor's goods, the consignee will be deemed to have purchase of the goods
from the consignor at such time for resale to his (the consignee's) customer.
Such transactions are deemed to result in either wholly taxable or wholly
exempt receipts to the consignor at the time the consignee consummates the sale
with his (the consignee's) customer. If the consignee is located within
Pennsylvania, the receipts will be considered wholly taxable receipts. If the
consignee is located outside of Pennsylvania the receipts will be considered
either wholly taxable or exempt according to §
549-506 as if the consignee is considered the buyer.
      (2)   Out-of-City of Reading consignor. If a person located outside City
of Reading ships goods on consignment to a person located in City of Reading
for subsequent sale by such consignee, the consignor will be deemed to have
sold the goods to the consignee at the time the consignee sells the goods to
his (the consignee's) customer. Such transactions are deemed to result in
either wholly taxable or exempt receipts to the consignor, depending upon the
location of such consignor. If the consignor is located within Pennsylvania,
the receipts will be considered wholly taxable receipts; if the consignor is
located outside Pennsylvania, the receipts will be considered exempt receipts.
   K.   Leased departments.
      (1)   Return by lessor. Where a person leases a department of his
business to another, such person may include in his return the gross receipts
from business done and sales made by lessee. When the business of such leased
department is included in the return made by the lessor, a schedule must be
attached to the return containing the name of the lessee, a description of the
department operated, and a statement to the effect that the lessor assumes
liability for reporting the gross receipts and paying the tax accruing against
the lessee of such department. The lessee, however, is not relieved from his
liability for business privilege taxes if the lessor fails to make a proper
return or fails to pay the tax due. Should a change occur in the ownership or
status of any leased department, the lessor shall notify the Business
Administrator promptly.
      (2)   Return by lessee. If the lessee wishes to file returns
independently, such lessee is required to include in his return the entire
gross receipts of said lessee whether collected by the lessor, or the lessee
without deducting any expenses or commissions charged to him by the lessor. To
expedite the examination and audit of returns filed by such lessee, the
Business Manager may require the lessor to furnish a statement of the entire
gross receipts collected on behalf of the lessee.
   L.   Persons erecting buildings or otherwise altering, repairing, or
improving real property.
      (1)   General. A contractor or subcontractor, resident or nonresident,
engaged in City of Reading in the business of erecting buildings or otherwise
altering, repairing or improving real property, is required to report as gross
receipts all receipts derived from the performance of such contract. The amount
of receipts to be included in the tax base shall be the full contract price,
that is, the total amount received or receivable by way of a fixed or
determinable amount under the terms of the contract. The contract price will be
considered to include all charges made by a contractor, or subcontractor for
materials, labor, or other obligations for which the contractor becomes liable
in the performance of the contract. In the case of a contractor, no deduction
may be made with respect to amounts paid to subcontractors and materialmen.
      (2)   Cost-plus contracts. A general contractor performing contracts on
the basis of "cost- plus-a-fixed-fee" or "cost-plus-a-percentage" is required
to report as gross receipts the full contract price as explained above; unless
he has no connection whatsoever with the purchase of materials and/or the
hiring of labor. In cases where the owner of the property buys the materials
and hires all labor in his own name and pays the general contractor a fixed
fee, or a percentage of the total cost to supervise and direct the construction
project, the general contractor will be required to report only the gross
amount of the fee or percentage received. Where the owner authorizes the
general contractor to make for him such purchases of tangible personal
property, or hire such labor or engage such subcontractors as are necessary for
the performance of the contract and: pledges his credit and is liable in the
first instance to the materialmen, suppliers, laborers or subcontractors, as
distinguished from merely guaranteeing payment to them or undertaking to
reimburse the general contractor for the cost of such materials, services or
subcontractors; and agrees to make payment directly to the materialmen,
suppliers, laborers or subcontractors, such sales or services will be regarded
as made directly to the owner, and the general contractor will not be required
to include such items in his gross receipts.
      (3)   Government contracts. Receipts from the performance of contracts
entered into with the City of Reading or the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, or
the United States of America or any subdivision of such governments are to be
included in the measure of the tax.
   M.   Contractors who repair, alter, and improve tangible personal property.
Persons engaged in business in the City of Reading as contractors who repair,
alter and improve tangible personal property for the account of others are
subject to tax under the provisions of the Business Privilege Tax Ordinance
[Part 4]. When contractors perform labor or services on articles of tangible
personal property furnished by the other party to the contract, such
contractors are required to report only the amount due them for labor or
services rendered.
   N.   Buildings, hotels, motels, apartment houses, boarding houses, nursing
homes, etc.
      (1)   Generally, persons operating hotels, motels, apartment houses,
boarding houses, nursing homes, rooming houses and all other such
establishments are taxable on receipts from renting of rooms, furnishing of
meals and any other service rendered.
      (2)   Depreciation, maintenance, etc. Any person carrying on the business
of renting buildings, offices, space, stores, dwelling houses, etc. shall
include gross rentals received in the tax base. No deductions may be made for
depreciation, cost of maintenance, repairs, etc.
      (3)   Nonprofit corporations and associations. Persons operating private
hospitals, nursing homes, and sanitariums are subject to the tax. The law
exempts such institutions only when they are operated by a nonprofit
corporation or association organized for religious, charitable or educational
purposes as set forth in §
549-510.
      (4)   Pennsylvania room occupancy tax (see §
549-515E).
   O.   Insurance companies.
      (1)   Tax base. Insurance companies, whether mutual or stock companies,
domestic or foreign, are subject to the tax for the privilege of carrying on
business in the City of Reading. The tax for the privilege of writing insurance
is based on premiums received from risks in the City of Reading without any
deductions therefrom for any costs or expenses whatsoever.
      (2)   Reinsurance. Reinsurance assumed shall not be included in the tax
base; reinsurance is not deductible from gross receipts.
      (3)   Return premiums and dividends. Receipts from premiums include gross
direct premiums, less return premiums thereon. Dividends credited to
policyholders may be deducted if such dividends are in the nature of an
adjustment of the premium charged.
      (4)   Other receipts. Receipts from servicing mortgages, operating
hotels, etc., are to be included in the tax base.
      (5)   Exemptions. (See §
549-511)
   P.   Insurance agents, brokers, and underwriters.
      (1)   General agents. General agents for insurance companies are required
to report as gross receipts the entire commissions received as compensation for
their own efforts on policies sold by them directly and the overriding
commissions received by them upon business produced by brokers or subagents.
      (2)   Brokers or subagents. Brokers or subagents are required to report
as gross receipts the commissions received as compensation for their service.
      (3)   Employee of single company. A person who represents a single
insurance company is subject to tax hereunto unless he:
         (a)   Devotes his entire time to the company;
         (b)   Is considered by the company to be its employee, and the company
pays Social Security and unemployment compensation taxes on behalf of the
person claiming the exemption and in the event of an accident in the course of
employment, said person is entitled to workmen's compensation; and
         (c)   Does not employ solicitors, subagents, or other persons to whom
he pays salaries, commissions or other compensation in connection with
insurance business solicited.
   Q.   Undertakers, morticians and funeral directors. Persons engaged in
business as undertakers, morticians or funeral directors are required to report
as gross receipts the total charges made to clients without deducting therefrom
any costs or expenses whatsoever. Both the sale of tangible personal property
and a charge for rendering service must be included in the tax base.
   R.   Sale of capital assets.
      (1)   Generally. The profits (not gross proceeds) resulting from the sale
of capital assets, such as plant machinery and equipment, furniture, fixtures,
delivery equipment, etc. are to be included in the tax base. If a loss is
sustained on such sales, it may not be offset against gross receipts from other
sources. In computing the profits to be included in the tax base, the costs of
the asset, less allowable depreciation, is to be deducted from the gross
proceeds of the sale.
      (2)   Asset located outside City of Reading. Where the capital asset sold
was located at an established place of business of the taxpayer outside City of
Reading, the profit realized on the sale thereof may be excluded from the tax
base.
      (3)   Bulk sale or exchange, merger. Where a corporation realizes a gain
as the result of a sale or exchange of substantially all of its assets, or as
the result of a merger or consolidation with another corporation, the amount of
such a gain must be included in the tax base.
   S.   Deposit on container. A person making a sale of products in a container
on which there is a deposit to insure the return of the container is require to
report only the gross selling price of the product in the container.
   T.   Vending machines. The entire gross receipts of vending machines and
other mechanical devices which dispense goods, wares, and merchandise are to be
included in the gross volume of business of the owner or lessor thereof. No
deductions may be made therefrom for splits, rentals, commissions or other
remuneration to persons in charge of the machines and/or to the lessees of the
premises upon which the machines are located.
   U.   Intercompany transactions. Receipts from transactions between
affiliated companies other than those of a purely accommodation nature, are
subject to inclusion in "gross volume of business."
   V.   Property traded in. In the case of trade-in transactions in which
goods, wares and merchandise are sold and allowances made for other property
which is traded in and is accepted by the vendor or dealer in part payment of
the property sold, the allowance made for the property traded in shall not be
deducted from the selling price of the property sold in computing the gross
receipts upon which the tax is based. The vendor or dealer must include in his
gross volume of business the full selling price of the property sold without
any deduction therefrom for any allowance made or property traded in. Where the
property traded is subsequently sold by the vendor or dealer, the latter must
include in his gross receipts only the amount by which the sale of the article
exceeds the trade-in allowance.
   W.   Refunds, credits or allowances. Refunds, credits or allowances given by
the seller to a purchaser on account of defects in goods sold or merchandise
returned may be deducted from gross receipts in ascertaining the amount to be
reported as taxable.
   X.   Commissions paid by brokers. Any broker, agent or salesman who splits
or otherwise divides a commission with another broker, agent or salesman in the
same type of business by reason of the fact that the second broker initiated,
executed, cleared or completed a portion of the transaction for which the fee
is paid shall be permitted to exclude from his gross receipts that portion of
the fee paid to the other broker, agent or salesman. This section does not
exempt so-called finders' fees, kickbacks, commissions or other remuneration
paid by a broker, agent or salesman to another individual not in the same type
of business as the broker, agent or salesman. Nor does this section exempt from
the gross receipts of a broker or agent a commission paid by said broker or
agent to a salesman affiliated with him.
   Y.   Bad debts. (See appropriate section of the ordinance. 13 )
   Z.   Taxes collected as agent for the United States of America, Commonwealth
of Pennsylvania, or the City of Reading. Taxes collected as agent for the
United States of America, Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, or the City of Reading
are excludable from taxable receipts.
12.   Editor's Note: See §
549-403.
13.   Editor's Note: See §
549-403.
§ 549-516. Partial exemptions.
(See appropriate section of the ordinance.)14
14.   Editor's Note: See §
549-403E.
§ 549-517. When same tax is imposed by two taxing bodies.
(See appropriate section of the ordinance.) 15
15.   Editor's Note: See §
549-403F.
§ 549-518. Records.
(See appropriate section of the ordinance.) 16
16.   Editor's Note: See §
549-403G.
§ 549-519. Returns. [Amended 8-11-2008 by Ord. No. 50-2008]
   A.   Filing returns. Forms may be obtained from the Business Privilege Tax
Office in Reading City Hall or by writing to the Business Privilege Tax Office
of the City of Reading, Reading, PA 19601. Failure to receive the forms will
not excuse the taxpayer for failure to file a return.
   B.   Who must file a return. Every individual, partnership, limited
partnership, association and corporation, and every receiver, trustee,
assignee, or other person acting in a fiduciary or representative capacity,
whether appointed by a court or otherwise, and any combination of persons
carrying on or exercising for gain or profit any trade, business, profession,
vocation or commercial activity in the City of Reading must file business
privilege tax returns.
   C.   Partnerships. A partnership is considered to be a taxable unit. The
respective partners are not required to file separate returns as individuals,
but they are jointly and severally liable for payment of the tax.
   D.   Signature. If the taxpayer is an individual, he shall sign the return.
If the taxpayer is a partnership, the return should be signed by at least one
of the general partners. If the taxpayer is a corporation, the return should be
signed by an officer of the corporation.
   E.   Multiple places of business. If a taxpayer maintains more than one
place of business in the City of Reading, he is required to file only one
return and may include therein the receipts from transactions occurring in all
his places of business in the City of Reading.
   F.   Lessors and lessees of departments within other business. (See §
549-515K.) G.   Time and place of filing. (See appropriate section of the
ordinance.) 17
   H.   Payment of tax and penalties for late payment. (See appropriate section
of the ordinance.) 18
   I.   Refund.
      (1)   Any tax payment made under protest which the City of Reading
thereafter determines to have been improperly paid shall be refunded to the
taxpayer together with interest thereon computed at 6% per annum from the date
of payment to the date of refund.
      (2)   In accordance with the Local Taxpayers' Bill of Rights (Act 50 of
1998) 53 Pa.C.S.A. § 8421 et seq., all refund requests must be made within
three years of the due date for filing the report or tax return (with allowable
extensions) or one year after actual payment of the tax, whichever is later. If
no report or tax return is required for the tax, a taxpayer must make a refund
claim within three years after the due date for payment of the eligible tax or
within one year after actual payment of the tax, whichever is later. For
amounts paid after receipt of an Assessment Notice, the taxpayer must make a
request for a refund to the City of Reading within one year of the date of the
payment. A tax return filed by the taxpayer showing an overpayment will also be
deemed to be a request for a cash refund unless otherwise indicated.
17.   Editor's Note: See §
549-404.
18.   Editor's Note: See §
549-404.
§ 549-520. License. 19
(See appropriate section of the ordinance. 20  See also
Chapter 339, Licenses and Permits, Part 2, Business Privilege License.)
   A.   To whom ordinance applies. (See appropriate section of the ordinance.)
21
   B.   Posting license.
      (1)   Generally. The license must be posted conspicuously at each place
of business of licensee at all times.
      (2)   Vending machine owners. A person who sells goods, wares or
merchandise by means of vending machines and who has not otherwise procured a
license under this Part shall procure one license covering all his vending
machines and shall post it at his principal place of business.
      (3)   Persons with no place of business in the City of Reading. Persons
conducting business within the City of Reading but having no "place of
business" there shall not be required to post their license. But, if such time
as such licensee establishes a place of business in the City of Reading, he
shall notify the Finance Director of the location of such place of business and
shall thereafter post his license at such place of business.
      (4)   Contractors. Contractors, regardless of the number of field offices
maintained within the City of Reading, shall be considered to have one place of
business for the purpose of licensing.
19. Editor's Note: Amended during codification (see
Ch. 1, General Provisions, Part 2).
20. Editor's Note: See §
549-405.
21. Editor's Note: See §
549-403.
§ 549-521. Violations and penalties.
(See appropriate section of the ordinance.) 22
22. Editor's Note: See §
549-406.
§ 549-522. Continuing offense.
(See appropriate section of the ordinance.)23
23. Editor's Note: See §
549-406.
§ 549-523. Powers and duties of business administrator.
(See appropriate section of the ordinance.) 24
24.   Editor's Note: See §
549-407.
§ 549-524. Confidential nature of returns, etc.
(See appropriate section of the ordinance.) 25
25.   Editor's Note: See §
549-408.
§ 549-525. Suit on collection and penalty.
(See appropriate section of the ordinance.)26
26.   Editor's Note: See §
549-409.
Part 6
Per Capita Tax
[Adopted 12-1-1976 by Ord. No. 44-1976 (Ch. 24, Part 1, of the 2011 Code of
Ordinances)]
§ 549-601. Definitions.
[Amended 12-28-1977 by Ord. No. 57-1977; 5-29-2001 by Ord. No. 14-2001]
The following words and phrases, when used in this Part, shall have the meaning
ascribed to them in this section unless the context clearly indicates a
different meaning:
   CITY — The City of Reading.
   DUE DATE — July 1 of each tax year for residents as of the date and for
those acquiring residency within the tax year after that date the date of
acquiring residency within the City.
   FINANCE DIRECTOR - The person designated by Council to administer and
enforce the tax.
   RESIDENT — A person who is a resident of the City of Reading on or after
July 1 of each tax year.
   TAX — A tax of $10 per year levied on each resident of the City of Reading
who has attained his or her 18th year as of July 1 of the tax year.
   TAXPAYER — Any person who has attained his or her 18th year as of July 1 of
the tax year and is a resident of the City on or after July 1 of each tax year.
   TREASURER — The Finance Director of the City of Reading.
§ 549-602. Levy and collection. 27
The City hereby imposes on each resident taxpayer an annual per capita tax of
$15. Said tax is authorized by the Local Tax Enabling Act (53 P.S. § 6924.101
et seq.).
27.   Editor's Note: Amended during codification (see
Ch. 1, General Provisions, Part 2).
§ 549-603. Amount.
[Amended 5-29-2001 by Ord. No. 14-2001 28 ]
Said per capita tax shall be the amount of $15 to be paid to the Finance
Director of the City of Reading.
28.   Editor's Note: Amended during codification (see
Ch. 1, General Provisions, Part 2).
§ 549-604. Notice.
[Amended 5-29-2001 by Ord. No. 14-2001]
The Finance Director shall cause tax notices to be mailed to all taxpayers
within the City prior to July 1 of each tax year; however, failure to mail such
notice or failure of the taxpayer to receive such notice shall not excuse
payment thereof.
§ 549-605. Discount, penalty and interest.
[Amended 12-28-1977 by Ord. No. 57-1977]
If said tax is paid by the taxpayer during the first two months of the due date
for said taxpayer, the taxpayer shall be allowed a discount of 2%. During the
subsequent two months, the flat rate shall apply. If payment is made after the
fourth month of the due date, the taxpayer shall be charged a penalty of 10%,
plus interest at the rate of 1% per month computed from the beginning of the
fifth month following the due date.
§ 549-606. Enforcement by Finance Director.
[Amended 5-29-2001 by Ord. No. 14-2001]
The Finance Director is hereby charged with the administration and the
enforcement of the tax and he shall have all the powers delegated to the Tax
Collector under §§ 19, 20 and 21 of the Local Tax Enabling Act 29 for the
collection of delinquent taxes and any other powers which are inferred by the
legislature for the collection of delinquent taxes. The per capita tax imposed
for each calendar year shall be termed delinquent if not paid as of November 1
of the tax year.
29.   Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. §§ 6924.702, 6924.703 and 6924.705,
respectively.
§ 549-607. Not a substitute tax.
This tax is imposed in addition and not in substitution of any existing taxes
of the City of Reading.
§ 549-608. (Reserved) 30
30.   Editor's Note: Former §
549-608, Exemption, added 8-26-2013 by Ord. No. 35-2013, was repealed 1-27-2014
by Ord. No. 4-2014.
§ 549-609. Violations and penalties.
[Added 8-26-2013 by Ord. No. 35-2013]
Upon conviction of a violation, any person, firm or corporation shall be
sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $1,000 plus costs and, in default of
payment of said fine and costs, to a term of imprisonment not to exceed 30
days. Each day that a violation continues shall constitute a separate offense.
Part 7
Amusement Tax
[Adopted 11-30-1998 by Ord. No. 37-1998 (Ch. 24, Part 6, of the 2011 Code of
Ordinances)]
§ 549-701. Establishment of an admission tax.
This Part shall be known and may be cited as the "City of Reading Admission Tax
Ordinance."
§ 549-702. Definitions.
The following words and phrases, when used in this Part, shall have the meaning
ascribed to them in this section except where the context clearly indicates a
different meaning:
   AMUSEMENT — All manner and forms of entertainment, including, among others,
theatrical, operatic or dramatic performances, concerts, circuses, carnivals,
side shows, air shows, fairs, farm or agricultural competitions, equestrian
competitions, exhibitions, dances, dog shows, bathing pools, amusement parks,
contests and other events involving games of chance, competitions and athletic
events, including but not limited to, archery, baseball, basketball, bowling,
boxing, football, golf, hockey, handball, squash, shooting, soccer, swimming,
tennis, wrestling, and all other forms of diversion, sport, recreation,
entertainment or pastime for which admission is charged or paid, by tickets,
cover charges, or any other method of obtaining monetary contributions,
donations, or deposits from the general public or a limited or selected portion
thereof.
   CHARITABLE OR NOT-FOR-PROFIT ORGANIZATION — Any organization or entity
qualified as a charitable organization by the United States Internal Revenue
Service or a not-for- profit organization registered with the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania Department of Revenue under applicable laws and regulations
governing the same.
   CHARITABLE PURPOSE — Any advertised purpose, the proposed amusement or
entertainment activity for which is expressly designed and intended to raise
funds for a charitable or not-for-profit organization as defined herein. A
written statement of assurance by the producer, as defined herein, and actual
proof of deposit of at least 75% of total revenues from the advertised activity
with the charitable or not-for-profit organization shall be required as a
condition of qualification of a charitable event.
   ESTABLISHED PRICE — A regular monetary charge of any character whatever,
including donations, contributions, fixed and exacted, or in any manner fixed
and received by producers, as herein defined, from the general public, or
limited or selected number thereof, directly or indirectly, for the privilege
to attend or engage in any entertainment or amusement (provided that when such
entertainment or amusement is conducted at any roof garden, nightclub, cabaret
or other place where charge for admission is wholly, or in part, included in
the price paid for refreshment, service, or merchandise, the amount paid for
admission to such amusement shall be deemed to be the amount of the cover or
minimum charge, if any, less the reasonable value of food, drink or other
tangible item provided).
   PERSON — Every individual person, copartnership, association, unincorporated
enterprise owned by two or more persons, corporations, limited-liability
companies, trusts or other legal entities, domestic or foreign. Whenever used
in any section prescribing and imposing a penalty, or both, the term "person"
as applied to copartnerships or associations, shall mean the partners, or
members thereof, and as applied to corporations, the officers thereof.
   PLACE OF AMUSEMENT — Any place, indoors or outdoors, within the City of
Reading, where the general public or a limited or selected number thereof may,
upon payment of an established price, attend or engage in any amusement as
herein defined, including, among others, theaters, opera houses, exhibition
halls, exposition centers, amusement parks, airports, stadiums, arenas,
gymnasiums, baseball fields, recreation areas, skating rinks, circus or
carnival tents or grounds, fairgrounds, halls, lodge rooms, riding academies,
golf courses, bathing and swimming places, bowling alleys, dance halls, tennis
courts, archery, rifle or shotgun ranges, parimutuel betting establishments,
roof gardens, bars and taverns, cabarets, night clubs, dinner theaters and
other like places.
   PRODUCER — Any person, as herein defined, conducting any amusement or place
of amusement, as herein defined, where the general public or a limited or
selected number thereof, may, upon payment of an established price or donation,
attend or engage in any amusement.
   TEMPORARY AMUSEMENT — An amusement to be conducted at one location for a
period of less than one month.
§ 549-703. Permits.
   A.   On or after the effective date of this Part, it shall be unlawful for
any producer to continue to conduct, or thereafter to begin to conduct any form
or amusement at any permanent or temporary or itinerant form of amusement
within the City of Reading, unless an amusement permit or permits shall have
been issued to said person as hereinafter prescribed and the tax herein imposed
paid in accordance with the provisions herein made.
   B.   Application.
      (1)   Every producer desiring to continue to conduct or hereafter to
begin to conduct any amusement within the City of Reading shall file an
application for a permanent, temporary or itinerant amusement permit or
permits, as the case may be, with the Tax Administration Office. Every
application for such permit or permits shall be made upon a form prescribed,
prepared and furnished by the Tax Administration Office, and shall set forth
the following:
         (a)   The name under which the applicant conducts or intends to
conduct an amusement.
         (b)   Whether the applicant conducts or intends to conduct a permanent
or temporary or itinerant form of amusement.
         (c)   The location of amusement.
         (d)   In the case of temporary or itinerant amusement, a statement of
consent of the lessee or owner of the location of said amusement.
         (e)   Such other information, including written evidence of consent by
the owner or lessee, as the Tax Administration Office may require.
      (2)   If the applicant has or intends to have more than one place of
amusement within the City of Reading, the application shall state the location
of each place of amusement, and in the case of itinerant forms of amusement,
the date and expected length of time such amusement is to be conducted at each
place. In the case of temporary forms of amusement, the application shall state
the name and address of the owner, lessee, custodian or other controller of the
premises upon which such amusement is to be conducted. If the applicant is an
association or corporation, the names and residential addresses of the
principal officers thereof; together with any other information prescribed or
required by the Tax Administration Office for purposes of identification and
service of process, if necessary. The application shall be signed by the
producer, if a natural person; in the case of any other type of entity, by an
authorized member or officer thereof; and, in the case of a corporation, by an
authorized officer thereof.
   C.   Every applicant, at the time of making such application, shall pay to
the Tax Administration Office a permit fee for each temporary or annual permit,
as provided in
Chapter 212, Fees. 31
   D.   Upon approval of the application and the payment of any permit fee or
fees herein required, the Tax Administration Office shall grant and issue to
each applicant an annual or temporary amusement permit for each place of
amusement within the City of Reading as set forth in the application. Amusement
permits shall not be assignable, shall be valid only for the persons, entities
or organization in whose names the permits are issued and shall apply only to
the conduct of amusements so specified in the application at the place or
places so designated. An amusement permit shall be issued for each place of
amusement activity and the same shall be prominently displayed at the place for
which each is issued.
   E.   All permits for permanent places of amusement shall expire on the first
day of January in the year next succeeding the date of issue, unless sooner
suspended, surrendered or revoked for cause by action of City Council. Permits
for temporary or itinerant places or forms of amusement shall expire at the
time specified therein. The producer of any itinerant form of amusement shall
notify the Tax Administration Office promptly of any change in the original
itinerary relating to date, time, place or method of conduct of the itinerant
form of amusement specified in the permit.
   F.   Permits issued for the permanent places of amusement, under the
provisions of this Part, may be renewed annually before the January 1, upon
application made to the Tax Administration Office, and the payment of a renewal
fee as provided in
Chapter 212, Fees. In the case of nonprofit or not-for-profit corporation
organizations, the permit may be renewed annually before the January 1, upon
application made to the Tax Administration Office, and the payment of renewal
fee as provided in
Chapter 212, Fees. Whenever any permit, issued under the provisions of this
Part, is defaced, destroyed or lost, the Tax Administration Office may issue a
duplicate permit to the holder of the defaced, destroyed or lost permit upon
the payment of fee as provided in
Chapter 212, Fees. 32
   G.   The Tax Administration Office may suspend, or, after written notice to
the permittee revoke an amusement permit if, in the judgment of the Tax
Administration Office, the permit holder has failed to comply with the
provisions of this Part. Upon suspending or revoking any amusement permit, the
Tax Administration Office shall request the permittee to surrender all permits,
including any duplicates thereof, and direct the permittee to discontinue and
cease the amusement activity forthwith.
31.   Editor's Note: Amended during codification (see
Ch. 1, General Provisions, Part 2).
32.   Editor's Note: Amended during codification (see
Ch. 1, General Provisions, Part 2).
§ 549-704. Imposition of tax. [Amended 5-29-2001 by Ord. No. 14-2001]
   A.   A tax is hereby imposed upon the admission to places of amusement as
defined in §
549-702, "Amusement" hereof, at the rate of 5% of the established price charged
the general public, or a limited or select group thereof, by any producer for
such admission, which shall be paid by the person acquiring the same.
      (1)   With regard to any producer (as defined herein) that is required to
report gross receipts for admissions to amusements to any franchiser, licensor
or to any other party or entity to which said producer may be required to pay
royalties, license fees or other charges based on admissions revenue, the tax
imposed herein shall be calculated on the basis of the gross receipts so
reported.
   B.   This tax shall apply only to admission charges for amusements (as
defined in §
549-702 hereof, that are held at any stadium, facility, arena, convention
center, civic center, theater or other similar facility owned in whole or in
part by the City of Reading or any authority to which the City of Reading has
any power to appoint representatives or board members.
      (1)   Any amusements for which the City of Reading and/or the Reading
School District shall act as producer shall be exempt from the tax imposed
hereinafter.
      (2)   Any amusements taking place on any playground or other facility
operated by the Recreation Department of the City of Reading Public Works
Department shall be exempt from the tax imposed hereunder.
   C.   In the case of persons having the permanent use of boxes or seats in
any place of amusement, or a lease for the use of such box, or seat in such
place of amusement, the tax imposed by this Part shall be computed on the
established price for which a similar box or seat is sold for each performance
or exhibit, at which the box or seat is used or reserved by or for the lessee
or holder, and then shall be paid by the lessee or holder. The terms of this
subsection shall not apply to any producer whose tax is calculated pursuant to
§
549-704A(1) set forth.
§ 549-705. Collection and payment of tax.
   A.   Producers and permittees shall collect the tax imposed by this Part and
shall be liable to the City of Reading as agents thereof for payment of the
same to the City of Reading through the Tax Administration Office, as
hereinafter provided.
   B.   Where permits are obtained for conducting temporary or itinerant
amusement by persons who are not the owners, lessee, custodians or other
controllers of the place(s) where the amusement(s) is held or conducted; or
where the temporary or itinerant amusement is permitted by the owner, lessee,
custodian or other controller to be conducted without the procurement of a
permit as required herein, the tax imposed by this Part, together with any
penalties, and interest imposed thereon as hereafter provided, shall be the
debt and liability of the said owner, lessee, custodian or other controller.
§ 549-706. Reports, interest and penalties.
   A.   Ever producer, except as hereinafter provided, conducting a place of
amusement on or before the 10th day of each month after the effective date of
this Part shall transmit and file with the Tax Administration Office, on the
form prescribed, a completed and accurate report of the amount of tax collected
by the producer during the preceding month together with payment of taxes due.
      (1)   In the case of a producer whose tax is calculated pursuant to §
549-704A(1) above, if such producer reports its gross receipts to its
franchiser, licensor or other party or entity as described therein on a
quarterly, annual or other basis less frequently than monthly, then the monthly
report required to be transmitted and filed by such producer with the Tax
Administration Office shall report, and the tax payable with respect to such
month shall be based on the producer's gross receipts for the relevant month,
calculated on the basis described in §
549-704A(1), with a further filing and tax reconciliation based upon the actual
quarterly, annual or other report actually submitted by such producer to the
franchiser, licensor or other party or entity.
   B.   Every producer conducting a temporary or itinerant amusement shall file
a report on the form prescribed, with the Tax Administration Office, together
with payment of taxes due, within 10 days of the completion of each such
amusement.
   C.   All taxes due and payable for permanent amusement(s) but unpaid on the
10th day of the following month shall bear interest at the legal rate until
paid. All taxes due and payable for temporary or itinerant amusement(s) but
unpaid on the 10th day following completing thereof shall bear interest at the
legal rate until paid.
   D.   Any producer who neglects or refuses to file monthly reports and/or pay
taxes legally due as required herein shall be assessed a penalty in the amount
of 10% per annum of the amount of tax due, in addition to interest otherwise
payable as provided hereinabove.
   E.   All amounts of tax, interest and penalties due shall be recoverable by
the City of Reading in the same manner as other debts due the City are by law
recoverable.
§ 549-707. Audits.
   A.   The Tax Administration Office is hereby authorized and empowered to
examine the books, records, papers, tax returns, ticket stubs, attendance
reports and other records or documents of any producer, taxable under this
Part, to verify the accuracy of any report or payment made under the provisions
hereof or to determine the amount of tax, interest and penalties, if any,
otherwise payable.
      (1)   With regard to any producer whose tax is calculated pursuant to §
549-704A(1) above, the subject of any audit inquiry shall be limited only to a
review and examination of the receipts or revenue information of said producer.
      (2)   With regard to any producer whose tax is calculated pursuant to §
549-704A(1) above, any allocation by said producer of receipts between a charge
for admission and other services or products provided by the producer shall be
as set forth in said report forwarded to the franchiser, licensor or other
party or entity so acting unless said allocation is challenged or changed by
said franchiser, licensor or other party or entity so acting. Said producer
shall notify the Tax Administration Office of any such challenge or change.
   B.   The Tax Administration Office is hereby authorized and directed to make
and keep such records, prepare such forms and take such other measures as may
be necessary or convenient and appropriate to carry this Part into effect and
further, may require reasonable deposits to be paid in advance by applicants
for temporary or itinerant permits.
§ 549-708. Violations and penalties.
[Amended 5-29-2001 by Ord. No. 14-2001]
   A.   Any person, firm or corporation who shall:
      (1)   Fail to file the reports required under this Part.
      (2)   Fail to pay any tax or license fee due under this Part.
      (3)   Fail to fully cooperate any produce any records upon audit.
   B.   Upon conviction thereof, shall be sentenced to pay a fine of not more
than $1,000 plus costs and, in default of payment of said fine and costs, to a
term of imprisonment not to exceed 30 days. Each day that a violation continues
shall constitute a separate offense.
Part 8
Local Services Tax
[Adopted 11-26-2007 by Ord. No. 77-2007 (Ch. 24, Part 4, of the 2011 Code of
Ordinances)]
§ 549-801. Definitions.
[Amended 10-25-2010 by Ord. No. 84-2010]
The following words and phrases, when used in this Part, shall have the
meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context or language
clearly indicates or requires a different meaning:
   DCED — The Department of Community and Economic Development of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
   EARNED INCOME — Compensation as this term is defined in § 13 (relating to
earned income taxes) of the Local Tax Enabling Act, the Act of Dec. 31, 1965,
P.L. 1257, § 13, as amended, 53 P.S. § 6913, as amended. 33
   EMPLOYER — An individual, partnership, association, limited liability
corporation, limited liability partnership, corporation, governmental body,
agency or other entity employing one or more persons on a salary, wage,
commission or other compensation basis, including a self- employed person.
   FINANCE DIRECTOR - The person, public employee or private agency designated
by City Council to collect and/or administer and/or enforce the Local Services
Tax.
   HIS, HIM or HER — Indicates the singular and plural number, as well as male,
female and neuter genders.
   INDIVIDUAL — Any person, male or female, engaged in any occupation, trade or
profession within the corporate limits of the City of Reading.
   NET PROFITS — The net income from the operation of a business, profession;
or other activity, as this term is defined in § 13 (relating to earned income
taxes) of the Local Tax Enabling Act, the Act of Dec. 31, 1965, P.L. 1251, §
13, as amended, 53 P.S. § 6913, as amended. 34
   OCCUPATION — Any trade, profession, business or undertaking of any type,
kind or character, including services, domestic or other, earned on or
performed within the corporate limits of the City of Reading for which
compensation is charged or received; whether by means of salary, wages,
commission or fees for services rendered.
   POLITICAL SUBDIVISION — A county, city, borough, incorporated town or
township.
   TAX — The local services tax at the rate fixed in §
549-802 of this Part.
   TAX YEAR — The period from January 1 until December 31 in any year; a
calendar year.
   TREASURER — The City of Reading Finance Director and/or the private agency
designated by City Council to receive returns and payments as mandated under
this Part.
33.   Editor's Note: See now 53 P.S. § 6924.301.
34.   Editor's Note: See now 53 P.S. § 6924.301.
§ 549-802. Levy of tax.
For specific revenue purposes, an annual tax is hereby levied and assessed,
commencing January 1, 2008; upon the privilege of engaging in an occupation
with a primary place of employment within the City of Reading during the tax
year. Each natural person who exercises such privilege for any length of time
during any tax year shall pay the tax for that year in the amount of $52,
assessed on a pro rata basis, in accordance with the provisions of this Part.
This tax may be used solely for the following purposes as the same may be
allocated by the City of Reading from time to time: emergency services, which
shall include emergency medical services, police services and/or fire services;
road construction and/or maintenance; reduction of property taxes; or property
tax relief through implementation of a homestead and farmstead exclusion in
accordance with 53 Pa.C.S. Ch. 85, Subch. F (relating to homestead property
exclusion). The City of Reading shall use no less than 25% of the funds derived
from the tax for emergency services. This tax is in addition to all other taxes
of any kind or nature heretofore levied by the City of Reading. The tax shall
be no more than $52 on each person for each calendar year, irrespective of the
number of political subdivisions within which a person maybe employed.
§ 549-803. Penalty and interest.
Employers are required to remit the local services tax 30 days after the end of
each quarter of a calendar year. Payments made after this time will be charged
a penalty of 10% and interest computed at 1% per month from the inception of
the penalty period.
§ 549-804. Exemption and refunds.
   A.   Exemption. Any person whose total earned income and net profits from
all sources within the City of Reading is less than $12,000, or less than
$1,000 for the school district for any calendar year in which the tax is
levied, is exempt from the payment of the tax for that calendar year. In
addition, the following persons are exempt from payment of the tax:
      (1)   Any person who has served in any war or armed conflict in which the
United States was engaged and is honorably discharged or released under
honorable circumstances from active service if, as a result of military
service, the person is blind, paraplegic or a double or quadruple amputee or
has a service-connected disability declared by the United States Veterans'
Administration or its successor to be a total 100% disability.
      (2)   Any person who serves as a member of a reserve component of the
armed forces and is called to active duty at any time during the taxable year.
For the purposes of this subsection, "reserve component of the armed forces"
shall mean the United States Army Reserve, United States Navy Reserve, United
States Marine Corps Reserve, United States Coast Guard Reserve, United States
Air Force Reserve, the Pennsylvania Army National Guard or the Pennsylvania Air
National Guard.
   B.   Procedure to claim exemption.
      (1)   A person seeking to claim an exemption from the local services tax
may annually file an exemption certificate with the City of Reading and with
the person's employer affirming that the person reasonably expects to receive
earned income and net profits from all sources within the City of Reading of
less than $12,000 in the calendar year for which the exemption certificate is
filed. An exemption certificate is to be provided to the City of Reading
Finance Director. The exemption certificate shall have attached to it a copy of
all the employee's last pay stubs or W-2 forms from employment within the City
of Reading for the year prior to the fiscal year for which the employee is
requesting to be exempted from the tax. Upon receipt of the exemption
certificate and until otherwise instructed by the City of Reading or except as
required by Subsection B(2), the employer shall not withhold the tax from the
person during the calendar year or the remainder of the calendar year for which
the exemption certificate applies. Employers shall ensure that the exemption
certificate forms are readily available to employees at all times and shall
furnish each new employee with a form at the time of hiring. The exemption
certificate form shall be the uniform form provided by the City of Reading.
      (2)   With respect to a person who claimed an exemption for a given
calendar year from the tax, upon notification to an employer by the person or
by the City of Reading that the person has received earned income and net
profits from all sources within the City equal to or in excess of $12,000 in
that calendar year or that the person is otherwise ineligible for the tax
exemption for that calendar year, or upon an employer's payment to the person
of earned income within the municipality in an amount equal to or in excess of
$12,000 in that calendar year, an employer shall withhold the local services
tax from the person under Subsection B(3).
      (3)   If a person who claimed an exemption for a given calendar year from
the tax becomes subject to the tax for the calendar year under Subsection B(2),
the employer shall withhold the tax for the remainder of that calendar year.
The employer shall withhold from the person, for the first payroll period after
receipt of the notification under Subsection B(2), a lump sum equal to the
amount of tax that was not withheld from the person due to the exemption
claimed by the person under this subsection, plus the per-payroll amount due
for that first payroll period. The amount of tax withheld per payroll period
for the remaining payroll periods in that calendar year shall be the same
amount withheld for other employees. In the event the employment of a person
subject to withholding of the tax under this subsection is subsequently severed
in that calendar year, the person shall be liable for any outstanding balance
of tax due, and the City of Reading may pursue collection under this Part.
      (4)   Except as provided in Subsection B(2), it is the intent of this
Subsection B that employers shall not be responsible for investigating
exemption certificates, monitoring tax exemption eligibility or exempting any
employee from the local services tax.
   C.   Refunds. Any taxpayer eligible for a refund of the local services tax
due to a double deduction, an erroneous deduction or who became eligible for an
exemption within a calendar year may request a refund. Any request for refund
under this section shall be filed in writing with the Finance Director and
shall be in accordance with 53 Pa.C.S.A. §§ 8425 and 8426. No refunds shall be
made for amounts overpaid in a calendar year that do not exceed $1.
§ 549-805. Duty of employers to collect.
   A.   Each employer within the City of Reading, as well as those employers
situated outside the City of Reading but who engage in business within the City
of Reading, is hereby charged with the duty of collecting the tax from each of
his employees engaged by him or performing for him within the City of Reading
and making a return and payment thereof to the Treasurer. Further, each
employer is hereby authorized to deduct this tax for each employee in his or
her employ, whether said employee is paid by salary, wage or commission and
whether or not all such services are performed within the City of Reading.
   B.   A person subject to the tax shall be assessed by the employer a pro
rata share of the tax for each payroll period in which the person is engaging
in an occupation. The pro rata share of the tax assessed on the person for a
payroll period shall be determined by dividing the rate of the tax levied for
the calendar year by the number of payroll periods established by the employer
for the calendar year. For purposes of determining the pro rata share, an
employer shall round down the amount of the tax collected each payroll period
to the nearest one- hundredth of a dollar. Collection of the tax shall be made
on a payroll-period basis for each payroll period in which the person is
engaging in an occupation, except as provided in Subsection D of this section.
For purposes of this subsection, "combined rate" shall mean the aggregate
annual rate of the tax levied by the school district and the municipality.
   C.   No person shall be subject to the payment of the local services tax by
more than one political subdivision during each payroll period.
   D.   In the case of concurrent employment, an employer shall refrain from
withholding the tax if the employee provides a recent pay statement from a
principal employer that includes the name of the employer, the length of the
payroll period and the amount of the tax withheld and a statement from the
employee that the pay statement is from the employee's principal employer and
the employee will notify other employers of a change in principal place of
employment within two weeks of its occurrence. The employee's statement shall
be provided on the form approved by DCED.
   E.   The tax shall be no more than $52 on each person for each calendar
year, irrespective of the number of political subdivisions within which a
person may be employed. The City of Reading shall provide a taxpayer a receipt
of payment upon request by the taxpayer.
   F.   No employer shall be held liable for failure to withhold the tax or for
the payment of the withheld tax money to the City of Reading if the failure to
withhold taxes arises from incorrect information submitted by the employee as
to the employee's place or places of employment, the employee's principal
office or where the employee is principally employed. Further, an employer
shall not be liable for payment of the local services tax in an amount
exceeding the amount withheld by the employer if the employer complies with the
provisions of §
549-804B of this Part and this section and remits the amount so withheld in
accordance with this Part.
   G.   Employers shall be required to remit the local services taxes 30 days
after the end of each quarter of a calendar year.
§ 549-806. Returns.
Each employer shall prepare and file a return showing a computation of the tax
on forms to be supplied to the employer by the City of Reading. If an employer
fails to file the return and pay the tax, whether or not the employer makes
collection thereof from the salary, wages or commissions paid by him or her to
an employee, except as provided hereafter in this Part, the employer shall be
responsible for the payment of the tax in full as though the tax had been
originally levied against the employer.
§ 549-807. Dates for determining tax liability and payment.
In each tax year, each employer shall use his or her employment records to
determine the number of employees from whom such tax shall be deducted and paid
over to the Treasurer on or before the 13th day following the end of each
calendar quarter of each such tax year.
§ 549-808. Self-employed individuals.
Each self-employed individual who performs services of any type or kind or
engages in any occupation or profession within a primary place of employment
within the City of Reading shall be required to comply with this Part and pay
the pro rata portion of the tax due to the Treasurer on or before the 13th day
following the end of each quarter.
§ 549-809. Individuals engaged in more than one occupation or employed in more
than one political subdivision.
   A.   The situs of the tax shall be the place of employment on the first day
the person becomes subject to the tax during each payroll period. In the event
a person is engaged in more than one occupation, that is, concurrent
employment, or an occupation which requires the person working in more than one
political subdivision during a payroll period, the priority of claim to collect
the local services tax shall be in the following order:
      (1)   First, the political subdivision in which a person maintains his or
her principal office or is principally employed.
      (2)   Second, the political subdivision in which the person resides and
works if the tax is levied by that political subdivision.
      (3)   Third, the political subdivision in which a person is employed and
which imposes the tax nearest in miles to the person's home.
   B.   In case of dispute, a tax receipt of the taxing authority for that
calendar year declaring that the taxpayer has made prior payment constitutes
prima facie certification of payment to all other political subdivisions.
§ 549-810. Nonresidents subject to tax.
All employers and self-employed individuals residing or having their places of
business outside of the City of Reading but who perform services of any type or
kind or engage in any occupation or profession within the City of Reading do,
by virtue thereof, agree to be bound by and subject themselves to the
provisions, penalties and regulations promulgated under this Part with the same
force and effect as though they were residents of the City of Reading. Further,
any individual engaged in an occupation within the City of Reading and an
employee of a nonresidential employer may, for the purpose of this Part, be
considered a self-employed person, and in the event his or her tax is not paid,
the City of Reading shall have the option of proceeding against either the
employer or employee for the collection of this tax as hereinafter provided.
§ 549-811. Administration of tax.
   A.   It shall be the duty of the Finance Director to accept and enforce this
tax and to keep a record thereof showing the amount and date received by each
employer or self-employed person.
   B.   The Finance Director is hereby charged with the administration and
enforcement of this Part and is hereby charged and empowered, subject to
municipal approval, to proscribe, adopt and promulgate rules and regulations
relating to any matter pertaining to the administration and enforcement of this
Part, including provisions for the examination of payroll records of any
employer subject to this Part, the examination and correction of any return
made in compliance with this Part and any payment alleged or found to be
incorrect or as to which overpayment is claimed or found to have occurred. Any
person aggrieved by any decision of the Finance Director shall have the right
to appeal to the Court of Common Pleas of Berks County as in other cases
provided.
   C.   The Finance Director is hereby authorized to examine the books and
payroll records of any employer in order to verify the accuracy of any return
made by an employer or, if no return was made, to ascertain the tax due. Each
employer is hereby directed and required to give the Finance Director the
means, facilities and opportunity for such examination.
§ 549-812. Suits for collection.
In the event that any tax under this Part remains due or unpaid 30 days after
the due dates above set forth, the Finance Director may sue for the recovery of
any such tax due or unpaid under this Part, together with interest and penalty
as provided in § 549-903. Where suit is brought for the recovery of this tax or
other appropriate remedy undertaken, the individual liable therefor shall, in
addition, be responsible and liable for the costs of collection.
§ 549-813. Violations and penalties.
Whoever makes any false or untrue statement on any return required by this
Part, or whoever refuses inspection of the books, records or accounts in his or
her custody and control setting forth the number of employees subject to this
tax who are in his or her employment, or whoever fails or refuses to file any
return required by this Part shall be guilty of a violation and, upon
conviction thereof, shall be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $600 and
costs of prosecution, and, in default of payment of such fine and costs, to
imprisonment for not more than 30 days. The action to enforce the penalty
herein prescribed may be instituted against any person in charge of the
business of any employer who shall have failed or who refuses to file a return
required by this Part.
§ 549-814. Interpretation.
   A.   Nothing contained in this Part shall be construed to empower the City
of Reading to levy and collect the tax hereby imposed on any occupation not
within the taxing power of the City of Reading under the Constitution of the
United States and the laws of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
   B.   If the tax hereby imposed under the provisions of this Part shall be
held by any court of competent jurisdiction to be in violation of the
Constitution of the United States or of the laws of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania as to any individual, the decision of the court shall not affect
or impair the right to impose or collect said tax or the validity of the tax so
imposed on other persons or individuals as herein provided.
Part 9
Nonresident Earned Income and Net Profits Tax
[Adopted 11-23-2015 by Ord. No. 66-2015 35; Amended 11-27-2017 by Ord. No. 101-
2017]
35.   Editor's Note: This Ordinance Also Superseded Former Part 9, Nonresident
Earned Income And Net Profits Tax, Adopted 11-24-2014 By Ord. No. 92-2014.
§ 549-901. Tax on nonresidents subject to tax in domicile.
The City of Reading hereby imposes a tax of 0.3% on all earned income and net
profits generated by nonresidents of the City of Reading within the City of
Reading who are subject to payment of earned income and net profits tax to the
taxpayer's resident (domicile) taxing authority in the amount of 1.0%.
§ 549-902. Tax on nonresidents not subject to tax in domicile.
The City of Reading hereby imposes a tax of 1.3% on all earned income and net
profits generated by nonresidents of the City of Reading within the City of
Reading who are not subject to payment of earned income and profits tax to the
taxpayer's resident (domicile) taxing authority.
§ 549-903. Tax percentage to equal 1.3%.
The City of Reading hereby imposes a tax of a certain percentage which, when
added to the percentage imposed by the taxpayer's resident (domicile) taxing
authority, equals 1.3% on all earned income and net profits generated by
nonresidents of the City of Reading within the City of Reading.
§ 549-904. Imposition of tax.
This tax on nonresidents is hereby imposed on:
   A.   All salaries, wages, commissions and other compensation earned on or
after January 1, 2018, during the calendar year 2018, by nonresidents of the
City for work done or services performed or rendered in the City of Reading;
   B.   The net profits earned on or after January 1, 2018, during the calendar
year 2018, of businesses, professions or other activities conducted in the City
of Reading by nonresidents.
§ 549-905. Tax not shared with school district; credit for tax paid to home
municipality.
This tax levied above shall not be shared by the school district, of Reading or
otherwise, and nonresidents shall continue to be given credit for the amount of
earned income tax paid to their home municipal taxing authorities.
§ 549-906. Use of revenue.
The revenues resulting from the above tax may be used for general fund and
capital fund purposes, i.e. on .3% tax: .1% to general fund and .2% to capital
fund.
§ 549-907. Collection.
This tax shall first be levied, collected and paid beginning on January 1,
2018, and during the calendar year of 2018 under all circumstances, whether or
not a fiscal year is used by the taxpayer.
§ 549-908. Effective date.
This Part shall become effective January 1, 2018, and shall continue in effect
until it may be repealed or modified by ordinance enacted by the City of
Reading Council in accordance with the applicable Home Rule Charter provisions.
Part 10
Home Rule Earned Income Tax
[Adopted 11-26-2012 by Ord. No. 118-2012]
§ 549-1001. Definitions.
The following words and phrases, when used in this Part, shall have the
meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly
indicates or requires a different meaning:
   ASSOCIATION — A partnership, limited partnership or any other unincorporated
group of two or more persons.
   BUSINESS — An enterprise, activity, profession or any other undertaking of
an unincorporated nature conducted for profit or ordinarily conducted for
profit, whether by a person, partnership, association or any other entity.
   CORPORATION — A corporation or joint stock association organized under the
laws of the United States, the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, or any other
state, territory, foreign country or dependency.
   COUNCIL — The City Council of Reading.
   CURRENT YEAR — The calendar year for which the tax is levied.
   DOMICILE — The place where one lives and has his permanent home and to which
he has the intention of returning whenever he is absent. Actual residence is
not necessarily domicile, for domicile is the fixed place of abode which, in
the intention of the taxpayer, is permanent rather than transitory. Domicile is
the place in which a man has voluntarily fixed the habitation of himself and
his family, not for a mere special or limited purpose, but with the present
intention of making a permanent home, until some event occurs to induce him to
adopt some other permanent home. In the case of businesses or associations, the
domicile is that place considered as the center of business affairs and the
place where its functions are discharged.
   EARNED INCOME — Salaries, wages, commissions, bonuses, incentive payments,
fees, tips and other compensation received by a person or his personal
representative for services rendered, whether directly or through an agent, and
whether in cash or in property, not including, however, wages or compensation
paid to persons on active military service, periodic payments for sickness and
disability other than regular wages received during a period of sickness,
disability or retirement, or payments arising under workmen's compensation
acts, occupational disease acts and similar legislation, or payments commonly
recognized as old age benefits, retirement pay or pensions paid to persons
retired from service after reaching a specific age or after a stated period of
employment, or payments commonly known as public assistance, or unemployment
compensation payments by any governmental agency, or payments to reimburse
expenses, or payments made by employers or labor unions for wage and salary
supplemental programs, including, but not limited to, programs covering
hospitalization, sickness, disability or death, supplemental unemployment
benefits, strike benefits, social security and retirement.
   EMPLOYER — A person, partnership, association, corporation, institution,
governmental body or unit or agency, or any other entity employing one or more
persons for a salary, wage, commission or other compensation.
   INCOME TAX OFFICER or OFFICER — A person, public employee or private agency
designated by the governing body to collect and administer the tax on earned
income and net profits.
   NET PROFITS — The net income from the operation of a business, profession or
other activity, except corporations, after provision for all costs and expenses
incurred in the conduct thereof, determined either on a cash or accrual basis
in accordance with the accounting system used in such business, profession, or
other activity, but without deduction of taxes based on income.
   NONRESIDENT — A person, partnership, association or other entity domiciled
outside the taxing district.
   PERSON or INDIVIDUAL — A natural person.
   PRECEDING YEAR — The calendar year before the current year.
   RESIDENT — A person, partnership, association or other entity domiciled in
the taxing district.
   SUCCEEDING YEAR — The calendar year following the current year.
TAX ADMINISTRATION — The City of Reading Tax Administration designated by
Council to administer the provisions of this Earned Income Tax article under
the direction of the Finance Director.
   TAXPAYER — A person, partnership, association or any other entity required
hereunder to file a return of earned income or net profits, or to pay a tax
thereon.
§ 549-1002. Imposition of tax.
   A.   A tax, for general revenue purposes, of 1.6% over and above the tax
collected under §
549-201 et seq. of the Code of the City of Reading is hereby imposed on the
following:
      (1)   Salaries, wages, commissions and other compensation earned from
year to year, on and after January 1, 2013, by individual residents of the City
of Reading.
      (2)   Net profits earned from year to year, on and after January 1, 2013,
by residents of the City.
   B.   The tax levied under Subsection A(1) hereof shall relate to and be
imposed upon salaries, wages, commissions and other compensation paid by an
employer or on his behalf to a person who is employed by him. The tax levied
under Subsection A(2) hereof shall relate to and be imposed on the net profits
of any business, profession or other activity carried on by any person or
persons.
   C.   Every corporation which is subject to the Pennsylvania Corporate Net
Income Tax or exempt from the Pennsylvania Corporate Net Income Tax and every
foreign corporation which is subject to the Pennsylvania Franchise Tax or
exempt from the Pennsylvania Franchise Tax, shall be exempt from the tax
imposed by this article.
   D.   The tax levied by this article shall be applicable to salaries, wages,
commissions and other compensation and to net profits earned in the period
beginning January 1, 2013, and ending December 31, 2013, and thereafter, from
year to year on a calendar-year basis and shall be in addition to the tax
imposed for the same period or periods under §
549-201 et seq.
§ 549-1003. Annual returns of taxpayers.
   A.   On or before April 15 of each year, every person, resident or
nonresident, who resided in the City of Reading for all or any part of the
preceding calendar year shall file with the appropriate officer an annual tax
return showing all earned income and net profits received and/or earned for the
previous year. A husband and wife may file a joint return.
   B.   If a person has no earned income to report, the word "none" shall be
entered on the annual tax return, and the return shall be signed, dated and
returned to the officer with an explanation (military service, retired,
disability income only, etc.).
   C.   If net profits are received, the type of business, profession, or
activity shall be indicated on annual tax return and the amount of the profits
shall be shown on the appropriate line(s) of the return. If a net loss is
incurred in the operation of a business activity, it may not be offset against
the net profit of other business activities or earned income. Losses shall be
indicated as zero in all calculations involving net profits on the annual tax
return. Copies of the appropriate Federal or Pennsylvania Income Tax Schedules
shall be attached to the annual tax return to substantiate profits and/or
losses indicated.
   D.   When a return is made for a fiscal year, the return shall be filed
within 105 days from the end of said fiscal year.
   E.   The annual tax return shall also show the taxpayer's name, social
security number, address, place or places of employment or business, the
amounts of tax due, the amount of any credit claimed for tax withheld by an
employer (with a copy of the earnings and tax statement) or paid on estimate
and such other information as may be indicated on the return form or as may be
required by the Officer. Every person subject to the tax shall file such return
regardless of the fact that his wages may have been subject to withholding of
the tax by his employer and regardless of whether or not tax is due.
   F.   At the time of filing the annual return, the taxpayer shall pay any tax
due.
   G.   Tax returns must be signed and dated by the taxpayer(s) in the space(s)
provided.
§ 549-1004. Declaration and payment of tax.
   A.   Net profits.
      (1)   Every taxpayer who reasonably expects that he will earn any taxable
net profits during the period between January 1, 2013, and December 31, 2013,
and thereafter, from year to year, shall, on or before April 15, 2013, and
April 15 of each succeeding year, make and file with the Income Tax Officer, on
a form prescribed by the Income Tax Officer, a declaration of his estimated net
profits for the period beginning January 1, 2013, and ending December 31, 2013,
and thereafter in each succeeding year between January 1 and December 31,
setting forth the estimated amount of net profits reasonably expected by him
for such period and subject to the tax, the amount of estimated tax imposed by
this article on such estimated net profits, and such other relevant information
as the Income Tax Officer may require. The taxpayer making the declaration
shall, at the time of filing thereof, pay the City one-fourth of the estimated
tax shown as due thereon and such taxpayer shall thereafter pay one-fourth of
the estimated tax in each of three installments, as follows: one installment on
or before June 15, 2013, one installment on or before September 15, 2013, and
the last installment on or before January 15, 2014, and thereafter, from year
to year, on June 15, September 15 and January 15, in each succeeding year.
      (2)   A person who on April 15, 2013, did not reasonably expect that he
would earn any taxable net profits during the period between January 1, 2013,
and December 31, 2013, and who, subsequent to April 15, 2013, reasonably
expects that he will earn taxable net profits on or before December 31, 2013,
shall make and file on or before June 15, 2013, September 15, 2013, or January
15, 2014, and thereafter, from year to year, on June 15, September 15, and
January 15, respectively, in each succeeding year, whichever of these dates
next follows the date on which the taxpayer first reasonably expects such net
profits, a declaration similar to that required under Subsection A(1) hereof.
The taxpayer making the declaration shall, at the time of filing thereof, pay
to the City the estimated tax shown as due thereon; provided, however, that the
taxpayer shall have the right to pay the estimated tax in equal installments on
or before the quarterly installment payment dates which remain after the filing
of the declaration.
      (3)   The Income Tax Officer is hereby authorized to provide by
regulations, approved by Council, for the making and filing of adjusted
declarations of estimated net profits, and for the payments of the estimated
tax in cases where a taxpayer who has filed the declaration hereinabove
required shall thereafter either reasonably expect additional net profits not
previously declared or find that he has overestimated his net profits.
      (4)   On or before April 15, 2014, and April 15 thereafter, from year to
year, every taxpayer who has earned taxable net profits shall make and file
with the Income Tax Officer a final return showing all of such net profits for
the period beginning January 1, 2013, and ending December 31, 2013, and periods
thereafter, year to year, the total amount of tax due, the amount of estimated
tax paid under the provisions of this section and the balance due. When the
return is made for a fiscal year different from the calendar year, the return
shall be made within 105 days from the end of such fiscal year. The percentage
of the total net profits of any calendar or fiscal year of a taxpayer beginning
or ending within the period beginning January 1, 2013, and ending December 31,
2013, to which the tax imposed by this article shall be applicable shall be
equal to the same percentage of such total net profits as the number of days in
any such year within such period bears to the total number of days in any such
year. At the time of filing the final return, the taxpayer shall pay the
balance of the tax due or shall make demand for refund or credit in the case of
overpayment.
      (5)   Every taxpayer who discontinues business prior to December 31,
2013, or prior to December 31 in any succeeding year while this article is in
force and effect, shall, within 30 days after the discontinuance of business,
file his final return as hereinabove required and pay the tax due, or demand
refund or credit in the case of overpayment.
   B.   Salaries, wages, commission and other compensation.
      (1)   Every taxpayer employed on a salary, wage, commission or other
compensation basis and who reasonably expects to earn any taxable earnings not
subject to the provisions of §
549-1004 relating to the collection at source, shall, on or before April 15,
2013, make and file with the Income Tax Officer a declaration of his estimated
total amount of taxable salaries, wages, commissions and other compensation for
the period beginning January 1, 2013, and ending December 31, 2013, the
estimated amount of the tax thereon that will be deducted therefrom pursuant to
§
549-1004, the estimated amount of tax imposed by this article that will not be
deducted therefrom pursuant to §
549-1004, and such other relevant information as the Income Tax Officer may
require. In preparing a declaration of estimated taxable salaries, wages,
commissions and other compensation taxable under this article, the taxpayer
shall use the same amounts with respect to such items as he shall have used in
preparing his declaration of estimated tax for the year 2013 for federal income
tax purposes, if such taxpayer shall be required to file any such last-
mentioned declaration.
      (2)   A person who on April 15, 2013, did not reasonably expect that he
would earn any salaries, wages, commissions and other compensation not subject
to the provision of §
549-1004 relating to the collection at source, during the period between
January 1, 2013, and December 31, 2013, and who subsequent to April 15, 2013,
reasonably expects that he will earn salaries, wages, commissions and other
compensation not subject to the provisions of §
549-1004, on or before December 31, 2013, shall make and file on or before June
15, 2013, September 15, 2013, or January 15, 2014, and thereafter from year to
year in each succeeding year on June 15, September 15 and January 15,
respectively, whichever of these dates next follows the date on which the
taxpayer first reasonably expects that he will earn such salaries, wages,
commissions and other compensation, a declaration similar to that required
under Subsection B(1) hereof. The taxpayer making the declaration shall, at the
time of filing thereof, pay to the City the estimated tax shown as due thereon;
provided, however, that the taxpayer shall have the right to pay the estimated
tax in equal installments on or before quarterly installment payment dates
which remain after the filing of the declaration.
      (3)   The Income Tax Officer is hereby authorized to provide by
regulations approved by Council for the making and filing of adjusted
declarations of estimated salaries, wages, commissions and other compensation,
and for the payments of the estimated tax in cases where a taxpayer who has
filed the declaration hereinabove required shall thereafter either reasonably
expect additional salaries, wages, commissions and other compensation not
previously declared, or find that he has overestimated his salaries, wages,
commissions and other compensation.
      (4)   On or before April 15, 2014, every taxpayer who has received
taxable salaries, wages, commissions and other compensation shall make and file
with the Income Tax Officer, a final return showing all such salaries, wages,
commissions and other compensation earned during the period beginning January
1, 2013, and ending December 31, 2013, the total amount of tax due thereon, the
amount, if any, of estimated tax thereon paid under the provisions of this
section, and the amount, if any, of tax thereon that has been withheld pursuant
to the provisions of §
549-1004 and the balance of tax due.
   C.   At the time of filing the final return, the taxpayer shall pay the
balance of the tax due or shall make demand for refund or credit in the case of
overpayment.
§ 549-1005. Collection at source.
   A.   Every person, firm or corporation within the City who employs one or
more persons on a salary, wage, commission or other compensation basis, other
than domestic servants, shall deduct, at the time of the payment thereof, the
tax imposed by this article on the salaries, wages, commissions and other
compensation due to his employee or employees, and shall, on or before April
30, 2013, July 31, 2013, October 31, 2013, and January 31, 2014, respectively,
and thereafter year to year, make and file with the Income Tax Officer, a
return setting forth the taxes so deducted, and pay to the City the amount of
taxes deducted for the preceding quarterly periods ending March 31, 2013, June
30, 2013, September 30, 2013, and December 31, 2013, respectively, and
thereafter year to year.
   B.   On or before February 28, 2014, and thereafter year to year, every such
employer shall file with the Income Tax Officer:
      (1)   An annual return showing the total amount of salaries, wages,
commissions and other compensation earned by each employee on which a tax is
imposed by this article, the total amount of taxes so deducted, and the total
amount of all taxes paid to the City on account of salaries, wages, commissions
and other compensation earned by each employee during the period beginning
January 1, 2013, and ending December 31, 2013, and thereafter year to year.
      (2)   A return for each person employed during all or any part of the
period beginning January 1, 2013, and ending December 31, 2013, and thereafter
year to year, who earned, during such period, any salaries, wages, commissions
or other compensation subject to the tax imposed by this article, setting forth
the employee's name, address and social security number, the total amount of
salary, wages, commissions or other compensation earned by each employee during
such period, and the amount of tax deducted therefrom. Every employer shall
furnish a copy of the individual return to each employee for whom the employer
is obligated to make a return under the provisions of this article.
   C.   Every employer who discontinues business prior to December 31, 2013,
and thereafter year to year, shall, within 30 days after the discontinuance of
business, file the returns herein above required and pay the tax due.
   D.   The failure or omission of any employer to make the deductions required
by this section does not relieve any employee from the payment of the tax or
from complying with the requirements of this article relating to the filing of
declarations and returns.
   E.   If an employer makes a deduction of tax as required by this section,
the amount deducted shall constitute in the hands of such employer a trust fund
held for the account of the City as beneficial owner thereof, and the employee
from whose salaries, wages commissions or other compensation such tax was
deducted shall be deemed to have paid such tax. Payment of the tax under the
provisions of this section shall not relieve the taxpayer from filing a final
return required by §
549-1003.
§ 549-1006. Income Tax Officer; powers and duties.
   A.   It shall be the duty of the Income Tax Officer to collect and receive
the taxes, fines and penalties imposed by this Part. It shall also be his duty
to keep a record showing the amount received by him from each person paying the
tax and, if paid by such person in respect to another person, the name of such
other person and the date of such receipt.
   B.   The Income Tax Officer is hereby charged with the administration and
enforcement of the provisions of this Part, and all amendments thereto, as well
as all rules and regulations of Council pertaining thereto, for the
administration and enforcement of this Part, including provisions for the
reexamination and correction of declarations and returns, and of payments
alleged or found to be incorrect, or as to which an overpayment is claimed or
found to have occurred, and to grant reasonable extensions of time upon proper
cause shown for filing declarations or returns found necessary for the
administration of this Part.
   C.   The Income Tax Officer, and agents designated in writing by him, are
hereby authorized to examine the books, papers, and records of any employer,
taxpayer, person, firm or corporation whom the officer reasonably believes to
be an employer or taxpayer, in order to verify the accuracy of any declaration
or return, or if no declaration or return was filed, to ascertain the tax due.
Every employer, taxpayer, person, firm or corporation whom the Officer
reasonably believes to be an employer or taxpayer, is hereby directed and
required to give to the Officer, or to any agent designated by him, the means,
facilities and opportunity for such examination and investigations, as are
hereby authorized.
   D.   Any information gained by the Income Tax Officer, his agents, or by any
other official, agent or employee of the City as a result of any declarations,
returns, investigations, hearings or verifications required or authorized by
this article shall be confidential and shall not be disclosed to any person
except for official use in connection with the administration or enforcement of
this article or as otherwise provided by law.
   E.   Any person aggrieved by any action of the Income Tax Officer shall have
the right of appeal as provided by law.
§ 549-1007. Suit for collection of tax.
   A.   The Income Tax Officer may sue in the name of the City for the recovery
of taxes due and unpaid under this article.
   B.   Any suit brought to recover the tax imposed by this article shall be
begun within three years after such tax is due, or within three years after the
declaration or return has been filed, whichever date is later; provided,
however, that this limitation shall not prevent the institution of a suit for
the collection of any tax due or determined to be due in the following cases:
      (1)   Where no declaration or return was filed by any person, although a
declaration or return was required to be filed by him under provisions of this
article, there shall be no limitation.
      (2)   Where an examination of the declaration or return filed by any
person, or of other evidence relating to such declaration or return in the
possession of the Income Tax Officer, reveals a fraudulent evasion of taxes,
there shall be no limitation.
      (3)   In the case of substantial understatement of tax liability of 25%
or more, and no fraud, suit shall be begun within six years.
      (4)   Where any person has deducted taxes under the provisions of this
Part and has failed to pay the amounts so deducted to the Income Tax Officer,
or where any person has willfully failed or omitted to make the deductions
required by this article, there shall be no limitation.
      (5)   This section shall not be construed to limit the City from
recovering delinquent taxes by any other means provided by this article.
   C.   The Income Tax Officer may sue for recovery of an erroneous refund,
provided such suit is begun two years after making such refund, except that the
suit may be brought within five years if it appears that any part of the refund
was induced by fraud or misrepresentation of material fact.
§ 549-1008. Interest on unpaid tax.
If for any reason the tax is not paid when due, interest at the rate of 6% per
annum on the amount of such tax, and an additional penalty of 1/2 of 1% of the
amount of the unpaid tax for each month or fraction thereof during which the
tax remains unpaid, shall be added and collected. Where suit is brought for the
recovery of any such tax, the person liable therefor shall, in addition, be
liable for the costs of collection and the interest and penalties herein
imposed.
§ 549-1009. Payment and refunds.
The Income Tax Officer is hereby authorized to accept payment of the amount of
tax claimed by the City in any case where any person disputes the validity or
amount of the City's claim for the tax. If it is thereafter judicially
determined by a court of competent jurisdiction that there has been an
overpayment to the Income Tax Officer, the amount of the overpayment shall be
refunded to the person who paid.
§ 549-1010. Applicability.
   A.   The tax imposed by this article shall not apply:
      (1)   To any person as to whom it is beyond the legal power of the City
to impose the tax herein provided for under the Constitution of the United
States and the Constitution and Laws of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
      (2)   To the net profits of any institution or organization operated for
public, religious, educational or charitable purposes, to an institution or
organization not organized or operated for private profit or to a trust or a
foundation established for any such purposes.
   B.   This section shall not be construed to exempt any person who is an
employer from the duty of collecting the tax at source from his employees and
paying the amount collected to the City under the provisions of §
549-1004.
§ 549-1011. Effective term.
   A.   This article shall be in force and effect from January 1, 2013, to and
including December 31, 2013, and thereafter, from year to year, between January
1, and December 31, inclusive, in each succeeding year until otherwise ordained
by the City or revoked by an act of Assembly, now or hereafter in force and
effect, of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
   B.   Wherever in this article a date is designated referring to a particular
year, such year shall be construed to refer to the initial year in which this
article is effective, and thereafter shall be construed to mean each succeeding
year in which this article remains in effect.
   C.   Dates used in this article relevant to the initial effective period
shall be construed in succeeding years with reference to the corresponding next
year.
§ 549-1012. Rules and regulations.
The Finance Department shall issue rules and regulations for the implementation
of this Part. Such rules and regulations shall be subject to approval by City
Council.
§ 549-1013. Hearing Officer.
The Finance Director is designated as the hearing officer to conduct hearings
and decide all appeals filed.
§ 549-1014. Violations and penalties.
   A.   Any person who fails, neglects or refuses to make any declaration or
return required by this Part, any employer who fails, neglects or refuses to
register or to pay the tax deducted from his employees, or fails, neglects or
refuses to deduct or withhold the tax from his employees, any person who
refuses to permit the Income Tax Officer or any agent designated by him to
examine his books, records and papers, and any person who knowingly makes an
incomplete, false or fraudulent return, or attempts to do anything whatsoever
to avoid the full disclosure of the amount of his net profits or earned income
in order to avoid the payment of the whole or any part of the tax imposed by
this Part shall, upon conviction thereof before any Magisterial District Judge
or court of competent jurisdiction in Berks County, be sentenced to pay a fine
of not more than $500 for each offense, and costs, and in default of payment of
said fine and costs to be imprisoned for a period not exceeding 30 days.
   B.   Any person who divulges any information which is confidential under the
provisions of this Part shall, upon conviction thereof before any Magisterial
District Judge or court of competent jurisdiction, be sentenced to pay a fine
of $600 for each offense, and costs, and in default of payment of such fines
and costs shall be imprisoned for a period not exceeding 90 days.
   C.   The penalties imposed under this section shall be in addition to any
other penalty imposed by any other section of this Part.
   D.   The failure of any person to receive or procure forms required for
making the declaration or returns required by this Part shall not excuse him
from making such declaration or return.
Part 11
Home Rule Per Capita Tax
[Adopted 11-25-2013 by Ord. No. 67-2013]
§ 549-1101. Imposition of tax.
[Amended 4-28-2014 by Ord. No. 43-2014]
Effective January 1, 2014, the City of Reading shall level a Home Rule Per
Capita Tax of $20 per year on each person residing in the City of Reading. This
tax shall be payable on July 1 of each year. This Home Rule Per Capita Tax
shall be in addition to the Per Capita Tax previously authorized by the Local
Tax Enabling Act renumbered (53 P.S. § 6924.101 et seq.). 36
36.   Editor's Note: See
Ch. 549, Part 6, Per Capita Tax.
§ 549-1102. Discount, penalty and interest.
[Amended 4-28-2014 by Ord. No. 43-2014]
If said tax is paid by the taxpayer during the first two months of the due date
for said taxpayer, the taxpayer shall be allowed a discount of 2%. During the
subsequent two months the flat rate shall apply. If payment is made after the
fourth month of the due date, the taxpayer shall be charged a penalty of 10%
plus interest at the rate of 1% per month computed from the beginning of the
fifth month following the due date.
§ 549-1103. Exploration of alternatives.
The Administration is directed by this Council to explore alternatives to
assure the broadest possible compliance herewith and report its recommendations
to the Council prior to January 31, 2014.
§ 549-1104. Authority.
The City derives authority to levy this tax by virtue of its Home Rule Charter.
Chapter 555
TREES
Part 1
Shade Trees
§
555-101.   Title
§
555-102.   Purpose.
§
555-103.   Definitions.
§
555-104.Custody and control of shade trees.
§
555-105.   Administration.
§
555-106.   Permits.
§
555-107.   Requirements for tree work contractors.
§
555-108.   Records.
§
555-109.   Shade Tree Commission.
§
555-110.   General regulations.
§
555-111.   Authority.
§
555-112.   Interpretation.
§
555-113.   Conflicts with other laws.
§
555-114.   Violations and penalties.
[HISTORY: Adopted by the City Council of the City of Reading as indicated in
part histories. Amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Property maintenance — See
Ch. 180, Part 13.
Streets and sidewalks — See
Ch. 508.
STATE LAW REFERENCES
Trees; shade trees - See 53 P.S. § 12416.
Part 1
Shade Trees
[Adopted 9-12-1973 By Ord. No. 42-1973 (Ch. 25, Part 1, Of The 2001 Code Of
Ordinances); amended 7-13-2020 By Bill No. 57-2020]
§ 555-101. Title.
   A.   This Part shall be known and may be cited as the "Reading City Shade
Tree Ordinance," hereinafter referred to by short title as the "Shade Tree
Ordinance."
§ 555-102. Purpose.
[Amended 11-24-2025 by Ord. No. 77-2025]
The City of Reading tree ordinance acknowledges the urban forest as a necessary
part of the City's infrastructure. This green infrastructure provides numerous
crucial ecosystem services to the City, including environmental (stormwater
management, carbon sequestration and urban wildlife habitat), social (human
health, healing, and quality of life), and economic (increased property values,
increased business activity and decreased energy use). However, the increased
creation of urban land over time, coupled with the challenges in adequately
maintaining the urban forest and tree canopy, has created the need to further
protect and conserve this valuable City resource. Thus, the purposes of this
chapter are to:
   A.   Maximize the ecosystem services derived from trees by establishing
policies for the planting, removal, maintenance and protection of trees along
City streets and sidewalks, within parks and public open spaces, and protected
trees on private property.
   B.   Maintain and strengthen the social and economic value of both private
and public property.
   C.   Preserve and enhance the visual character and natural beauty of the
City.
   D.   Restore a healthy natural environment through an expanded tree canopy
that improves water quality, reduces stormwater runoff and air pollution,
mitigates urban heat islands, enhances biodiversity and wildlife habitat, and
promotes overall community health and wellbeing.
   E   Preserve green space and promote a healthy, managed urban forest.
§ 555-103. Definitions.
[Amended 11-24-2025 by Ord. No. 77-2025]
   A.   Intent. For the purposes of this Part, all words used in the present
tense include future tense and all words used in the future tense include
present tense. All words in the plural number include the singular number and
all words in the singular number include the plural number, unless the natural
construction of the sentence dictates otherwise. The word "shall" is mandatory
and not directory. The word "located" includes "designed, intended or arranged
to be located."
   B.   Specific words and phrases defined. As used in this part, the following
terms shall have the meanings indicated:
   ARBORIST -An individual certified by the International Society of
Arborculture in the field of arborculture and who is designated by the City of
Reading to enforce the provisions of this Part.
   CARTWAY - The paved surface of a street or alley available for use by
vehicular traffic.
   CITY - The City of Reading, Pennsylvania.
   COMMISSION - The Shade Tree Commission of the City of Reading.
   COMMISSIONER - A member of the Shade Tree Commission.
   COUNCIL - The governing body of the City of Reading.
   CURBLINES - The lines in the right-of-way, constructed or proposed, which
separate the portion of the public right-of-way dedicated to vehicular traffic
from that portion dedicated to pedestrian traffic. The official City map on
file in the office of the City Engineer shall be the final authority on the
location of curblines should a dispute arise.1
   DBH, DIAMETER AT BREAST HEIGHT - The measure of the diameter, in inches, of
a tree trunk at a point four and one-half (4.5) feet above ground. See also
"caliper."
   DEPARTMENT - The Department of Public Works of the City of Reading.
   DIRECTOR - The Director of the Department of Public Works or his/her
designee.
   PEDESTRIANWAY - That portion of the public right-of-way which exists between
the curbline and the property line.
   PERMIT, SHADE TREE - A certificate issued by Council or its designee for the
planting, transplanting, cutting, trimming or removal of any tree governed by
the provisions of this Part, or for the fastening of any sign, wire, rope or
other materials to, around or through any tree, or for the deposition,
placement, storage or maintenance of any stone, brick, sand, concrete or other
material which might impede the free passage of water, air or fertilizer to the
roots of any tree governed by the provisions of this Part. In this Part, when
the word "permit" appears alone, the word shall be construed to mean "shade
tree permit."
   PERMIT, SIDEWALK - A certificate issued by Council or its designee for the
construction, reconstruction, modification or removal of any sidewalk governed
by the provisions of the Reading City Sidewalk Ordinance (Chapter 508, Part 5).
Council may, at its option, allow a sidewalk modification under the shade tree
permit, insofar as such sidewalk modification is necessary for the planting,
transplanting, removal or protection of any tree governed by the provisions of
this Part.
   PERSON - Any individual, firm, partnership, association, company or
corporation, public or private or other legal entity, whether as a single
entity or a combination of one or more entities.
   PROPERTY LINE - Any of the lines forming the front, rear and sides of lots
as described in the recorded title.
   PUBLIC AREA - Any public right-of-way, park or other publicly owned property
or easement under the control of the City.
   PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY - The total width of any land reserved or dedicated to
the public use, including any street, but not including alleys or utility
easements. Streets may be commonly known as boulevards, highway, places,
terraces, avenues or other similar terms. The official topographic survey map
of Reading, Pennsylvania, on file in the office of the Director of Public
Works, shall be the final authoritative document should the existence of any
street, dedicated or not be disputed.
   SHADE TREE - Any tree located in any public area, herein defined, or which
at maturity would protrude into a public area, or to any tree located on
property of special interest to the City by right of
Chapter 600, Zoning, or any other ordinance.
   STREET LINE - The street line is that line determining the limit of
vehicular right, either existing or contemplated, in a public right-of-way.
Specifically, the street line is that line separating the cartway from the
pedestrianway. The street line may also be referred to as the "curbline."
   TOPPING - The severe cutting back of limbs to stubs larger than three (3)
inches in diameter within the tree's crown to such a degree so as to remove the
normal canopy and disfigure the tree.
1.   Editor's Note: The original definition of "Director of Finance," which
immediately followed this definition, was repealed 6-13-2011 by Ord. No. 26-
2011.
§ 555-104. Custody and control of shade trees.
[Amended 11-24-2025 by Ord. No. 77-2025]
   The Department shall have the rights to plating, removal, and protection of
the trees on and along the streets and highways in the City (hereinafter "shade
tree"). The Department at its discretion may require the planting or replanting
of shade trees along the streets and highways in the City. The type of tree and
the alignment and location of trees shall be determined by the Department but
shall not prevent necessary and reasonable use of the street, sidewalk or
abutting property or the conduct of business.
   Shade trees are owned and must be maintained by the owner of the property on
which the shade tree is located, however, the City retains authority to enforce
the regulations contained in this part. No person shall break, injure,
mutilate, kill, or in any other way harm any shade tree.
§ 555-105. Administration.
[Amended 2-18-1976 by Ord. No. 8-1976; 7-26-2010 by Ord. No. 35-2010; 11-24-
2025 by Ord. No. 77-2025]
   A.   Enforcement. The provisions of this Part shall be administered and
enforced by the Arborist or officers of the City who shall be appointed by the
Mayor subject to the approval of Council. It shall be the duty of the Arborist
or officers to cause any premises to be inspected or examined and to order in
writing the remedying of any conditions found to exist in violation of any
provisions of this Part and to issue permits in accordance with this Part.
   B.   Relief from personal responsibility.
      (1)   The Arborist, or any employee charged with the enforcement of this
Part, while acting for the City, shall not thereby render himself personally
liable, and he is hereby relieved from all personal liability for any damage
that may accrue to persons or property as a result of any act required or
permitted in the discharge of his duties. Any suit instituted against any
officer or employee because of an act performed by him in the lawful discharge
of his duties shall be defended by the legal representative of the City.
      (2)   In no case shall the Arborist be liable for costs in any action or
suit or proceeding that may be instituted in pursuance of the provisions of
this Part when he and/or his subordinates perform their duties in good faith
and without malice.
§ 555-106. Permits.
[Amended 11-24-2025 by Ord. No. 77-2025]
   A.   No shade tree shall be planted, transplanted, cut, pruned, treated or
removed in or upon any public street, highway or avenue, park, or open space
without a written permit from the City Arborist. Any person who works on or has
work done on a shade tree in a public area must first obtain a written permit
from the City in accordance with §
555-106. All work required to be done under any permit issued hereunder shall
be completed within the period specified, but not to exceed six months from the
date issued, unless the time has been extended by the City Arborist.
   B.   Permits shall be required for the following:
      1.   Planting, transplanting, cutting, pruning, treating or removing any
shade tree, or portion thereof, in the right-of-way and other public areas.
      2.   Fastening or causing to be fastened any sign, wire, rope or other
materials to, around or through any shade tree.
      3.   Depositing, placing, storing or maintaining any stone, brick, sand,
concrete or other material which may impede the free passage of water, air or
fertilizer to the roots of any shade tree.
      4.   Moving any building or other object on or over any public street or
public right-of-way in such a manner as to damage or injure any shade tree.
      5.   Hanging lights and other seasonal or holiday displays. When
permitted, all such displays shall be removed within 30 days following the
holiday or end of season.
   C.   Application. The application for any permit shall be made in writing on
the form provided. Such permit application shall describe the work to be done,
specify species or variety, size, nursery grade and location and briefly
specify the method of planting, method of support and pruning of all trees or
shrubs concerned and contain a definite expiration.
      1.   All applications for a shade tree work permit shall be reviewed and
approved by the City Arborist.
      2.   The application for a shade tree work permit may be waived by the
Director when the work is done at the direction of, and carried out by, a city
agent.
   D.   Conditions attached to permits.
      1.   All shade trees removed by permit shall be replaced within a period
of one year from the date of removal.
         (a)   The property owner may, in lieu of replacing a tree, pay a fee,
equal to the replacement value of a tree as set by the City Arborist from the
average retail cost of trees of the current year, to be used by the city for
the planting of trees as deemed necessary.
         (b)   The option of paying a fee in lieu of replacing a tree may only
be exercised when circumstances prohibit planting a tree in the location from
which it was removed. Such a determination will be made by the City Arborist.
      2.   In the event of a tree removal where the tree will not be replaced,
the property owner is required to contract for the removal of the stump
immediately following the removal of the tree and to make the necessary repairs
to the sidewalk at the property owners own expense.
      3.   The city shall have the authority to designate a suitable type of
tree and may ref use a permit to plant any type of tree which, in its opinion,
is not suitable to the location. The permit may be revoked at any time upon
proof satisfactory to the city that any of the terms or conditions upon which
such permit was issued are or have been violated.
      4.   The city, in its discretion, may, as a condition precedent to
issuance of a permit, require a contractor, authorized by the property owner to
plant a tree, to guarantee such tree for a period of 12 months against defects
in materials or workmanship. If death of the tree results within this time, the
contractor shall incur the cost of removal, including cost of sidewalk repairs,
new tree cost and replanting for each tree planted. However, if the tree should
die after the period of warranty has expired, the property owner shall replace
said tree in accordance with all provisions herein.
      5.   A contractor hired to perform any tree work shall file with the city
proof of sufficient liability insurance.
   6.   As a condition to any permit to move any building or any oversized
object on or over any public street or other public right of way, the City may
require the applicant to furnish bond in an amount sufficient to cover any
damage or injury to any shade tree caused by the applicant or his agent(s) and
it may direct the route of any such moving so as to minimize damage or injury
to shade trees.
   E.   The application for a shade tree permit shall be made by the owner or
lessee, or the agent of either, of the real estate on which such tree is
located or, if such tree is located on a public right-of-way, the application
shall be made by the owner or lessee, or the agent of either, of the real
estate nearest the tree.
   F.   Revocation of permit. The Arborist may revoke a permit or approval
issued under the provisions of this Part in case of any false statement or
misrepresentation of fact in the application or on the plans on which the
permit or approval was based. Revocations may be appealed, in writing, to the
Director within five (5) workdays of that notice of revocation.
   G.   Nullification of permit. Any permit issued in conflict with the
provisions of this Part shall be null and void and may not be construed as
waiving any provision of this Part.
   H.   Form of permit application. The permit application shall be on a form
prepared by the Commission.
   I.   Fees. The fee for the shade tree permit, if any is deemed necessary,
shall be set by ordinance of Council; see
Chapter 212, Fees.2
2.   Editor's Note: Amended during codification (see
Ch. 1, General Provisions, Part 2).
   J.   In no case shall a shade tree permit be issued for planting,
transplanting, cutting, trimming or removing any tree or for the fastening of
any sign, wire, rope, or other materials to, around, or through any shade tree
where such activity would be in violation of any provision of this Part.
   K.   Exception. Nothing in this Section shall be construed to exempt
abutting property owners, municipal authorities, or public utility companies or
other agencies from any of the requirements of this Chapter. Only the City of
Reading Director of Public Works, his/her designee, an agent of the Director,
or a contractor hired by the City of Reading Department of Public Works may
perform work on City owned trees without obtaining a permit.
§ 555-107. Requirements for tree work contractors.
[Added 6-13-2011 by Ord. No. 26-2011]
   A.   Contractors shall have current insurance. Tree care companies are
required to obtain public liability insurance in the amount of $500,000/
$1,000,000; property damage insurance in the amount of $50,000/$100,000; and
workers' compensation insurance. Each applicant shall submit to the City
Solicitor proof that the applicant maintains insurance coverage as required by
this section. Additionally, a representative of the City of Reading may request
proof of insurance when the individual, or company, are working within the City
boundaries.
   B.   Tree care contractors shall adhere to ANSI A300 Standards of Practice
for Tree Care Operations and ANSI Z133.1 Safety Standards of Practice for
Arboricultural Operations, or the most current versions of standards pertaining
to arboricultural and tree care operations.
   C.   Any company or individual engaged in the act of applying pesticides
shall be licensed in accordance with the Pennsylvania Pesticide Control Act of
1973, specifically, Sections 15.1, 16.1, 16.2, and 17.3 Notification to the
City of Reading's Public Works Department is required 24 hours prior to any
street tree applications in addition to any notifications pertaining to the
current Hypersensitivity List published annually by the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania Department of Agriculture.4
   D.   Proper vehicle and pedestrian traffic control will be implemented by
any company performing work in or near the public right-of-way. Traffic control
shall be in accordance with U.S. Occupational Health and Safety (OSHA) Manual
on Uniform Traffic Devices (MUTD) 1926, Subpart G. Companies are responsible
for installing their own"Temporary No Parking" signage as well as notifying the
Reading Parking Authority and the Reading Police Department if a roadway is
going to be partially or totally closed for any length of time. The contractor
is also responsible for the safety of pedestrians walking near a work site by
properly establishing a work safety zone.
                                                                                                                                                                           
3.   Editor's Note: See 3 P.S. §§ 111.35a, 111.36a, 111.36b and 111.37,
respectively.
4.   Editor's Note: Amended during codification (see
Ch. 1, General Provisions, Part 2).
§ 555-108. Records.
   A.   It shall be the duty of the Arborist to keep a record of all
applications for shade tree permits and a record of all permits issued. He
shall file and safely keep copies of all plans submitted and these shall form
part of the records of his office.
   B.   The Arborist shall prepare a quarterly report for Council summarizing
for the period since his last previous report all shade tree permits issued and
all complaints of violation and the action taken by him consequent thereon.
   C.   The Shade Tree Commission shall annually report in full to Council, at
Council's first stated meeting in October, its transactions and expenses for
the last fiscal year of the City.
§ 555-109. Shade Tree Commission.
   A.   Creation and membership. The Shade Tree Commission is hereby created.
Unless otherwise specified, the word "Commission," when used in this Part,
shall be construed to mean the Shade Tree Commission of the City of Reading.
The Commission shall be composed of five (5) residents of the City appointed by
resolution of Council upon the recommendation of the Mayor. If possible, at
least two (2) of the members shall be professionals in forestry, horticulture,
plant pathology, entomology, landscape architecture or related fields. One
Commissioner shall serve for a term of three years, one for a term of four
years and one for a term of five years on a Commission of only three residents.
If the Commission consists of more than three members, the time sequence
provided for a three-member commission shall be repeated. On the expiration of
the term of any Commissioner, a successor shall be appointed to serve for a
term of five years. The Commission shall notify Council promptly of any
vacancies which occur. Appointments to fill vacancies shall be only for the
unexpired portion of the term. [Amended 6-13-2011 by Ord. No. 26-2011]
   B.   Organization, records and meetings. The Commission shall elect from its
own membership a Chairman, Vice Chairman and secretary who shall serve annual
terms and who may succeed themselves. All officers shall be eligible for
reelection. The Commission shall keep full public records of its business in
accordance with the law. The Commission shall submit a report of its activities
to Council as may be requested or required.
      For the purpose of taking action, a quorum of three (3) members must be
present.
   C.   Removal of members. Any member may be removed for misconduct or neglect
of duty or for other just cause by a majority vote of Council taken after the
member has received 15 days' advance notice of the intent to take such vote.
Failure of a member to attend three consecutive regular meetings of the
Commission will constitute grounds for immediate removal from the Commission by
City Council. Failure of a member to attend at least 50% of the regular
meetings of the Commission in a calendar year will constitute grounds for
immediate removal from the Commission by City Council. The Chairperson of the
Commission shall inform the City Clerk in writing when a member has failed to
comply with this attendance policy. Following such notification, City Council
may vote to remove the member and seek applicants to fill the vacant position.
   D.   Expenditures for services. Within the limits of funds appropriated by
Council, the Commission may employ or contract for secretaries, clerks, legal
counsel, consultants and other technical assistance. Members shall serve
without compensation except that Council may reimburse Commission members for
expenses incurred in the performance of their duties.
   E.   Notification that work is to be performed. Whenever the Commission
proposes to plant, transplant or remove shade trees, notice of the time and
place of the meeting at which such work is to be considered shall be given in
at least one newspaper of general circulation within the City once each week
for two weeks immediately preceding the time of the meeting, as provided by
law. Such notice shall specify in detail the street(s) or other public area(s)
or portions thereof upon which trees are proposed to be so planted,
transplanted or removed. Any property owners directly affected by such
planting, transplanting or removal shall be notified by mail of such meeting at
least one week prior to the meeting.
§ 555-110. General regulations.
[Amended 7-26-1995 by Ord. No. 68-1995; 5-29-2001 by Ord. No. 14-2001; 11-24-
2025 by Ord. No. 77-2025]
   A.   Advice to City Council. City Council shall consider the advice of the
Shade Tree Commission on all matters concerning the application of this Part;
30 days' time shall be allowed for the Commission to report to Council. The
Commission shall carry out any duties and responsibilities conferred upon it by
Council, including those herein conferred.
   B.   Commission authority. The Shade Tree Commission may plant, remove,
maintain and protect such shade trees. The Commission at its discretion may
require the planting or replanting of any shade tree and may direct the size
and species as well as the alignment and location of such trees except that the
alignment and location of any shade tree shall not prevent necessary and
reasonable conduct of business or use of the streets, sidewalks or abutting
property. The Commission may designate suitable persons in the employ of the
City to aid it in its functions.
   C.   Hazardous trees on private property.
      1.   When, following an inspection, and in the professional opinion of
the City Arborist, a tree or portions of a tree located on private property is
found to be damaged, diseased, or in such condition that it presents a
potential or immediate hazard to the public or to other trees on public or
private property, the City Arborist shall issue an official opinion and
recommendation.
      2.   Based upon such determination, the City Arborist and/or a duly
authorized City employee or official shall initiate and enforce the appropriate
code compliance actions. The property owner shall be notified in writing of the
findings and shall be required to undertake the necessary corrective measures
to abate the hazard, which may include the pruning, treatment, or removal of
the affected tree or any hazardous portions thereof.
      3.   If the property owner fails or refuses to comply, the Arborist or
their designee is authorized to take appropriate action, including partial or
full removal of the hazardous tree. In situations where the hazard is deemed
immediate, the matter shall be reviewed by the Director, who may determine that
prompt action or emergency removal is necessary to protect public safety.
      4.   All costs incurred by the City in performing such work shall be
billed to the property owner. If unpaid, the costs shall become a lien against
the property in accordance with Subsection G. Additionally, failure to comply
may result in enforcement penalties as outlined in §
555-114.
   D.   Hazardous trees in public areas.
      1.   When, in the opinion of the Arborist, a tree or portions of a tree
in public areas or any place that is open and accessible to the general public
is seriously damaged, diseased, disfigured, or constitutes a hazard to the
public or to trees on private property, the Arborist, or their designee, shall
notify the adjacent property owner(s) of the necessary removal or pruning. The
property owner shall be responsible for the removal within a reasonable
timeframe as determined by the Arborist.
      2.   If the property owner fails to act within the specified period, the
Arborist, or their designee, may proceed with the removal or pruning. If a tree
or portions of a tree in a public area constitutes an immediate hazard to
persons or property, the Arborist, or their designee, is authorized to remove
the hazard without prior notice if notification is not feasible before removal.
   E.   Dead trees. Should any tree die, it shall be declared a public nuisance
by the Arborist and the elimination of the tree shall be effected pursuant to
Subsection I.
   F.   Responsibility for costs.
      (1)   The cost of furnishing, planting, transplanting, repairing or
removing any shade tree(s) or the necessary suitable guards, curbing or grading
for the protection thereof, and the replacing of any pavement or sidewalk
necessarily disturbed in the execution of such work, shall be paid by the owner
of the property on which such tree(s) are located or, if located in a public
right-of-way, by the owner of the property nearest such tree(s).
      (2)   Upon the filing of such work order, the Arborist shall cause 30
days' written notice to be given by certified mail to the persons against whose
property an assessment has been made. The notice shall state the amount of the
assessment and theorize and place of payment, and shall be accompanied by a
copy of the work order. The expense of such notice shall be borne by the City.
       (3)   The amount assessed against the real estate shall be a lien from
the time of the filing of the work order and, if not paid within the time
stipulated, a claim may be filed and collected in the same manner as municipal
claims are filed and collected.
      (4)   Exception. The discretion to file an assessment under this section
shall be in the purview of the Director. If, in the discretion of the Director,
it is in the public interest to make the improvements and the expenditures of
public funds as justified then whether to file an assessment, partial or full,
is also within the discretion of the Director.
   G.   Damage to shade trees. Should any shade tree be damaged by any person,
the City may charge the person causing such damage for repairs to the tree and/
or its devaluation. Should any shade tree be destroyed by any person, the City
may charge the person causing such destruction for the appraised value of the
tree plus the cost of its removal and replacement. The Arborist, or his
designee, shall determine the appropriate value of the damaged or destroyed
tree by utilizing local or national standards, such as those formulas developed
by the Council of Tree and Landscape Appraisers. Should any shade tree be
damaged or felled by storm or other natural occurrence, such tree shall be
repaired or removed, including stump, by the owner of the property on which the
tree stands or stood, or, if located on a public right-of-way, by the owner of
the property nearest the point at which the tree stands or stood. Replacement
of such tree shall be made at the discretion of the Shade Tree Commission and
at the expense of the owner of the property on which the tree is located, or,
if located on a public right-of-way, at the expense of the owner of the
property nearest such tree. [Amended 6-13-2011 by Ord. No. 26-2011]
   H.   Shade trees as obstructions. The Arborist or his/her designee may trim
branches from any shade tree overhanging a public right-of-way so that such
tree(s) shall not obstruct light from any streetlight or traffic light, signal
or sign, and so that it shall not obstruct the free passage of pedestrian or
vehicular traffic over the cartway. It shall be the responsibility of the
property owner nearest the shade tree to ensure that such tree does not
obstruct the free passage of persons on the pedestrianway.
   I.   Shade trees as public nuisances. Any shade tree that, in the opinion of
the Arborist, endangers the life, health, safety or property of the public, or
which is afflicted with any contagious disease or insect infestation, shall be
declared a public nuisance by the Arborist, except that when such shade tree
presents a clear and present danger to the life, health, safety or property of
the public, such declaration may be made by Council, the Chief Building
Inspector or the Director. The owner of the property on which such tree is
located or, if located on a public right-of-way, the owner of the property
nearest the tree shall be notified in writing of the existence of the nuisance
and be given reasonable time to effect abatement of such nuisance or removal of
such tree at his own expense. If the owner does not effect such abatement or
removal of the nuisance within the time specified in the notification, the City
shall cause the nuisance to be corrected or removed and the cost thereof shall
be assessed to the owner as provided by law.
   J.   When projects taking place in a particular block or neighborhood
encompass more than 70% of the properties in the immediate area, the City may
determine that an abandoned or otherwise unattended property exists. In this
situation, the City may have the work done and a lien placed upon the property.
[Added 6-13-2011 by Ord. No. 26-20115]
   K.   Tree specifications.
      (1)   The Shade Tree Commission shall plant, or permit to be planted,
only those tree species on the approved list on file with the Arborist. Trees
shall not be planted less than forty (40) feet from the middle of a public road
intersection or fifteen (15) feet from a driveway or pole supporting a street
light or ten (10) feet away from any sewer, water, gas, and electric or other
line or conduit. Actual tree locations shall be approved by the Arborist or the
Director.
      (2)   The center of all newly planted trees shall be not less than
twenty-four (24) inches from the curbline. An area, open or with tiles, bricks
or other materials which allows sufficient passage of air, water and
fertilizer, shall be provided around the base of each shade tree; this area
shall be not less than twenty-four (24) square feet (4 feet wide x 6 feet
long). The Arborist may, whenever he/she deems necessary, waive the provisions
of this section.
      (3)   When a tree has grown beyond the twenty-four (24) foot space
between the base of the tree and the edge of the curb line, the sidewalk shall
be repaired or relayed at the expense of the property owner so that at least
twenty-four (24) inches is left between the base of the shade tree and the edge
of pavement. This requirement shall be in effect for all owner-occupied
premises when title is transferred and shall be included in the buyer's
notification. Otherwise, this requirement shall take effect in accordance with
the law.
      (4)   Trees must be maintained to a height that will not create a safety
hazard or to obstruct the visibility of any traffic control device, signs, or
light from any streetlight and so that there shall be no obstructions hindering
the visibility of the street or sidewalk. The minimum height of fourteen (14)
feet over the cartway and eight (8) feet over the sidewalk should be maintained
to ensure unobstructed traffic flow of vehicles and pedestrians. [Added 6-13-
2011 by Ord. No. 26-2011]
5.   Editor's Note: Amended during codification (see Ch. 1, General Provisions,
Part 2).
      (5)   If a violation of Section M, subsection four (4) occurs, the
Department reserves the exclusive rights to abate the hazard.
      (6)   The Department shall plant, or permit to be planted, shade trees
not less than one and one half (1½) inches in caliper, symmetrical in shape,
with a trunk clean and straight without branches for a distance of six (6) feet
from the ground. The planting of any species other than those on the approved
species list on file in the Arborist office is prohibited unless approved by
the Arborist in writing.
      (7)   The space between newly planted shade trees shall not be less than
twenty (20) feet and may vary based on the location of various utilities and
with the kind of tree species planted.
      (8)   No shade tree shall be planted on any street or roadway where curbs
have not been constructed. The Arborist may, whenever it deems necessary, waive
the provision of this section.
   L.   Authorized types of tree pruning. Tree pruning shall follow the
National Arborist Association 's Pruning Standards for Shade Trees and are
summarized below:
      (1)   Crown Cleaning - shall consist of the removal of dead, dying,
diseased, crowded, weakly attached and low-vigor branches from the crown of the
tree.
      (2)   Crown Thinning - shall consist of the selective removal of branches
to increase light penetration and air movement through the crown. Thinning
opens the foliage of a tree, reduces weight on heavy limbs, and helps retain
the trees' natural shape.
      (3)   Crown Raising - removes the lower branches from a tree in order to
provide clearance for buildings, vehicles, pedestrians, vistas and line of site
issues causing safety concerns.
      (4)   Crown Reduction - reduces the size of a tree, often for clearance
for utility lines. Reducing the height or spread of a tree is best accomplished
by pruning back the leaders and branch terminals to lateral branches that are
large enough to assume the terminal roles (at least one-third the diameter of
the cut stem).
   M.   Unauthorized pruning.
      Topping of Trees - It shall be unlawful for any firm or City Department
to top any street tree, park, or other tree on public property. Trees severely
damaged by storms or other cause, or certain trees under utility wires or other
obstructions where other pruning practices are impractical may be exempted from
this ordinance at the determination of the Arborist.
    N.   Maintenance by City; tax levy.
      (1)   The Arborist or his/her designee may prune any branch that is an
obstruction in the cartway. It is the responsibility of the owner of the
property nearest the tree to maintain and secure the tree pit, sidewalk and
prune the rest of the tree, making certain no hazardous conditions exist.
      (2)   The needed amount for City pruning shall each year be certified by
the Arborist to City Council in time for inclusion in the proposed budget
ordinance, and the funds provided by City Council shall be drawn against, as
required by the Arborist, in the same manner as money appropriated for City
purposes. The Arborist may accept and expend contributions to achieve the
purposes of this Part.
      (3)   Council may levy a special tax, not to exceed the sum of 1/10 mill
on the dollar of the assessed valuation of the property in the City, for the
purpose of defraying the cost and expenses incurred by the Commission in the
execution of its duties, or it may provide for such expenses by appropriations
and through annual budgeting.
      (4)   It is the responsibility of the owner of the property nearest an
empty shade tree pit to secure any empty tree pits to avoid possible trip
hazards, replace the tree in accordance with this Part, and maintain the
sidewalk around the tree pit according to the sidewalk standards established by
the Department of Public Works. If permission has been granted by the City of
Reading Shade Tree Commission, the pit may be properly capped or sealed at the
property owner's expense and according to the City's sidewalk standards.
[Amended 6-13-2011 by Ord. No. 26-2011]
§ 555-111. Authority.
This Part is enacted pursuant to the provisions of the Third Class City Code of
the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.6
                                                                                                                                                                          
6.   Editor's Note: See 11 Pa.C.S. §§ 10101 et seq.
 § 555-112. Interpretation.
All standards set forth in this Part are to be interpreted as minimum standards
required. Nothing herein contained shall be construed to prohibit or prevent
the use of higher standards.
§ 555-113. Conflict with other laws.
Should any provision set forth in this Part be found to conflict with any law
of the United States or of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, such federal and/
or state laws shall govern and this Part shall be construed accordingly. Such
conflict shall not affect the validity of this Part.
§ 555-114. Violations and penalties.
[Amended 8-24-1983 by Ord. No. 32-1983; 5-29-2001 by Ord. No. 14-2001]
   A.   Notice of violation. The Arborist or his/her designee shall serve a
notice of violation of the person in violation of this Part or of a plan
approved thereunder or in violation of a permit or certificate issued under the
provisions of this Part. Such notice shall direct the abatement of such
violation.
   B.   Appeal process. While the Arborist or his/her designee strives to
provide the most accurate tree/tree risk assessments possible property owners
may sometimes feel that the Arborist or his/her designee is incorrect. The
assessment appeal process allows property owners the opportunity to dispute the
observations determined by the Arborist. Property owners should file an appeal
in writing when the tree/tree risk assessment of their property does not
accurately reflect what they believe is correct.
      Appeals must be filed in writing within ten (10) days of the receipt of
the notice of violation. The appeal must state whether or not the property
owner wishes to appear before the Shade Tree Commission at their next regularly
scheduled meeting. The Arborist will attempt to prioritize appeals not
requesting an appearance before the Shade Tree Commission.
   C.   Prosecution of violation. If the violation is not abated within the
time specified in the notice of violation, the Officer may request the City
Solicitor to institute the appropriate proceeding at law or in equity to
restrain, correct or abate such violation.
   D.   Penalties.
      (1)   Penalties. Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any
provision of this Part or who shall fail to comply with any of the requirements
thereof or who shall conduct activities in violation of a permit issued under
the provisions of this Part, or who shall, without having applied for and
received an approved permit, conduct activities for which a permit is required
under the terms of this Part, who shall willfully, maliciously or negligently
destroy or injure any shade trees shall be, upon conviction thereof, sentenced
to pay a fine of not more than $600 plus costs and, in default of payment of
said fine and costs, to a term of imprisonment not to exceed 30 days. Each day
that a violation continues shall be deemed a separate offense.
      (2)   Disposition of penalties or assessments. All penalties or
assessments imposed under this Part shall be paid to the City Treasurer, to be
placed to the credit of the Shade Tree Commission, subject to be drawn upon by
the Commission for the purposes authorized in this Part.7
7.   Editor's Note: Original § 25-110, Amendments, which immediately followed
this section, was repealed 6-13-2011 by Ord. No. 26-2011.
Chapter 564
VEHICLE NUISANCES, STORAGE OF
§
564-101.   Definitions.
§
564-102.   Motor vehicles nuisances prohibited.
§
564-103.   Emergency efforts.
§
564-104.   Storage of motor vehicle nuisances permitted.
§
564-105.   Parking trucks, trailers and mobile homes; permit fee; penalties.
§
564-106.   Inspection of premises; notice to comply.
§
564-107.   Authority to remedy noncompliance.
§
564-108.   Solid waste.
§
564-109.   Hearing.
§
564-110.   Violations and penalties.
§
564-111.   Remedies not mutually exclusive.
TRAA Vehicle Identification Guide
[HISTORY: Adopted by the City Council of the City of Reading 3-22-1999 by Ord.
No. 7-1999 1   (Ch. 10, Part 5, of the 2001 Code of Ordinances). Amendments
noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Property maintenance — See
Ch. 180, Parts 13 and 14.
Streets and sidewalks — See
Ch. 508.
Vehicles and traffic — See
Ch. 576.
1.   Editor's Note: Ord. No. 28-2010, adopted 6-28-2010, repealed this chapter
to the extent inconsistent with or in direct contrast to the Property
Maintenance Rules and Regulations, enacted and authorized by Ord. No. 28-2010 (
Ch. 180, Part 13).
§ 564-101. Definitions.
   A.   As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated, unless a different meaning clearly appears from the context.
   COMMERCIAL VEHICLE — [Added 4-27-2015 by Ord. No. 18-2015; amended 11-9-2015
by Ord. No. 60-2015]
      (1)   Any TRAA Class 3 motor vehicle (attached) or trailer designed or
used to transport passengers or property:
         (a)   If the vehicle has a gross vehicle weight rating of 10,000 or
more pounds;
         (b)   If the vehicle is designed to transport 16 or more passengers,
including the driver;
         (c)   If the vehicle is a school bus;
         (d)   If the vehicle is transporting hazardous materials and is
required to be placarded in accordance with PennDOT regulations;
         (e)   If the vehicle is construction equipment and not involved in a
project; or
         (f)   All dual-wheeled vehicles that are not exempt from this chapter.
      (2)   For purposes of this chapter, the phrase "commercial vehicle" shall
include self- propelled vehicles, vehicles that are not self-propelled such as
utility trailers and other types of trailers designed or used to store or haul
equipment and materials and the combination of self-propelled vehicles and
vehicles that are not self-propelled. (See attached TRAA diagrams.)
      (3)   The term does not include pickup trucks classified as 5 and lower
by PennDOT (see attached schedule) 2  and vehicles that are an antique or
classic motor vehicle, or an implement of husbandry.
   MOTOR VEHICLE — Any type of mechanical device, propelled by a motor, in
which persons or property may be transported upon public streets or highways.
[Amended 4-27-2015 by Ord. No. 18-2015]
   NUISANCE — Any condition, structure or improvement which constitutes a
danger or potential danger to the health, safety or welfare of citizens of the
City or causes a blighting effect in City neighborhoods.
   PERSON — A natural person, firm, partnership, association, corporation or
other legal entity.
   B.   In this chapter, the singular shall include the plural; the plural
shall include the singular; and the masculine shall include the feminine and
the neuter.
2.   Editor's Note: The TRAA Vehicle Identification Guide is included as an
attachment to this chapter.
§ 564-102. Motor vehicles nuisances prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for any person who owns a motor vehicle to maintain a
motor vehicle nuisance upon the open public or private grounds of any person or
property within the City. A motor vehicle nuisance shall be declared if any of
the following physical defects exist:
   A.   Broken windshields, mirrors or other glass, with sharp edges.
   B.   Broken headlamps, tail lamps, bumpers or grills with sharp edges.
   C.   Any body parts, truck, firewall or floorboards with sharp edges or
large holes resulting from rust.
   D.   Protruding sharp objects from the chassis.
   E.   Missing doors, windows, hood, trunks or other body parts that could
permit animal harborage.
   F.   One or more open tires or tubes which could permit animal harborage.
   G.   Any vehicle suspended by blocks, jacks or other such materials in a
location which may pose a danger to the public property owners visitors or
residents of the property on which said vehicle is found.
   H.   Any excessive fluids leaking from vehicle which may be harmful to the
public or the environment.
   I.   Disassembled body or chassis parts stored in on or about the vehicle.
   J.   Vehicles that do not display a current valid license and registration.
   K.   Such other defects which the Fire Department determines to be a danger
to the general public or property.
   L.   Motor vehicles parked, drifted or otherwise located which may interfere
with flow of pedestrian or automobile traffic or impede emergency efforts.
§ 564-103. Emergency efforts.
It shall also be unlawful to park, store or house a motor vehicle nuisance in a
location that may hamper emergency efforts to persons or property.
§ 564-104. Storage of motor vehicle nuisances permitted.
Any person who is the owner of a motor vehicle qualifying as a nuisance as
defined in §
564-102 above may store said vehicle in the City only in strict compliance with
the regulations provided herein.
   A.   The motor vehicle nuisance must be stored within a garage or other
enclosed building.
   B.   Outdoors within an opaque fence six feet high that is locked at all
times when unattended.
   C.   Outdoors in an area enclosed by a chain link fence six feet high,
screened by shrubbery around the perimeter to the height of the fence with an
unobstructed gate capable of admitting fire or emergency equipment. Such gate
shall remain locked at all times when unattended.
   D.   Liquid contents of the stored motor vehicle nuisance shall not be
leaking.
   E.   Licensed businesses concerned with motor vehicle nuisances shall be
exempt from the provisions of this chapter.
   F.   The motor vehicle nuisance must be stored on private property and
covered securely with a tarpaulin or similar device.
   G.   Nothing herein shall be construed to permit the storage of motor
vehicle nuisances contrary to the Zoning Ordinance (
Chapter 600) provisions of the City.
   H.   Storage of a motor vehicle in the aforementioned fashion shall be
limited to one motor vehicle per registered owner and/or one motor vehicle per
property in the City.
§ 564-105. Parking trucks, trailers and mobile homes; permit fee; penalties.
[Added 2-12-2007 by Ord. No. 14-2007; amended 9-10-2007 by Ord. No. 68-2007; 1-
28-2008 by Ord. No. 10-2008; 8-24-2009 by Ord. No. 47-2009; 8-26-2013 by Ord.
No. 35-2013; 4-27-2015 by Ord. No. 18-2015; 11-9-2015 by Ord. No. 60-2015; and
1-4-2021 by Ord. 98-2020]
   A.   It shall be unlawful for a person to park, or allow to remain parked
for more than one hour any commercial vehicle with a gross vehicle weight
rating (GVWR) of 10,000 pounds or more in plain view from the public right-of-
way. Tow trucks designated medium or heavy duty, car carriers and low boy
trailers are similarly prohibited. This restriction applies City-wide and
includes without limitation school buses, construction equipment, trucks,
trailers, or tractors, whether attached or unattached unless the vehicle is
involved in the actual delivery, pick up of goods, supplies, or merchandise
from any building, residence or business, or the vehicle is used to perform
services for any permitted residential or commercial project in that block.
   B.   Recreational vehicles.
      (1)   It shall be unlawful for a person to park for more than 24 hours in
plain view from the public right-of-way any attached or unattached motorized
boat, trailer, camping trailer, or vehicle rated Department of Transportation
Class 5 or greater in the following zoning districts:
         (a)   R-1A, R-1, R-2, R-3 - Residential Districts.
         (b)   Commercial Residential Districts - C-R.
         (c)   Commercial Neighborhood Districts - C-N.
         (d)   Residential Professional Office - R-PO.
         (e)   Preservation.
      (2)   Mobile homes and recreational vehicles designed or adapted for use
as a mobile dwelling, including a vehicle equipped with a truck-camper, with a
maximum length of 24 feet and a maximum weight that does not exceed 12,000 GVW
may, however, park on private property, in accordance with §
600-1602A and B of
Chapter 600, Zoning.
      (3)   Each household may apply to the Department of Police, Traffic
Enforcement Office, for no more than two temporary recreational vehicle parking
permits that will allow the recreational vehicle to be parked at the property
for longer than 24 hours. Barring a special exception, the cost of the permit
shall be set at $50, as per
Chapter 212, §
212-145, be visibly displayed on the dashboard at all times the vehicle is not
in use, and shall last for a period of time as determined by the Chief of
Police, or his designee.
   C.   Enforcement. Prior to the issuance of the citation and fine,
notification of this law and a warning of the penalties imposed upon violation
shall be posted on the vehicle one time or a copy issued to the owner or tenant
of the property in areas that are not posted with signage. Such warning shall
be properly recorded in the Police Department, Traffic Enforcement Office, by
the issuing enforcement official. If the vehicle is not removed within 48
hours, per Subsection E below, the citing officer may issue a citation or
exercise discretion to tow the vehicle to alleviate a safety or hazard concern.
   D.   Exemptions. Pickup trucks classed as 4B and lower by PennDOT (see
attached schedule) 3  and an antique or classic motor vehicle, or an implement
of husbandry are exempted from this section.
   E.   Any person who shall violate any provision of this section shall be
cited and fined as set forth in the schedule below. At the discretion of the
citing officer, the vehicle(s) located in the public right-of-way may be
subject to tow after the second citation in any calendar year.
 
Code Section Violation         Violation Amount 10-day penalty 30 day penalty
             48 hour parking
564-105      restriction on    $100             $50            $50
             truck, trailer or
             mobile home
             Truck trailers
564-105A.    tractors over one $110             $55            $55
             hour
 
   F.   The Department of Police, Property Maintenance Division and Reading
Parking Authority are hereby provided with enforcement authority on public and
private property for this section.
3.   Editor's Note: The TRAA Vehicle Identification Guide is included as an
attachment to this chapter.
§ 564-106. Inspection of premises; notice to comply.
[Amended 2-12-2007 by Ord. No. 14-2007; 9-10-2007 by Ord. No. 68-2007]
   A.   Any official of the Property Improvement Division, Fire Department or
Police Department is hereby empowered to inspect public and private property on
which motor vehicles are stored to determine if there is compliance with the
provisions of this chapter. If noncompliance with the provisions of this
chapter constitutes a nuisance or if any condition, structure, or improvements
pose a threat to the health, safety or wealth of the public, a written notice
shall be served by registered or certified mail upon the owner of the vehicle,
or if the vehicle owner's whereabouts or identity be unknown, by posting the
notice conspicuously upon the offending vehicle and/or premises.
   B.   Said notice shall specify the condition of the vehicle nuisance and
shall require the owner to commence to remove or otherwise rectify the
condition as set forth therein within 10 days of mailing or posting of said
notice, and thereafter, to fully comply with the requirements of the notice
within 30 days.
§ 564-107. Authority to remedy noncompliance.
[Amended 2-12-2007 by Ord. No. 14-2007; 9-10-2007 by Ord. No. 68-2007; 8-26-
2013 by Ord. No. 35-2013]
If the owner of vehicle does not comply with the notice to abate the nuisance
within the time limit prescribed, the City shall have the authority to take
measures to abate the condition and collect the cost of such abatement plus an
administrative fee in an amount set by ordinance, as provided in
Chapter 212, Fees. The City and its agents, in such event and pursuant to its
statutory or otherwise authorized police powers, shall have the right and power
to enter upon the offending premises to accomplish the foregoing.
§ 564-108. Solid waste.
[Amended 2-12-2007 by Ord. No. 14-2007; 9-10-2007 by Ord. No. 68-2007]
It shall be against the provisions of this chapter to store solid waste in or
on a motor vehicle or a motor vehicle or a motor vehicle nuisance within the
City.
§ 564-109. Hearing.
[Amended 2-12-2007 by Ord. No. 14-2007; 9-10-2007 by Ord. No. 68-2007]
   A.   Any person aggrieved by the decision of any official of the Property
Improvement Division, Fire Department or Police Department may request and
shall then be granted a hearing before the Manager of the Property Improvement
Division of the City, provided he files a written petition with the City within
10 days after receiving a notice to comply with the provisions of this chapter
requesting such hearing and setting forth a brief statement of the grounds
therefor. The hearing shall commence not later than 30 days after the date on
which the petition was filed unless postponed for sufficient cause.
   B.   After such hearing, the Property Improvement Division Manager shall
sustain, modify or overrule the decision of the official of the Property
Improvement Division, Fire Department or Police Department.
§ 564-110. Violations and penalties.
[Amended 2-12-2007 by Ord. No. 14-2007; 9-10-2007 by Ord. No. 68-2007; 8-26-
2013 by Ord. No. 35-2013]
Any person who shall violate any provision of this chapter, except §
564-105, shall, upon conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of not less
than $300 nor more than $1,000 for the first two violations and not exceeding
$5,000 for the third and successive offenses plus restitution and costs, or in
default of payment, to imprisonment for a term not to exceed 30 days. One fine
per month per violation shall be assessed except that in the case of continual
and uncorrected violations that pose a threat to the public and violate the
same subsection of an ordinance for the same property can be assessed at one
citation per five calendar days.
§ 564-111. Remedies not mutually exclusive.
[Amended 2-12-2007 by Ord. No. 14-2007; 9-10-2007 by Ord. No. 68-2007]
The remedies provided herein for the enforcement of this chapter, or any remedy
provided by law, shall not be deemed mutually exclusive; rather they may be
employed simultaneously or consecutively, at the option of the City.
TRAA VEHICLE IDENTIFICATION GUIDE
(Added 4-27-2015 by Ord. No. 18-2015]
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/6541e9c0b130f7197f9155a8a6441bb6dc5ca83c/
IMAGES/0-0-0-66.png]
Law enforcement communications with towing and recovery operators describing an
incident and the vehicles involved can insure quick and efficient clearing of
these scenes and less disruption to traffic flow. In an effort to standardize
communications, the towing industry is adopting the federal vehicle class
standards as outlined herein.
   VIN CODES
The year of the vehicle is critical information for towing operators in order
for them to reference correct towing procedures. The diagrams on the front are
examples of classifications. The following information about vehicle
identification numbers affixed to the chassis will help determine the vehicle’s
year. As noted, the vehicle’s year, identified by a letter or number in the VIN
sequence, is the eighth character from the right.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/6541e9c0b130f7197f9155a8a6441bb6dc5ca83c/
IMAGES/0-0-0-68.png]
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/6541e9c0b130f7197f9155a8a6441bb6dc5ca83c/
IMAGES/0-0-0-70.png]
Chapter 570
VEHICLE REPAIR SHOPS
§
570-101.   Definitions.
§
570-102.   Report of damaged motor vehicles required.
§
570-103.   State reports required.
§
570-104.   Violations and penalties.
[HISTORY: Adopted by the City Council of the City of Reading 9-13-1967 by Ord.
No. 28-1967 (Ch. 13, Part 10, of the 2001 Code of Ordinances). Amendments noted
where applicable.]
STATE LAW REFERENCES
Accidents and accident reporting — See 75 Pa.C.S.A. § 3747 et seq.
Vehicle Code — See 75 Pa.C.S.A. § 101 et seq.
§ 570-101. Definitions.
Words and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed
to them in the Vehicle Code of Pennsylvania, except in those instances where
the context clearly indicates a different meaning. The singular shall include
the plural and the masculine shall include the feminine.
§ 570-102. Report of damaged motor vehicles required.
[Amended 5-29-2001 by Ord. No. 14-2001 1 ]
The person in charge of any motor vehicle service station, garage or repair
shop, including a motor vehicle garage or repair shop operated in connection
with a motor vehicle parts and accessories store in the City to which is
brought any motor vehicle which shows evidence of having been involved in an
accident, externally damaged or struck by a bullet, shall make a report of such
damage to the Police Department, orally or in writing or upon demand. The
report shall be retained by the vehicle repair shop for a minimum of one year.
The report shall include the registration number of the vehicle and, if known,
the name and address of the owner and/or operation of such vehicle as well as
photographs of the damage to the vehicle. 2
1.   Editor's Note: Amended during codification (see
Ch. 1, General Provisions, Part 2).
2.   Editor's Note: Original § 13-1003, Repairs prohibited prior to damage
release sticker, and § 13-1004, Damage release sticker, as amended 5-29-2001 by
Ord. No. 14-2001, which immediately followed this section, were repealed during
codification (see
Ch. 1, General Provisions, Part 2).
§ 570-103. State reports required.
Nothing herein contained shall exempt any operator of any motor vehicle
involved in an accident or any person in charge of any garage or repair shop
from the making of any report as required by the Vehicle Code of Pennsylvania.
§ 570-104. Violations and penalties.
[Amended 5-29-2001 by Ord. No. 14-2001]
Whoever violates any provision of this chapter shall be, upon conviction
thereof, be sentenced to a fine of not less than $10 nor more than $600 plus
costs and, in default of payment of said fine and costs, to a term of
imprisonment not to exceed 30 days.
Chapter 576
VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC
Part 1
General Provisions
A   General Regulations
§
576-101.   Definitions and interpretations.
§
576-102.   Manner of adopting permanent traffic and parking regulations.
§
576-103.   Continuation of existing regulations.
§
576-104.   Temporary and emergency regulations.
§
576-105.   Experimental regulations.
§
576-106.   Restrictions during construction, maintenance or special events.
§
576-107.   Use of streets by processions and assemblages.
§
576-108.   Authority of police officers.
§
576-109.   Authorization for use of speed timing devices.
Part 2
Traffic
A   Regulations
§
576-201.   Maximum speed limits established on certain streets.
§
576-202.   Maximum speed limits established on certain bridges and elevated
structures.
§
576-203.   Maximum speed limits established for certain vehicles on hazardous
grades.
§
576-204.   Maximum speed limits established in parks.
§
576-205.   Traffic signals at certain locations.
§
576-206.   Intersections where turn prohibited on red signal.
§
576-207.   One-way roadways established.
§
576-208.   Turning at certain intersections prohibited or restricted.
§
576-209.   Right turns only permitted at certain intersections.
§
576-210.   U-turns prohibited at certain locations.
§
576-211.   No-passing zones established.
§
576-212.   Through highways established.
§
576-213.   Stop intersections established.
§
576-214.   Yield intersections established.
§
576-215.   Operation of motor vehicles restricted on public lands.
§
576-216.   Rotary traffic islands established.
§
576-217.   Play highways established and authorized.
§
576-218.   Snowmobile roads designated.
§
576-219.   Two-way traffic pattern established.
Part 3
Size, Weight and Type of Vehicle and Load
A   Restrictions
§
576-301.   Vehicle weight limits established on certain streets and bridges.
§
576-302.   Restrictions on size of vehicles on certain streets and bridges.
§
576-303.   Restrictions as to weight and size of vehicles on certain streets
and bridges.
§
576-304.   Truck traffic restricted on certain streets.
Part 4
Stopping and Parking
A   Regulations
§
576-401.   Parking in prohibited areas.
§
576-402.   Parking limited in designated areas.
§
576-403.   Parking prohibited in specific areas.
§
576-404.   Blocking garage and rear yard parking area entrance.
§
576-405.   Greasing or repair work.
§
576-406.   (Reserved)
§
576-407.   Storage of vehicles on streets.
§
576-408.   Parking of inoperable or illegally registered vehicles.
§
576-409.   Parking prohibited on private property.
§
576-410.   Parking prohibited at handicapped areas.
§
576-411.   Parking, stopping, standing or drifting prohibited in a loading zone
or timed zone.
§
576-412.   (Reserved)
§
576-413.   (Reserved)
§
576-414.   Nonpayment of daily parking fee notice.
§
576-415.   Parking violations subject to immediate towing.
§
576-416.   Notice of violation; waiver.
§
576-417.   Residential permit parking.
§
576-418.   Hazardous vehicles.
§
576-419.   Daily parking permits.
§
576-420.   Parking against traffic flow.
Part 5
Parking Meters or Kiosks
A   Regulations
§
576-501.   Definitions.
§
576-502.   Parking zones established; traffic control maps.
§
576-503.   Hours of enforcement and Saturdays, Sundays and holidays excepted.
§
576-504.   (Reserved)
§
576-505.   Marking of spaces.
§
576-506.   Meter signals and kiosk receipts.
§
576-507.   Manner of parking.
§
576-508.   Deposit of proper payments in parking zone.
§
576-509.   No parking beyond indicated time.
§
576-510.   Use of parking meter or kiosk funds.
§
576-511.   Slugs prohibited.
§
576-512.   Injuring or defacing meters.
§
576-513.   Exceptions.
§
576-514.   Enforcement.
§
576-515.   Duty of police and authorized agents.
§
576-516.   Verification of parking meters or kiosks.
§
576-517.   Notice of violation; violations and penalties; waiver.
§
576-518.   Parking ticket appeal process.
Part 6
Daytime Parking Restrictions
A   Short-Term Daytime Parking Restrictions
§
576-601.   Findings and purpose.
§
576-602.   Daytime parking restrictions.
§
576-603.   Notice of violation; violations and penalties; waivers.
Part 7
Commercial Contractor Parking
A   Commercial Contractor Parking Permit and Daily Parking Permit
§
576-701.   Purpose.
§
576-702.   Criteria for application.
§
576-703.   Display of permit.
§
576-704.   Permit parking exemption.
§
576-705.   Daily parking permits.
§
576-706.   Permit fees.
§
576-707.   Revocation of permit.
§
576-708.   Violations and penalties.
Part 8
Impounding and Immobilization of Vehicles
A   Removal and Impoundment of Illegally Parked Vehicles
§
576-801.   Applicability and scope.
§
576-802.   Authority to remove and impound.
§
576-803   Authority to remove and impound unattended vehicles on private
property by any privately operated towing businesses operating within the City
of Reading as per 75 Pa C.S. § 3353.3.b.
§
576-803.1.   Tow-away zones designated.
§
576-804.   Designation of approved storage garages; bonding; towing and
storage.
§
576-805.   Payment of towing and storage charges.
§
576-806.   Reclamation costs.
§
576-807.   Records of vehicles removed and impounded.
§
576-808.   Restrictions upon removal of vehicles.
§
576-809.   Violations and penalties.
§
576-810.   Reports and disposition of unclaimed vehicles.
B   Immobilization of Motor Vehicles
§
576-811.   Definitions.
§
576-812.   Basis for immobilization.
§
576-813.   (Reserved)
§
576-814.   Release of immobilized vehicle.
§
576-815.   Towing and storage of immobilized vehicles.
§
576-816.   Immobilization fee.
§
576-817.   Tampering with immobilization device prohibited.
§
576-818.   Implementation and enforcement.
§
576-819.   Right to hearing not waived.
C   Selection of Towing Contractors
§
576-821.   Police to contact approved towing contractors; exceptions.
§
576-822.   Definitions.
§
576-823.   Selection of towing contractors.
§
576-824.   Qualifications of tower.
§
576-825.   Duties of towers.
§
576-826.   Towing service charges.
§
576-827.   Towing zones.
§
576-828.   Nonliability of City for services.
§
576-829.   Investigation of applicants and facilities.
§
576-830.   Right of inspection.
§
576-831.   Promulgation of regulations and penalties.
§
576-832.   Prohibited behavior.
§
576-833.   Compliance and responsibility.
§
576-834.   Complaint procedure.
§
576-835.   Violations and penalties.
Part 9
Snow and Ice Emergency
A   Snow and Ice Emergency Regulations
§
576-901.   Definitions.
§
576-902.   Declaration of snow emergency.
§
576-903.   Declaration of prohibited parking for snow removal or inclement
weather.
§
576-904.   Moving, impounding and returning vehicles.
§
576-905.   Signs to mark snow emergency routes.
§
576-906.   Official snow emergency routes.
§
576-907.   Snow removal operations.
§
576-908.   Violations and penalties.
Part 10
Pedalcycles and Nonmotorized Vehicles
A   Regulations
§
576-1001.   Riding and parking of pedalcycles on sidewalks along certain
streets prohibited.
§
576-1002.   Restrictions on use of pushcarts.
§
576-1003.   Skates, skateboards, coasters, sleds and other toy vehicles.
Part 11
Pedestrians
A   Regulations
§
576-1101.   Pedestrians to obey traffic- control signs.
§
576-1102.   Pedestrian-control signal locations established.
§
576-1103.   Locations where pedestrian crossing in unmarked crosswalks
restricted.
§
576-1104.   Locations where pedestrians may cross only in crosswalk.
§
576-1105.   Pedestrians only.
§
576-1106.   Violations and penalties.
Part 12
Parades, Special Events, and Public Gatherings
A   Parades, Special Events, and Public Gatherings
§
576-1201.   Short title.
§
576-1202.   Definitions.
§
576-1203.   Permit required.
§
576-1204.   Application (fees).
§
576-1205.   Fees, time limit and cost of event.
§
576-1206.   Changes to application.
§
576-1207.   Date of permit issued.
§
576-1208.   Conditions for issuance of permit, where applicable.
§
576-1209.   Denial or revocation of permit.
§
576-1210.   Notice of decision.
§
576-1211.   Street activity and route restrictions.
§
576-1212.   Temporary signs for events.
§
576-1213.   Appeal procedure.
§
576-1214.   Alternative permit.
§
576-1215.   Notice to City and other officials.
§
576-1216.   Duties of permittee.
§
576-1217.   Public conduct during event.
§
576-1218.   Inspections.
§
576-1219.   Animal waste.
§
576-1220.   Insurance required to conduct special event or recreation facility/
site reservation event involving City gymnasium rentals.
§
576-1221.   Indemnification.
§
576-1222.   Conditions for premises after event.
§
576-1223.   Violations and penalties.
Part 13
Motorized Devices and All-Terrain Vehicles
A   Use and Operation
§
576-1301.   Operation of motorized devices is restricted.
§
576-1302.   Definitions.
§
576-1303.   Registration and title.
§
576-1304.   Operation and use.
§
576-1305.   Towing and storage.
§
576-1306.   Enforcement by notice of violation and forfeiture.
§
576-1307.   Vehicle seized prior to the effective date of this Part.
Part 14
Handicapped Parking Regulations
A   Regulations
§
576-1401.   Definitions.
§
576-1402.   Application for handicapped parking space.
§
576-1403.   Review process and criteria.
§
576-1404.   Notice to adjacent property owner.
§
576-1405.   Renewals.
§
576-1406.   Changes in conditions.
[HISTORY: Adopted by the City Council of the City of Reading 5-29-2001 by Ord.
No. 14-2001 (Ch. 15 of the 2001 Code of Ordinances). Amendments noted where
applicable.]
 
GENERAL REFERENCES
Animal control — See
Ch. 141, Part 2.
Noise — See
Ch. 387.
Streets and sidewalks — See
Ch. 508.
Storage of vehicle nuisances — See
Ch. 564.
Vehicle repair shops — See
Ch. 570.
STATE LAW REFERENCES
Delegation of powers authorized — See Vehicle Code, 75 Pa.C.S.A. § 6109(f).
Prohibited parking areas — See Vehicle Code, 75 Pa.C.S.A. § 3353 et seq.
Power to establish — See Vehicle Code, 75 Pa.C.S.A. § 6109 et seq.
Removal and storage — See Vehicle Code, 75 Pa.C.S.A. § 3352.
Removal of vehicle by or at discretion of police — See Vehicle Code, 75
Pa.C.S.A. § 3352.
Authorization of salvers — See Vehicle Code, 75 Pa.C.S.A. § 7301.
Part 1
General Provisions
A   General Regulations
§ 576-101. Definitions and interpretations.
   A.   Words and phrases, when used in this chapter, except for sections or
parts to which different or additional definitions apply, shall have the
meanings ascribed to them in the Vehicle Code, 75 Pa.C.S.A. § 101 et seq.,
except that in this chapter, the word "street" may be used interchangeably with
the word "highway," and shall have the same meaning as the word "highway" as
defined in the Vehicle Code.
   B.   The term "legal holidays" as used in this chapter shall mean and
include: New Year's Day, Memorial Day, Independence Day, Labor Day,
Thanksgiving Day and Christmas Day.
   C.   In this chapter, the singular shall include the plural, the plural
shall include the singular, and the masculine shall include the feminine.
   D.   Although the streets in the City run generally in a northeast-southwest
and a northwest- southeast direction, for the purpose of this chapter, Fifth
Street and the streets running parallel or generally parallel to Fifth Street
shall be deemed to run in a north-south direction, and Penn Street and the
streets parallel or generally parallel to Penn Street shall be deemed to run in
an east-west direction.
§ 576-102. Manner of adopting permanent traffic and parking regulations.
All traffic and parking regulations of a permanent nature shall be enacted as
ordinances, as parts of ordinances, as amendments to ordinances or as
amendments to this chapter, except where the law specifically authorizes less
formal action.
§ 576-103. Continuation of existing regulations.
The provisions of this chapter, so far as they are the same as those of
ordinances and regulations in force immediately before the enactment of this
chapter, are intended as a continuation of those earlier ordinances and
regulations, and not as new enactments. Nothing in this chapter shall affect
any act done or liability incurred, or any suit or prosecution pending or to be
instituted under any of those repealed or superseded ordinances or regulations.
§ 576-104. Temporary and emergency regulations.
   A.   The Chief of Police or his designee shall have the following powers to
regulate traffic and parking temporarily and in time of emergency:
      (1)   In the case of fire, flood, storm or other emergency, to establish
temporary traffic and/or parking regulations.
      (2)   In the case of emergency or to facilitate public works, or in the
conduct of parades, processions or public events, to restrict or prohibit
traffic and/or parking in limited areas for periods of not more than 72 hours.
   B.   Such temporary and emergency regulations shall be enforced by the
Police Department in the same manner as permanent regulations. Any person who
shall operate or park a vehicle or tractor in violation of any such regulation,
or who shall move, remove, destroy, injure or deface any sign or marking
erected, posted or made to give notice of any such regulation, shall, upon
conviction thereof, be subject to the penalty set forth in the law or elsewhere
in this chapter for a violation of such nature and, in case of a violation for
which no specific penalty is set forth in the law or elsewhere in this chapter,
to a fine of not more than $25 together with costs of prosecution.
§ 576-105. Experimental regulations.
The City Council may, from time to time by resolution, designate places upon
and along the highways in the City where, for a period of not more than 90
days, specific traffic and/or parking regulations, prohibitions and
restrictions shall be in force and effect, and shall designate such locations
by proper signs and markings. Such regulations, prohibitions and restrictions
shall be effective as if they had been specified in this chapter. No person
shall operate and no person shall move, remove, destroy or deface any sign or
marking erected, posted or made by authority of this section. Any person who
shall violate any provision of this section shall, upon conviction thereof, be
subject to the penalty set forth in the law or elsewhere in this chapter for a
violation of such nature and, in case of a violation for which no specific
penalty is set forth in the law or elsewhere in this chapter, to a fine of not
more than $25 together with costs of prosecution; provided, the purpose of this
section is to allow for test and experimental determination of the feasibility
and desirability of permanent changes in the ordinances of the City relative to
traffic and parking.
§ 576-106. Restrictions during construction, maintenance or special events.
   A.   The City Council shall have authority to close any street or specific
part of a street to vehicular traffic and to place barriers or station police
officers at each end of the closed portion while construction or maintenance
work is underway or a special event is being conducted on the closed portion.
It shall be unlawful for any person to drive a vehicle upon any such closed
portion.
   B.   The City Council shall have authority to establish a restricted traffic
area upon any street where construction or maintenance work is underway and to
station flagmen at each end of the restricted portion. It shall be unlawful for
any person to drive a vehicle upon any such restricted traffic area at any time
when the flagman is displaying a sign directing that vehicle to stop, or is
signaling that vehicle, by a flag or other device, not to proceed.
   C.   Any person who violates any provision of this section shall, upon
conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of $25 and costs.
§ 576-107. Use of streets by processions and assemblages.
   A.   For the purpose of this section, the words "assemblage" and
"procession" shall have the following meanings:
   ASSEMBLAGE — A gathering of people without vehicles, which interferes with
the movement of pedestrian or vehicular traffic on any street.
   PROCESSION — A group of individuals, vehicles, animals and/or objects moving
along a street in a way that interferes with the normal movement of traffic. A
procession shall not include a funeral caravan or military convoy.
   B.   It shall be unlawful for any person to hold or participate in any
assemblage unless the person organizing or conducting the assemblage first
obtains a permit from the Chief of Police or his designee, which shall be
issued without fee. Application for the permit shall be made at least one week
in advance of the day on which the assemblage is proposed to be held, but in
any case where a state-designated highway is proposed to be used, application
shall be made at least three weeks in advance of the proposed date. The permit
shall state the place where and the date when the assemblage is to be held, the
hour when the assemblage may convene and the hour by which it shall have been
completely dispersed. It shall be unlawful for any person to hold or to
participate in any assemblage unless the permit has been granted, or at any
time or place other than that authorized by the permit.
   C.   It shall be unlawful for any person to hold or participate in any
procession unless the person organizing or conducting the procession first
obtains a permit from the Chief of Police or his designee, which shall be
issued without fee. Application for the permit shall be made at least two weeks
in advance of the day when the procession is proposed to be held, but in any
case where the state-designated highway is proposed to be used, application
shall be made at least three weeks in advance of the proposed date. The permit
shall specify the date on which the procession is to be held, the route to be
followed by the procession, the hour when and place where participants may
commence to assemble and form before the procession is under way, the time when
the procession may commence to move along its route, and the time by which the
end of the procession shall have been disbanded. It shall be unlawful for any
person to hold or to participate in any procession unless the permit shall have
been granted, or under any conditions as to time or route or otherwise than
those stated in the permit.
   D.   Any person who violates any provision of this section shall, upon
conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of $25 and costs.
§ 576-108. Authority of police officers.
The police officers of the City are hereby authorized to direct traffic on the
highways of the City and at intersections thereof and to otherwise enforce the
provisions of this chapter.
§ 576-109. Authorization for use of speed timing devices.
   A.   The Police Department is hereby authorized to use all speed timing
devices for the determination of speed of a motor vehicle as are approved or
will be approved by the Department of Transportation of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania, in accordance with 75 Pa.C.S.A. § 3368.
   B.   This section authorizes the use of said devices upon all highways
within the City be they City, county or state highways, and does also hereby
elect to exercise all powers granted to "local authorities" under the Vehicle
Code of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, 75 Pa.C.S.A. § 6101 et seq., as
hereafter amended, supplemented, modified or reenacted by the General Assembly
of Pennsylvania.
Part 2
Traffic
A   Regulations
§ 576-201. Maximum speed limits established on certain streets.
[Amended 7-26-2010 by Ord. No. 46-2010]
   A.   Maximum speed limits are established on portions of specified streets,
as follows, and it shall be unlawful for any person to drive a vehicle on any
part of a street where a maximum speed limit applies at a higher speed than the
maximum prescribed for that part of the street:
 
Street            Between       Maximum Speed Limit (mph)
Schuylkill Avenue Entire length 25
 
   B.   Any person who violates any provision of this section shall, upon
conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of $35 and costs. Any person exceeding
the maximum speed limit by more than five miles per hour shall pay an
additional fine of $2 per mile for each mile in excess of five miles per hour
over the maximum speed limit.
§ 576-202. Maximum speed limits established on certain bridges and elevated
structures.
   A.   Maximum speed limits are established, as follows, on certain bridges
and elevated structures, and it shall be unlawful for any person to drive a
vehicle on any such bridge or elevated structure at a higher speed than the
maximum prescribed for that bridge or elevated structure:
 
Bridge or Elevated Structure Location Maximum Speed Limit
(Reserved)
 
   B.   Any person who violates any provision of this section shall, upon
conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of $35 and costs. Any person exceeding
the maximum speed limit by more than five miles per hour shall pay an
additional fine of $2 per mile for each mile in excess of five miles per hour
over the maximum speed limit.
§ 576-203. Maximum speed limits established for certain vehicles on hazardous
grades.
   A.   The following are declared to be hazardous grades and, upon any such
hazardous grade, no person shall drive a vehicle having a gross weight in
excess of that referred to for that grade, in the direction stated for that
grade, at a speed in excess of that established in this section for that grade
and, if so stated for a particular grade, the driver of every such vehicle
shall stop the vehicle before proceeding downhill:
 
                   Direction of Maximum Gross Maximum Speed Required to Stop
Street     Between Travel       Weight        Limit         Before Proceeding
                                                            Downhill
(Reserved)
 
   B.   Any person who violates any provision of this section shall, upon
conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of $35 and costs. Any person exceeding
the maximum speed limit by more than five miles per hour shall pay an
additional fine of $2 for each mile in excess of five miles per hour over the
maximum speed limit.
§ 576-204. Maximum speed limits established in parks.
   A.   A speed limit of 15 miles per hour is established on all streets and
roadways in the public parks maintained and operated by the City, except in the
following locations, where the lower maximums, as specified, shall apply:
 
Park       Street Location Maximum Speed Limit
(Reserved)
 
   B.   Any person who violates any provision of this section shall, upon
conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of $35 and costs. Any person exceeding
the maximum speed limit by more than five miles per hour shall pay an
additional fine of $2 per mile for each mile in excess of five miles per hour
over the maximum speed limit.
§ 576-205. Traffic signals at certain locations.
   A.   At the following locations, traffic signals as indicated below shall be
erected (or are ratified if previously erected), and traffic at those locations
shall be directed by those signals:
 
Location   Type of Signal
(Reserved)
 
   B.   Any driver of a vehicle who disobeys the directions of any traffic
signal shall, upon conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of $25 and costs.
§ 576-206. Intersections where turn prohibited on red signal.
   A.   The following are established as intersections where drivers of
vehicles headed in the direction or directions indicated are prohibited from
making a right turn (or a left turn from a one-way street into another one-way
street) on a steady red signal:
 
Intersection Vehicles Traveling On Facing
(Reserved)
 
   B.   Any driver of a vehicle who violates any provision of this section
shall, upon conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of $25 and costs.
§ 576-207. One-way roadways established.
[Amended 10-23-2006 by Ord. No. 67-2006; 6-25-2007 by Ord. No. 52-2007; 6-25-
2007 by Ord. No. 53-2007; 1-14-2008 by Ord. No. 1-2008; 7-26-2010 by Ord. No.
45-2010; 6-26-2023 by Ord. No. 56-2023; 8-14-2023 by Ord. No. 72-2023]
   A.   The following are established as one-way roadways, and it shall be
unlawful for any person to drive a vehicle on any one-way street other than in
the direction established for traffic on that street:
 
Street                 From               To                Direction of Travel
East Wyomissing        Lancaster Avenue   Brookline Street  Northbound
Boulevard
Klein Avenue [Added 2-
14-2011 by Ord. No. 5- Seventeenth Street Eighteenth Street Eastbound
2011]
South Fourteenth       Perkiomen Avenue   Muhlenberg Street Southbound
Street
Eberhart Street        River Road         West Windsor      Southbound
North 12th Street      Bern Street        Exeter Street     Southbound
 
   B.   Any person who violates any provision of this section shall, upon
conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of $25 and costs.
§ 576-208. Turning at certain intersections prohibited or restricted.
   A.   It shall be unlawful for the driver of any vehicle of the type
indicated traveling upon the first-named street at any of the following
intersections, in the direction or directions indicated in each case, to make a
left turn and/or a right turn into the second-named street, as indicated, at
any time when such a turn is prohibited by this section:
 
Vehicles Traveling Direction of Not to Make Turn Into When Type of Vehicle
On                 Travel                                  Applicable To
(Reserved)                                              
 
   B.   Any person who violates any provision of this section shall, upon
conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of $25 and costs.
§ 576-209. Right turns only permitted at certain intersections.
[Amended 6-26-2023 by Ord. No. 56-2023]
   A.   It shall be unlawful for the driver of any vehicle traveling upon the
first-named street at any of the following intersections, in the direction or
directions indicated in each case, to make other than a right turn, at any time
stated, both left turns and straight-across traffic being prohibited:
 
Vehicles Traveling On Direction of Travel Times Not To Make Left Turn Into or
                                                Travel Straight Across
Eberhart Street       Southbound          All   No left turn at West Windsor
                                                Street
 
   B.   Any person who violates any provision of this section shall, upon
conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of $25 and costs.
§ 576-210. U-turns prohibited at certain locations.
   A.   It shall be unlawful for the driver of any vehicle traveling upon any
of the following portions of streets, in the direction or directions indicated
for that street, to make a U-turn:
 
Street     Portion Direction of Travel
(Reserved)
 
   B.   Any person who violates any provision of this section shall, upon
conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of $25 and costs.
§ 576-211. No-passing zones established.
   A.   The following are established as no-passing zones, and it shall be
unlawful for the driver of any vehicle to overtake or pass another vehicle or
to drive on the left side of the roadway in any no passing zone:
 
Street     Direction of Travel Between
(Reserved)
 
   B.   Any person who violates any provision of this section shall, upon
conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of $25 and costs.
§ 576-212. Through highways established.
   A.   The following highways are established as through highways, thus
authorizing stop or yield signs to be erected facing traffic approaching every
intersection with the through highway except for those intersections with
traffic signals, or with exceptions or modifications as indicated below. Every
driver of a vehicle approaching a stop or yield sign authorized by this section
shall stop the vehicle or yield right-of-way as required by § 3323(b) or (c) of
the Vehicle Code, 75 Pa.C.S.A. § 3323(b) or (c), as the case may be, and shall
not proceed into or across the through highway until he has followed all
applicable requirements of that section of the law:
 
Highway    Between
(Reserved)
 
   B.   Any person who violates any provision of this section shall, upon
conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of $25 and costs.
§ 576-213. Stop intersections established.
[Amended 7-26-2010 by Ord. No. 33-2010]
   A.   The following intersections (in addition to intersections with the
through highways established by §
576-212) are established as stop intersections, and official stop signs shall
be erected (or are ratified if previously erected) in such a position as to
face traffic approaching the second-named street (the intersecting or through
street) on the first-named street (the stop street) in the direction or
directions indicated for that intersection. Every driver of a vehicle
approaching the intersection on the first-named or stop street, in the
direction indicated in each case, shall stop the vehicle as required by § 3323
(b) of the Vehicle Code, 75 Pa.C.S.A. § 3323(b), and shall not proceed into or
across the second- named or intersecting or through street until he has
followed all applicable requirements of that section of the law.
Stop Street Intersecting or Through Street Direction of Travel
Stop Street                   Intersecting or Through Direction of Travel
                              Street
Buttonwood Street [Added 3-   Second Street           All-way
14-2022 by Ord. No. 23-2022]
Crestmont Street
[Added 7-28-2014 by Ord. No.  Fern Avenue             Four-way
50-2014]
Greenwich Street
[Added 7-28-2014 by Ord. No.  North Second Street     Four-way
51-2014]
McKnight Street
[Added 7-28-2014 by Ord. No.  West Windsor Street     Four-way
105-2014]
North Fourth Street
[Added 1-23-2012 by Ord. No.  Oley Street             Four-way
4-2012]
North Thirteenth Street       Greenwich Street        Four-way
North Thirteenth Street
[Added 4-11-2011 by Ord. No.  Elm Street              Four-way
18-2011]
North Thirteenth Street
[Added 3-14-2022 by Ord. No.  Perry Street            All-way
24-2022]
North Thirteenth Street
[Added 5-9-2022 by Ord. No.   Pike Street             All-way
38-2022]
North Thirteenth Street
[Added 6-27-2011 by Ord. No.  Richmond Street         Four-way
31-2011]
North Twelfth Street [Added
8-14-2023 by Ord. No. 72-     Bern Street             Three-way
2023]
North Twelfth Street
[Added 9-10-2012 by Ord. No.  Walnut Street           Three-way
89-2012]
St. Bernardine Street
[Added 3-12-2012 by Ord. No.  Greenway Terrace        Four-way
25-2012]
West Green Street
[Added 7-28-2014 by Ord. No.  McKnight Street         Three-way
52-2014]
West Green Street
[Added 7-28-2014 by Ord. No.  Weiser Street           Three-way
53-2014]
West Greenwich Street
[Added 12-22-2014 by Ord. No. Tulpehocken Street      Four-way
106-2014]
 
   B.   Any person who violates any provision of this section shall, upon
conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of $25 and costs.
§ 576-214. Yield intersections established.
   A.   The following intersections (in addition to intersections with the
through highways established by §
576-212) are established as yield intersections, and official yield signs shall
be erected (or are ratified if previously erected) in such a position as to
face traffic approaching the second-named street (the through street) on the
first-named street (the yield street) in the direction or directions indicated
for that intersection. Every driver of a vehicle approaching the intersection
on the first-named or yield street, in the direction indicated in each case,
shall slow down or stop the vehicle as required by § 3323(c) of the Vehicle
Code, 75 Pa.C.S.A. § 3323(c), and then yield the right-of-way as required by
that subsection of the Vehicle Code.
 
Yield Street Through Street Direction of Travel
(Reserved)
 
   B.   Any person who violates any provision of this section shall, upon
conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of $25 and costs.
§ 576-215. Operation of motor vehicles restricted on public lands.
   A.   No motor vehicle including a motorcycle, pedalcycle or minibike shall
be operated on any property owned by the City or any other public agency or
instrumentality within the City without the permission of the property owner
and a permit from the Chief of Police or his designee of the City.
   B.   Any person who violates an provision of this section shall, upon
conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of $25 and costs.
§ 576-216. Rotary traffic islands established.
   A.   The following locations are designated as rotary traffic islands, and
every vehicle passing around a rotary traffic island shall be driven only to
the right of the island:
 
Location
(Reserved)
 
   B.   Any person who drives a vehicle otherwise than to the right of any
rotary traffic island shall be guilty of a violation of this section and, upon
conviction, shall be sentenced to pay a fine of $25 and costs.
§ 576-217. Play highways established and authorized.
   A.   The following areas upon the streets in the City are established as
play highways:
 
Street     Between Days Hours
(Reserved)
 
   B.   The Chief of Police or his designee is authorized to designate as play
highways, whenever he deems that action advisable and for whatever period of
time directed by him, any part of any street in the City where sledding and
coasting shall be permitted. That play highway shall be set apart for the
purpose under the direction of the Chief of Police or his designee.
   C.   No person shall drive any motor vehicle upon any play highway at any
time when that street shall be designated as a play highway, except in case of
emergency, with special permission of the Chief of Police or his designee or of
the police officer in charge, who shall first clear that play highway of all
persons using it for the purpose for which it was set aside. Any person who
violates any provision of this subsection shall, upon conviction, be sentenced
to pay a fine of $25 and costs.
§ 576-218. Snowmobile roads designated.
   A.   The following roads and streets within the City are designated as
special snowmobile roads:
 
Street or Road Between Used by Snowmobiles Only When Shared With Vehicular
                       Closed to Vehicular Traffic?  Traffic?
(Reserved)
 
   B.   It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a snowmobile on any
highway, street or road in the City other than as provided above. Provided,
nothing in this section shall prohibit any person from operating a snowmobile
on any other street in the City:
      (1)   As authorized by § 7721 of the Vehicle Code, 75 Pa.C.S.A. § 7721,
for emergency and bridge crossings and for direct crossing of streets or two-
lane highways.
      (2)   For special snowmobile events where authorized in advance and the
street is blocked off as provided in § 7723 of the Vehicle Code, 75 Pa.C.S.A. §
7723. Any person who violates any provision of this section shall be subject to
the penalties prescribed in § 7752(a) of the Vehicle Code, 75 Pa.C.S.A. § 7752
(a).
§ 576-219. Two-way traffic pattern established. [Added 5-27-2003 by Ord. No.
20-2003]
   A.   Two-way traffic pattern established for Schuylkill Avenue between the
intersection of West Green Street and West Greenwich Street.
      (1)   All motor vehicle traffic on Schuylkill Avenue between the
intersection of West Green Street and West Greenwich Street shall be limited
and restricted to two-way traffic, which two-way traffic shall allow for motor
vehicles traveling in a northerly and southerly direction on Schuykill Avenue
between the intersection of West Green Street and West Greenwich Street.
   B.   Division Street between Buttonwood Street and Schiller Street is hereby
changed to two- way traffic from one-way southbound. [Added 1-23-2012 by Ord.
No. 5-2012]
   C.   Two-way traffic on North Twelfth Street between Walnut Street and Elm
Street is established. [Added 9-10-2012 by Ord. No. 90-9012]
   D.   Two-way traffic on Walnut Street between North Twelfth Street and
(vacated) Birch Street is established. [Added 9-10-2012 by Ord. No. 91-9012]
Part 3
Size, Weight And Type Of Vehicle And Load
A   Restrictions
§ 576-301. Vehicle weight limits established on certain streets and bridges.
   A.   On the following bridges and streets or parts of streets, by authority
granted by § 4902(a) of the Vehicle Code, 75 Pa.C.S.A. § 4902(a), it shall be
unlawful for any person or persons to drive any vehicle or combination having a
gross weight in excess of the maximum prescribed below for that bridge or
street or part of street, as the case may be:
 
Street or Bridge Between Maximum Gross Weight
(Reserved)
 
   B.   Any person who violates any provision of this section shall be
prosecuted under § 4902(a) and (g)(1) of the Vehicle Code, 75 Pa.C.S.A. § 4902
(a) and (g)(1) and, upon conviction, shall be sentenced to pay a fine of $150
plus $150 for each 500 pounds, or part thereof, in excess of 3,000 pounds over
the maximum allowable weight, and costs.
§ 576-302. Restrictions on size of vehicles on certain streets and bridges.
   A.   On the following bridges and streets or parts of streets, by authority
granted by § 4902(a) of the Vehicle Code, 75 Pa.C.S.A. § 4902(a), it shall be
unlawful for any person to drive any vehicle or combination in violation of the
size restrictions prescribed below for that bridge or street or part of street:
 
Street or Bridge Between Restrictions
(Reserved)
 
   B.   Any person who violates any provision of this section shall be
prosecuted under § 4902(a) and (g)(1) of the Vehicle Code, 75 Pa.C.S.A. § 4902
(a) and (g)(1), and, upon conviction, shall be sentenced to pay a fine of $75
and costs.
§ 576-303. Restrictions as to weight and size of vehicles on certain streets
and bridges.
   A.   By reason of hazardous traffic conditions and other safety factors, by
authority granted by § 4902(b) of the Vehicle Code, 75 Pa.C.S.A. § 4902(b), it
shall be unlawful for any person to drive any vehicle or combination in
violation of the restriction prescribed below for that bridge or street or part
of street:
 
Street or Bridge Between Restrictions
(Reserved)
 
   B.   Any person who violates any provision of this section shall be
prosecuted under § 4902(b) and (g)(2) of the Vehicle Code, 75 Pa.C.S.A. § 4902
(b) and (g)(2), and, upon conviction, shall be sentenced to pay a fine of not
more than $500 and costs. 1
1.   Editor's Note: Amended during codification (see
Ch. 1, General Provisions, Part 2).
§ 576-304. Truck traffic restricted on certain streets.
[Amended 3-27-2006 by Ord. No. 29-2006]
   A.   It shall be unlawful for any person to drive a vehicle other than a
passenger car on any of the following streets or parts of streets:
 
Street     Between
(Reserved)
 
   B.   Provided, nothing in this section shall prohibit any person from
driving an emergency vehicle on any of those streets or parts of streets, or
from driving on any of those streets or parts of streets a truck or other
commercial vehicle making local deliveries to or pickups from premises located
along that street or part of a street.
   C.   Any person who violates any provision of this section shall, upon
conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of $25 and costs.
Part 4
Stopping And Parking
A   Regulations
§ 576-401. Parking in prohibited areas.
When signs are erected lawfully giving notice thereof, no person shall park a
vehicle at any time upon any of the streets or parts of streets designated and
posted as prohibited parking areas, or by temporary regulations in conformity
with this chapter.
§ 576-402. Parking limited in designated areas.
[Amended 1-23-1974 by Res. No. 22; 10-27-2014 by Ord. No. 80-2014; 10-27-2014
by Ord. No. 81-2014; 11-10-2014 by Ord. No. 83-2014; 11-10-2014 by Ord. No. 85-
2014; 3-28-2016 by Ord. No. 15-2016; 4-11-2016 by Ord. No. 16-2016; 9-26-2016
by Ord. No. 39-2016; 1-23-2017 by Ord. No. 3-2017; 5-8-2017 by Ord. No. 40-
2017; 5-22-2017 by Ord. No. 45-2017; 8-14-2017 by Ord. No. 67-2017; 8-28-2017
by Ord. No. 82-2017; 1-22-2018 by Ord. No. 2-2018; 4-9-2018 by Ord. No. 18-
2018; 6-28-2021 by Ord. No. 48-2021; 7-26-2021 by Ord. No. 57-2021; 4-24-2023
by Ord. No. 27-2023; 3-13-2023 by Ord. No. 28-2023; 5-8-2023 by Ord. No. 44-
2023; 5-22-2023 by Ord. No. 49-2023; 8-14-2023 by Ord. No. 72-2023; 9-11-2023
by Ord. No. 79- 2023; 11-13-2023 by Ord. No. 100-2023; 5-28-2024 by Ord. No.
33-2024; 5-12-2025 by Ord. No. 36- 2025]
When signs are erected lawfully giving notice thereof, no person shall park
vehicle longer than the time permitted upon any streets or parts of streets
designated and posted as limited parking areas, or by temporary regulations in
conformity with this chapter.
Miscellaneous Parking
Street Description
Miscellaneous Parking
Street          Description
Avenues A & B:  on-street parking shall be permitted on both sides of the
                street
Bern Street*    no parking for a distance of 44 feet, across from the entrance
                to 1007 Bern Street
                parallel parking on the west side of Brookline Plaza shall
Brookline Plaza remain in place and the same; however, angled parking shall now
                be permitted on the east side of Brookline Plaza in place of
                the parallel parking that currently exists
Cherry*         500 block between South 5th and South 6th Street
Chestnut        no parking on the south side adjacent to the west side of the
Street*         driveway for Remcon Plastics at 208 Chestnut Street
Chestnut        no parking in the 200 block across from Remocon Plastics, Inc.
Street*
                no parking on both sides near the driveway entrance for
Clarion Street* Mountanview Mechanical, Inc. at 1250 Clarion Street, except
                between 5:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. Monday through Friday, and on
                Saturday and Sunday at 1201 to 1225 Clarion Street
                no parking along the north side adjacent to the UGI property
Eberly Street*  between parking lot driveway entrances for a distance of
                approximately 90 feet
Grape Street    on-street parking shall be permitted on the south side of the
                street in the 200 block
                limited no parking zone on the north side of Green Street
Green Street    between North 13th Street and Linden Street from 7:30 a.m. to
                4:00 p.m. only on days when school is in session at 13th and
                Green Elementary School
Gregg Avenue*   no parking on the east side adjacent to the driveways at 606
                and 618 Gregg Avenue for approximately 130 feet
Lackawanna      no parking near the two driveway entrances for the proposed
Street*         Holy Trinity Church of God
Morgantown      no parking at 290 Morgantown Road, presently known as Mimmo’s
Road*           Restaurant
North 2nd       no parking on both sides between Washington Street and Penn
Street*         Street except for 8 parking spaces along the east side of North
                2nd Street between Court Street and Penn Street
North 4th       000 block between Washington Street and Penn Street
Street*
North 5th       no parking near the intersections with Woodward, Douglass and
Street*         Oley Streets
North 6th       000 block between Washington Street and Penn Street
Street*
North 8th       on-street parking shall be permitted on both sides of the
Street          street in the 200 block and 300 block
North 9th       no parking in the 1000 block on the eastern side to accommodate
Street          the proposed driveway for McDonalds Corporation
North 9th       no parking on both sides in the 1100 and 1200 blocks
Street*
North 12th      no on-street tractor-trailer parking along North 12th Street
Street          from its intersection with Richmond Street to its intersection
                with Bern Street
North 12th      on-street, pull-in angle parking in designated spaces permitted
Street          from its intersection with Bern Street to its intersection with
                Exexter Street, on the Shirk Stadium side of the street
North 13th      no parking at the intersection with Rockland Street on the east
Street*         side beginning at the traffic signal pole on the north bound
                traffic lane and continuing south for approximately 160 feet
Perkiomen       no parking for a distance of approximately 20 feet, adjacent to
Avenue*         1426 Perkiomen Avenue
Reed Street*    no parking on the east side at the intersection of Buttonwood
                Street and Reed Street for approximately 28 feet
                on-street, parallel parking with a bike lane shall be permitted
Riverfront      on
Drive           both sides of the street beginning at S. 2nd Street and
                continuing to S. 4th Street
                no parking along both sides between the Pagoda and the City
Skyline Drive*  limits to the north for approximately 3,500 feet, between the
                hours of 11:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m.
                on-street, parallel parking with a bike lane shall be permitted
South 2nd       on both
Street          sides of the street beginning at Franklin Street and continuing
                to Riverfront Drive
South 4th       000 block between Penn Street and Franklin Street
Street*
South 5th       no parking on the southwest side of the intersection of South
Street*         5th Street and Franklin Street, a length of approximately one
                parking space
South 9th       no parking at 118 South 9th Street, presently known as Jet Set
Street*         Restaurant, LLC
Washington      no parking on north side from Fourth Street to Reed Street
Street*
Washington      no parking on both sides of the 200 block
Street*
*   Editor's Note: these locations were approved by Council ordinance with this
section number mistakenly omitted.
§ 576-403. Parking prohibited in specific areas.
[Amended 1-14-2008 by Ord. No. 1-2008; 8-23-2010 by Ord. No. 61-2010; 9-26-2022
by Ord. No. 113-2022; 10-10-2022 by Ord. No. 119- 2022; 6-26-2023 by Ord. No.
53-2023]
Except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or to protect the
safety of any person or in compliance with law or the direction of a police
officer or other traffic control device, no person shall:
   A.   Stop, stand or park a vehicle:
      (1)   In a lane of traffic.
      (2)   On a sidewalk.
      (3)   Within an intersection.
      (4)   On a crosswalk.
      (5)   Between a safety zone and the adjacent curb within 30 feet of
points on the curb immediately opposite the ends of a safety zone, unless a
different length is indicated by official traffic control devices.
      (6)   Alongside or opposite any street excavation or obstruction when
stopping, standing or parking would obstruct traffic.
      (7)   Upon any bridge or other elevated structure upon a highway or
within a highway tunnel.
      (8)   On any railroad tracks.
      (9)   In the area between roadways of a divided highway, including
crossovers.
      (10)   At any place where official signs prohibit stopping.
      (11)   All nonemergency vehicles along East Wyomissing Boulevard between/
from Lancaster Avenue and/to Brookline Avenue.
   B.   Stand or park a vehicle:
      (1)   In front of a public driveway or in front of a private driveway
upon complaint received.
      (2)   Within 7 feet of a fire hydrant.
      (3)   Within 20 feet of a crosswalk.
      (4)   Within 30 feet of upon the approach to any flashing signal, stop
sign, yield sign or traffic control signal located at the side of a roadway.
      (5)   Within 20 feet of the driveway entrance to any fire station or when
properly sign posted, on the opposite side of a street opposite the entrance to
any fire station within 75 feet of the entrance.
      (6)   Where the vehicle would prevent the free movement of a streetcar,
municipal bus or other means of public transportation.
      (7)   On limited-access highways unless authorized by official traffic
control devices.
      (8)   At any place where official signs prohibit standing.
      (9)   At a yellow curb.
   C.   Park a vehicle:
      (1)   Within 50 feet of the nearest rail or railroad crossing.
      (2)   At any place where official signs prohibited parking.
      (3)   In an alley less than 18 feet wide.
   D.   Park outside the center of lines designating a parking space, with such
designated parking locations to be determined from time to time by Resolution
of the City Council, but shall be located within a single marked space. No
vehicle shall be permitted to occupy more than one parking space at any time.
§ 576-404. Blocking garage and rear yard parking area entrance.
[Amended 3-22-2021 by Ord. No. 26-2021]
No person other than the owner or occupant of the garage shall park a vehicle
at any time in front of, opposite to or in such a position as to block entrance
to or exit by a vehicle from a garage and a rear yard parking area, unless
parking in front of the owners garage by the owner/occupant limits access to
other garages or rear yard parking areas.
§ 576-405. Greasing or repair work.
No vehicle shall stand on any street or sidewalk for the purpose of greasing or
repair except in case of emergency repairs.
§ 576-406. (Reserved)2
2.   Editor's Note: Original § 15-406 was repealed 11-14-2005 by Ord. No. 75-
2005.
§ 576-407. Storage of vehicles on streets.
[Amended 2-12-2007 by Ord. No. 14-2007; 9-10-2007 by Ord. No. 68-20073; 12-19-
2016 by Ord. No. 68-2016; and 3-22-2021 by Ord. No. 26-2021]
A.   No vehicle shall be stored upon any street. As used herein, “stored” shall
mean:
   (1)   The parking of a vehicle in one place upon any street continuously for
over 72 hours.
   (2)   The parking of an All-Terrain Vehicle or “ATV” on the sidewalk
abutting his or her house or abutting any premises where the vehicle is in a
licensed trailer or other safe carrier, or manual transport for the purposes of
lawfully conveying the vehicle for an agricultural use, to support a licensed
commercial business operation, or a location outside the City within 24 hours
of notice.
3.   Editor's Note: Amended during codification (see
Ch. 1, General Provisions, Part 2).
§ 576-408. Parking of inoperable or illegally registered vehicles.
[Amended 2-12-2007 by Ord. No. 14-2007; 9-10-2007 by Ord. No. 68-2007]
   A.   No person shall park or leave on the streets, highways or public
property of the City any vehicle without current valid registration plates.
   B.   No person shall park or leave on the streets, highways or public
property of the City any vehicle without a current inspection sticker unless
the vehicle is legally parked in front of, or in close proximity to, an
official state inspection station which identifies said vehicle by work order
specifying a state inspection will be performed within 24 hours. Additional
work orders beyond the initial twenty-four-hour period are prohibited.
   C.   No person shall park or leave on the streets, highways or public
property of the City any vehicle deemed mechanically inoperable.
§ 576-409. Parking prohibited on private property.
[Amended 2-12-2007 by Ord. No. 14-2007; 9-10-2007 by Ord. No. 68-2007; 5-9-2022
by Ord. No. 43-2022]
   A.   No person shall park or leave unattended a vehicle on private property
without consent of the owner or the other person in control or possession of
the property, except in case of emergency or disablement of the vehicle, in
which case the operator, within 24 hours, must show proof of the emergency or
disablement and removal of the vehicle from the private property. See §
576-803.
   B.   The provisions of this section shall not apply to private parking lots
unless such lots are posted to notify the public of any parking restrictions
and the operator of the vehicles violates such posted restrictions. For the
purpose of this section, a "private parking lot," means a parking lot open to
the public or used for parking without charge; or a parking lot used for
parking with a charge. The City hereby adopts the regulations promulgated by
the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation which defines posting for public
notice pursuant to 75 Pa.C.S.A. § 3353(b) and any amended or successor statute
(s).
§ 576-410. Parking prohibited at handicapped areas.
[Amended 2-12-2007 by Ord. No. 14-2007; 9-10-2007 by Ord. No. 68-2007]
   A.   No person shall park or leave unattended a vehicle at any place
specifically reserved for handicapped parking, unless the parked vehicle has a
state-issued plate or placard (displayed conspicuous manner) for a handicapped
person or severely disabled veteran and is being used in the immediate service
of a handicapped person or severely disabled veteran.
   B.   For the purpose of this section, a reserved handicapped parking place
must be indicated by a PennDOT approved sign with universally accepted
handicapped symbols. Each sign must indicate that the state-issued placard or
plate must be displayed at all times while parking in the space.
§ 576-411. Parking, stopping, standing or drifting prohibited in a loading zone
or timed zone.
[Amended 2-12-2007 by Ord. No. 14-2007; 9-10-2007 by Ord. No. 68-2007; 10-22-
2007 by Ord. No. 74-2007; 1-11-2021 by Ord. No. 101-2020]
   A.   No person shall allow a vehicle to be parked, stopped or standing in
the following ways:
      (1)   For more than the time designated in any marked loading zone or
timed zone.
      (2)   Without loading activity in any marked loading zone.
   B.   No person shall drift a vehicle to conceal an officer’s chalk mark
within a loading zone or a timed zone.
   C.   Commercial loading zones shall be established to provide retail
businesses with areas for commercial vehicles to conduct loading and unloading
activities (such as trucks that deliver or pick up beverages, food supplies,
large merchandise, etc.). It shall be unlawful for any vehicle other than a
commercial vehicle to occupy any commercial loading zone during the hours
applicable to any such zones.
      (1)   A commercial vehicle shall include all motor vehicles, with a gross
vehicle weight (GVW) of 10,000 pounds or more that are used for the
transportation of goods, wares or merchandise. Passenger vehicles having a
truck license or registration shall not qualify as a commercial vehicle.
   D.   Use of loading zones within the parking zones identified in § 576-502
shall be charged at the parking meter rates set forth in the City Fee Schedule
located in 212-144.
§ 576-412. (Reserved) 4
4.   Editor's Note: Original § 15-412, as amended, was repealed 9-10-2007 by
Ord. No. 68-2007.
§ 576-413. (Reserved) 5
5.   Editor's Note: Original § 15-413, as amended, was repealed 9-10-2007 by
Ord. No. 68-2007.
§ 576-414. Nonpayment of daily parking fee notice.
[Amended 2-12-2007 by Ord. No. 14-2007; 9-10-2007 by Ord. No. 68-2007]
Any vehicle parked in a municipal garage having been properly served with a
daily parking fee notice shall enclose the appropriate dollar amount due along
with the time stamped entry ticket in the envelope provided. Failure to return
the daily parking fee notice to the Reading Parking Authority, with the
appropriate payment amount included, within 72 hours after issuance shall be
deemed a violation of this Part.
§ 576-415. Parking violations subject to immediate towing.
[Amended 3-1-2005 by Ord. No. 9-2005; 2-12-2007 by Ord. No. 14-2007; 9-10-2007
by Ord. No. 68-2007]
Any motor vehicle or conveyance in violation of the parking ordinances
enumerated below shall be subject to immediate towing and storage:
   A.   Parking in prohibited areas (§
576-401).
   B.   Parking prohibited in specific areas (§
576-403). All violators shall be subjected to §
576-416.
   C.   Storage of vehicles on street (§
576-407).
   D.   Illegally registered, uninspected or inoperable vehicles (§
576-408).
   E.   Parking prohibited on private property (§
576-409).
   F.   Parking prohibited at handicapped areas (§
576-410).
§ 576-416. Notice of violation; waiver.
[Amended 10-14-2002 by Ord. No. 52-2002; 5-27-2003 by Ord. No. 16-2003; 8-9-
2004 by Ord. No. 37-2004; 9-25-2006 by Ord. No. 60-2006; 2-12-2007 by Ord. No.
14-2007; 9-10-2007 by Ord. No. 68-2007; 11-10-2008 by Ord. No. 72-2008; 11-22-
2010 by Ord. No. 97-2010; 11-25-2016 by Ord. No. 63-2016; 1-25-2021 by Ord. No.
102-2020; 2-8-2021 by Ord. No. 5-2021; 10-10-2022 by Ord. No. 119-2022; 3-13-
2023 by Ord. No. 30-2023; 6-26-2023 by Ord. No. 53-2023; 9-11-2023 by Ord. No.
82-2023]
   A.   Notice that a motor vehicle/conveyance is parked in violation of any
parking restriction or parking regulation, either in this Part or as otherwise
provided by law shall be provided. The notice shall indicate:
      (1)   The dollar amount of the penalty charged;
      (2)   That the penalty shall be paid to the Reading Parking Authority
within 240 hours from the time of the violation;
      (3)    The place where the penalty shall be paid; and
      (4)   The manner of payment.
   The Reading Chief of Police shall have the discretion and authority to void
any parking ticket issued by the Reading Parking Authority and the Reading
Police Department. The Reading Police Department shall provide notice to the
Reading Authority stating when parking tickets are voided and documenting the
circumstances under which the ticket was voided. the authority fo the Reading
Police Chief to void tickets under this provision shall in no way usurp the
appeal process of the Reading Parking Authority.
   B.   All parking penalties shall be paid no later than 30 days after the
date of the violation.
   C.   The following penalties shall be charged to the owner or operator of a
vehicle for a violation of these enumerated sections:
Code Violation Penalty 10 Day Penalty 30 Day Penalty
Code          Violation                   Penalty 10 Day Penalty 30 Day Penalty
              48 hour parking restriction
564-105       on truck, trailer or mobile $115.00 $57.50         $57.50
              home
564-105A.     Trucks, trailers, tractors  $125.00 $62.50         $62.50
              over one hour
576-402       Posted limited time parking $35.00  $17.50         $17.50
576-402-10m   10 minute                   $35.00  $17.50         $17.50
576-402-15m   15 minute                   $35.00  $17.50         $17.50
576-402-1h    1 hour                      $35.00  $17.50         $17.50
576-402-20m   20 minute                   $35.00  $17.50         $17.50
576-402-2h    2 hour                      $35.00  $17.50         $17.50
576-402-30m   30 minute                   $35.00  $17.50         $17.50
              Any person who shall violate any provision hereof shall, upon
576-403       conviction hereof, be subject to the penalty of a fine not more
              than $25.
              Parking outside stall lines
              or parking more than one
              vehicle in one space, after
576-403       the expiration of one 30-   $25.00  $12.50         $12.50
              day grace period from the
              date the stall markers were
              installed
*             No stopping, standing,      $100.00 $50.00         $50.00
576-403A.(1)  parking in traffic lane
576-403A.(10) No stopping or standing     $35.00  $17.50         $17.50
576-403A.(2)  Parked on sidewalk          $70.00  $35.00         $35.00
*             Parked within intersection  $100.00 $50.00         $50.00
576-403A.(3)
*             Parked in crosswalk         $80.00  $40.00         $40.00
576-403A.(4)
576-403A.(5)  Parked within marked safety $45.00  $22.50         $22.50
              zone
              Parked alongside
576-403A.(6)  excavation/construction     $45.00  $22.50         $22.50
              site
576-403A.(7)  Parked on bridge or         $45.00  $22.50         $22.50
              elevated roadway
576-403A.(8)  Parked on railroad tracks   $45.00  $22.50         $22.50
576-403A.(9)  Parked between roadways of  $45.00  $22.50         $22.50
              a divided highway
576-403B.(1)  Obstructing driveway issued $70.00  $35.00         $35.00
              on complaint
*             Within 7 feet of fire       $200.00 $50.00         $50.00
576-403B.(2)  hydrant
*             Parked within 20 feet of a
576-403B.(3)  crosswalk at an             $100.00 $50.00         $50.00
              intersection
576-403B.(4)  Parked within 30 feet of    $45.00  $22.50         $22.50
              traffic signal
576-403B.(5)  Parked within 20 feet of or $45.00  $22.50         $22.50
              75 feet of a fire station
576-403B.(6)  Parked in bus stop          $35.00  $17.50         $17.50
576-403B.(7)  Parked on limited access    $45.00  $22.50         $22.50
              highway
576-403B.(8)  No standing                 $35.00  $17.50         $17.50
576-403B.(9)  No parking yellow curb      $35.00  $17.50         $17.50
576-403C.(1)  Parked within 50 feet of    $45.00  $22.50         $22.50
              railroad crossing
576-403C.(2)  Official signs posted no    $45.00  $22.50         $22.50
              parking
*             Parked in alley less than   $100.00 $50.00         $50.00
576-403C.(3)  18 feet wide
576-404       Parked obstructing garage   $45.00  $22.50         $22.50
              entrance
576-405       Performing greasing or      $90.00  $45.00         $45.00
              repair work
576-407       Vehicle stored on city      $70.00  $35.00         $35.00
              street/property 72 hours
576-408A.     Vehicle registration        $70.00  $35.00         $35.00
              expired or missing
576-408B.     Inspection sticker expired  $70.00  $35.00         $35.00
              or missing
576-408C.     Inoperable vehicle parked   $70.00  $35.00         $35.00
              on street
576-409       Private property issued on  $70.00  $35.00         $35.00
              complaint
576-410       Vehicle in handicapped      $200.00 $102.50        $102.50
              space no plate or placard
576-411       Parked in loading/pickup    $35.00  $17.50         $17.50
              zone
576-414       Non-payment of parking fee  $45.00  $22.50         $22.50
              notice
576-417       Signs posted resident       $45.00  $22.50         $22.50
              permit zone over time limit
*             Hazardous vehicle health    $100.00 $50.00         $50.00
576-418A.(1)  hazard
*             Hazardous vehicle fire      $100.00 $50.00         $50.00
576-418A.(2)  hazard
*             Hazardous vehicle traffic   $100.00 $50.00         $50.00
576-418A.(3)  hazard
*             Parked against flow of      $100.00 $50.00         $50.00
576-420       traffic
576-504       Parked overtime in limited  $45.00  $22.50         $22.50
              metered zone
576-509       Parked overtime at a        $45.00  $22.50         $22.50
              metered space
576-602       DAYTIME PARKING             $35.00  $17.50         $17.50
              RESTRICTIONS
576-602B.(1)  Daytime restrictions 8-12   $35.00  $17.50         $17.50
576-602B.(2)  Daytime restrictions 12-4   $35.00  $17.50         $17.50
576-603       Official signs posted no    $35.00  $17.50         $17.50
              parking (Public Works)
**            Boot fee                    $100.00 $50.00         $50.00
576-816(1)
**            Barnacle fee                $100.00 $50.00         $50.00
576-816(b)
576-908       Official signs posted snow  $60.00  $30.00         $30.00
              emergency route
*   Hazard class of violations
**   Reduction in fee
 
   D.   In all cases, failure of the owner or operator to make payment within
30 days from the date a violation notice was served shall make the owner or
operator subject to the penalties for the violation set forth in the table
above or an amount not to exceed the current allowable maximum prescribed by
law.
§ 576-417. Residential permit parking.
[Amended 11-14-2005 by Ord. No. 73-2005; 2-12-2007 by Ord. No. 14-2007; 9-10-
2007 by Ord. No. 68-2007; 11-28-2016 by Ord. No. 62-2016; 4-28-2025 by Ord. No.
32-2025]
   A.   Purpose. The City Council of the City of Reading considers it to be in
the interest of the citizens of the City to provide for the establishment of a
residential permit parking program in order to alleviate the hardship
experienced by residents in obtaining on-street parking space, to preserve the
residential quality of neighborhoods and to provide for improvement in air
quality. The powers and duties as contained in this section shall be performed
by the Parking Authority.
   B.   Residential permit parking program. The Parking Authority is hereby
authorized to designate, subject to approval by the City Council as herein
provided, certain streets and other public areas within the City as permit
parking areas in which resident vehicles displaying valid parking permits may
stand or be parked without limitation by parking time restrictions established
by this Part. Vehicles not displaying valid parking permits may stand or be
parked for a limited time not to exceed the time specified upon adequately
posted signs.
   C.   Designation of residential permit parking areas. A residential area
shall be considered for designation as a residential permit parking area,
provided that designation criteria established by this Part be satisfied and
that City Council, through enactment of an ordinance, authorize the posting of
appropriate signs specifying limits and period of the day for its application.
   D.   Designation criteria. A residential area shall be deemed impacted and
thereby eligible for residential permit parking provided that the following
criteria are satisfied:
      (1)   In areas zoned other than Commercial Core District, the following
criteria must be met:
         (a)   At least 50% of the street level, front footage use is
residential or non-business related.
         (b)   During any period between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m.
on weekdays except holidays, the number of vehicles parked and/or standing,
legally or illegally at on-street parking spaced, is equal to 70% or more of
the legal on-street parking capacity of the area. For purposes of this
evaluation, a legal parking space shall be 20 lineal feet.
         (c)   During the same time period as specified above, 10% or more of
the vehicles parking and/or standing on the streets in the area are not
registered in the name of a person residing within a three-block distance of
the location at which the vehicle is parked.
         (d)   On streets where there are parking meters and/or time restricted
parking in Subsection D(l)(b) and (c) are not criteria for designation.
         (e)   If the above criteria is not met at any time, the Reading
Parking Authority shall notify City Council. City Council may consider revoking
the residential parking permit status for that street through the enactment of
an ordinance, following a 30-day layover period to allow written notification
to the affected properties.
      (2)   In areas zoned Commercial Core District, the following criteria
must be met:
         (a)   At least 80% of the street level front footage abutting the
street designated must have a residential or non-business-related use.
         (b)   During any period between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m.
on weekdays except holidays, at least 80% of all occupied on-street parking
spaces are occupied by vehicles registered in the name of the person residing
within three blocks of the location at which the vehicle is parked.
         (c)   If the above criteria is not met at any time, the Reading
Parking Authority shall notify City Council. City Council may consider revoking
the residential parking permit status for that street through the enactment of
an ordinance, following a 30-day layover period to allow written notification
to the affected properties.
   E.   Designation process.
      (1)   If the area in question is not an approved residential permit
parking zone and a sufficient number of residents have requested it to be a
residential permit parking zone, then the Parking Authority will schedule and
administer a public hearing. For this hearing, every resident and property
owner of the proposed plan area shall be notified by mail. On the basis of
testimony taken, City Council shall not designate the areas as an official
residential permit parking area.
      (2)   On blocks or portions thereof within a residential parking permit
zone where parking meters and/or time-restricted parking already exists, the
Parking Authority may designate the area as a residential permit parking block.
      (3)   On blocks or portions thereof within a residential parking zone
where no parking meters and/or time restricted parking exists, the following
process is to be followed:
         (a)   A block or portion thereof may be considered as a potential
residential parking block or portion thereof upon the receipt by the Parking
Authority of verified petitions from residents of that block or portion
thereof. A separate petition must be filed for each block and in order for the
petition to be valid, it must contain the signatures of the majority of
households in that block.
         (b)   The Parking Authority shall conduct surveys of potential
residential parking areas to determine the following:
            [1]   The number of legal on-street spaces occupied by parked
vehicles during an average weekday on each block in the area.
            [2]   The number of legal on-street spaces occupied by parked
vehicles during an average weekday on each block in the area. Two surveys will
be made on different days of the week and at different times of the day. One
observation will be made in the early part of the day.
            [3]   The number of parked vehicles in the areas which are
registered to addresses of persons who do not live in the area.
         (c)   If all designation criteria for a particular block has been
satisfied, the Parking Authority shall direct the Division of Traffic
Engineering to erect, or cause to be erected, signs on the designated block
indicating that parking beyond the stipulated hours is by permit only. This
restriction shall be considered a temporary traffic regulation subject to
approval by City Council.
   F.   Issuance of parking permits. The following City Council approval of the
designation of a residential permit parking area, the Parking Authority may
issue appropriate permits and shall cause parking signs to be erected in the
areas indicating the times and conditions under which parking should be
allowed. A permit shall be issued upon application and payment of the
applicable fee, only to the owner or operator of a motor vehicle who resides in
appropriate residential permit parking area. A separate permit shall be
required for each motor vehicle. Commercial vehicles are not eligible for
permits. Eligibility for a permit shall be as follows:
      (1)   Residents. The resident must prove residency and vehicle ownership
or evidence of having a leased or company owned vehicle. The Parking Authority
shall establish criteria for proof of residence. A separate application shall
be required for each vehicle and each application shall be accompanied by
permit fee.
      (2)   Visitors. Special permits may be issued to visitors for a period of
time not to exceed 14 days. No resident of a residential permit parking area
shall be issued more than two visitor permits at any time.
      (3)   Residents living in the Commercial Core District have the option of
purchasing a permit to park in an adjacent designated area.
   G.   Display of permit. Permits shall be displayed from the front windshield
rearview mirror so as to be readily visible to enforcement personnel.
   H.   Permit parking exemption. A resident vehicle on which is displayed a
valid parking permit as provided for herein shall be permitted to stand or be
parked in the residential permit area for which the permit has been issued
without being limited by time restrictions or meter requirements established
pursuant to this section. However, said resident's vehicle shall not be exempt
from parking restrictions or prohibitions established pursuant to authority
other than this section including Part 4 of this chapter, as well as loading
zones, time parking zones, handicapped zones and other special parking
restrictions. All other motor vehicles parked within a residential parking area
shall be subject to the time restrictions and meter requirements adopted as
provided in this section as well as the penalties provided for herein.
   I.   Application for and duration of permit.
      (1)   A residential parking permit shall be issued on the basis of one
permit per vehicle registered to an address in the approved block, up to a
maximum of four vehicles per household.
      (2)   The application for residential parking permit shall contain the
following information:
         (a)   The name and residential address of the owner of the vehicle.
         (b)   The name, residential address and driver's license number of the
principal operator of the vehicle.
         (c)   The make, model and registration number of the vehicle.
         (d)   The signature of the application for the residential parking
permit.
      (3)   The permit(s) shall be valid for a period of 12 months from the
date of issuance. It shall be the responsibility of the applicant to ensure
timely renewal of an approved permit or permits.
   J.   Permit fees. An initial processing fee in an amount as provided in
Chapter 212, Fees, shall be charged for each residential parking permit issued
per motor vehicle. Thereafter, an annual renewal fee as provided in
Chapter 212, Fees, shall be charged for each residential permit issued per
motor vehicle.
   K.   Revocation of permit. The Parking Authority is authorized to revoke the
residential parking permit of any permit of any person found to be in violation
of this section and, upon written notification thereof, the person shall
surrender such permit to the Parking Authority. Failure, when so requested, to
surrender a residential parking permit shall constitute a violation of law and
of this Part.
   L.   Residential parking permit zones. The current residential parking zone
list is maintained in the Reading Parking Authority office.
   M.   Regulations and procedures.
      (1)   Time restrictions on parking. Except as otherwise designated, on-
street parking will be restricted to a one- to three-hour time limit on streets
that now have legal, on-street parking except for metered areas. Vehicles
bearing valid residential parking permit for this area shall be exempt from the
one- to three-hour time limit and meter requirements. The Department of Public
Works will erect or cause to be erected signs. These signs shall indicate the
one to three hour time limits and the exclusion for vehicles with residential
parking permits or shall indicate the exclusion of said vehicles from meter
requirements. The one to three hour time limit shall be enforced from 8:00 a.m.
to 8:00 p.m. weekdays, excluding holidays.
      (2)   In the areas with existing parking meters, operators with valid
residential parking permits will be allowed to park at meters within the
designated areas without the need to deposit coins.
      (3)   Existing parking regulations. All existing parking regulations
shall remain in effect. These include but are not limited to, prohibited
parking areas, street cleaning restrictions, loading zones, limited-time pickup
areas, and vehicle storage restrictions. Holder of residential parking permits
will not be exempted from these regulations.
   N.   Removal of residential permit parking areas. A residential permit
parking areas designation can be removed by the following process:
      (1)   A petition, containing the signatures of 51% of the affected
property owners, shall be submitted to the Parking Authority.
      (2)   After certifying the petition, the Parking Authority shall schedule
a public meeting, with notice being provided through an advertisement in a
local newspaper with daily delivery and by notice delivered through direct mail
to the affected property owners.
      (3)   After taking testimony from the affected property owners, the
Parking Authority shall make a recommendation to continue or eliminate the
residential permit parking area designation to Council. Council shall approve
the removal of a residential parking area designation through the enactment of
an ordinance.
   O.   If special circumstances such as business influx, public entity
migration, park designation, etc., change the demographics of a residential
permit area in a way that makes it not meet the requirements of the ordinance,
the Parking Authority shall convene a public hearing to address the continuance
of a designated residential permit. Notice of the public hearing shall be
provided to affected residents by direct mail and through an advertisement in a
local newspaper with daily delivery. After taking testimony from the affected
property owners, the Parking Authority shall make a recommendation to Council.
Council shall approve the removal of a residential parking area designation
through the enactment of an ordinance.
   P.   Penalties.
      (1)   It shall be unlawful and a violation of this Part for any person to
stand or park a motor vehicle for a period exceeding the time limitation
established pursuant hereto. For violation of any provision of this Part, the
owner or operator may within 10 days of the time when such notice was attached
to their vehicle, be subject to the penalty as provided in §
576-416C.
      (2)   It shall be a violation of this Part for a person to falsely
represent themselves as eligible for a parking permit or to furnish false
information in an application therefor.
      (3)   It shall be a violation of this Part for a person holding a valid
residential parking permit issued pursuant thereto to permit the use of or
display such a permit in a vehicle other than that for which the permit is
issued. Such conduct shall constitute an unlawful act and violation of this
section both by the person who so uses or displays the residential parking
permit on a motor vehicle other than that for which it is issued.
      (4)   It shall be a violation of this Part for person to copy, produce or
otherwise bring in to existence a facsimile or counterfeit residential parking
permit or permits. It shall further be unlawful and a violation of this Part
for a person to knowingly use or display a facsimile or counterfeit residential
parking permit in order to evade time limitation on parking applicable in a
residential permit parking area.
      (5)   For violation of any provision contained in Subsection P(2), (3)
and (4) of this section, the person committing the unlawful act shall be, upon
conviction thereof, sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $600 plus costs
and, in default of payment of said fine and costs, to a term of imprisonment
not to exceed 30 days.
§ 576-418. Hazardous vehicles.
[Amended 2-12-2007 by Ord. No. 14-2007; 9-10-2007 by Ord. No. 68-2007]
   A.   No person shall park a vehicle or permit it to stand, whether attended
or unattended, upon a street, highway or public property of the City which may
be deemed to be a hazardous vehicle. "Hazardous vehicle" is defined as:
      (1)   Health hazard. Any vehicle with the following characteristics shall
be declared a health hazard:
         (a)   Broken windshields, mirrors or other glass, with sharp edges.
         (b)   Broken headlamps, tail lamps, bumpers or grills with sharp
edges.
         (c)   Any body parts, trunk, firewall or floorboards with sharp edges
or large holes resulting from rust.
         (d)   Protruding sharp objects from the chassis.
         (e)   Missing doors, windows, hood, trunk or other body parts that
could permit animal harborage.
         (f)   One or more open tires or tubes which could permit animal
harborage.
         (g)   Any vehicle suspended by blocks, jacks or other such materials
in a location which may pose a danger to the public, property owner, visitors
or residents of the property on which said vehicle is found.
         (h)   Any excessive fluids leaking from vehicle which may be harmful
to the public or the environment.
         (i)   Disassembled body or chassis parts stored in or about the
vehicle.
         (j)   Excessive amounts of trash, debris or solid waste in or on the
vehicle that could permit animal or vermin harborage.
      (2)   Fire hazard. Any vehicle that the Fire Department deems a danger to
the health or safety of the general public, due to the leakage, condition or
instability of its contents shall be declared a fire hazard.
      (3)   Traffic hazard. Any vehicle suspended or supported by jacks, blocks
or any other materials or any vehicle parked, drifted or otherwise situated
causing a pedestrian safety or traffic problem shall be declared a traffic
hazard.
   B.   Penalty. After the property authority has deemed any vehicle to be a
hazardous vehicle, as defined in this section. It shall be subject to a penalty
charge as provided in §
576-416C and to immediate towing and storage in accordance with the towing
provisions provided in Part 8B. 11
      (1)   Health hazard penalty.
      (2)   Fire hazard penalty. Nontraffic citation issued.
      (3)   Traffic hazard penalty. Nontraffic citation issued.
   C.   State law and regulations. In all matters that are regulated by the
laws of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania or by regulations of departments or
agencies of the commonwealth promulgated by authority of law, such laws or
regulations, or other ordinances of the City, as the case may be, shall control
where the requirements thereof are the same or in excess of the provisions of
this section. The code shall control in all cases where the state requirements
or the requirements of other ordinances of this City are not as strict as those
contained in this Part.
   D.   Provisions to be continuation of existing regulations. The provisions
of this section, so far as they are the same as those ordinances and/or codes
in force immediately prior to the enactment of this section, are intended as a
continuation of such ordinances and codes and not as new enactments. The
provisions of this section shall not affect any act done or liability incurred,
nor shall they affect any suit or prosecution pending or to be instituted to
enforce any right or penalty or to punish any offense under the authority of
the repealed ordinances.
11.   Editor's Note: Amended during codification (see
Ch. 1, General Provisions, Part 2).
§ 576-419. Daily parking permits.
[Added 11-14-2005 by Ord. No. 77-2005; 2-12-2007 by Ord. No. 14-2007; 9-10-2007
by Ord. No. 68-2007; 1-4-2021 by Ord. No. 100-2020]
   A.   Purpose. Daily parking permits are designed to make legal parking more
convenient by having motorists prepay a required fee in return for the posting
of a no-parking sign by the Reading Parking Authority. These signs are intended
for short-term use that will not exceed two weeks; they shall not be used in
place of long term off- street parking. Daily parking permits may be issued for
all legal on- street parking spaces. They do not permit parking in prohibited
parking zones.
   B.   The following regulations govern the issuance of a daily parking
permit:
      (1)   The request for a daily parking permit shall be submitted to the
Reading Parking Authority. The Reading Parking Authority may require a separate
Police Department-issued “special event” permit for the issuance of four or
more signs.
      (2)   The daily parking permit shall contain the name of the individual
or organization requesting the posting of a no-parking sign and the date, time
and location of use.
      (3)   A daily parking permit must be requested at least 24 hours prior to
its intended use. Requests for use of a daily parking permit on a Monday shall
be submitted no later than the preceding Thursday. The Reading Parking
Authority will post a no-parking sign consistent with the daily parking permit
that is issued and it shall remove the no-parking sign when the use has ended.
      (4)   One no-parking sign shall be required for every parking space.
      (5)   Daily parking permits are exempt from street cleaning.
      (6)   No refunds will be issued by the Reading Parking Authority due to
the rescheduling of events, inclement weather or non-use of the daily parking
permit that is issued.
      (7)   It shall be illegal to alter a no-parking sign or to attempt any
use at a date and/or time other than originally specified.
      (8)   Any violation of any of the above regulations will result in the
levy of fines and may result in prosecution. The Reading Parking Authority
shall be permitted to charge applicable daily parking permit fees to anyone
that misuses a no-parking sign or fails to pay for any such use and shall be
permitted to temporarily suspend the use of no parking signs by anyone that
takes part in any such misuse.
   C.   An individual that requests a daily parking permit for use in front of
his or her residence shall be required to provide proof of residence in the
City of Reading. Residential parking permits shall be for personal use only.
Commercial use of a residential daily parking permit is prohibited.
   D.   The cost of a daily parking permit shall be as provided in
212-144. The rate for a residential parking permit shall be available for 20 or
fewer days for a single residence in one calendar year. The issuance of a
residential parking permit for a personal home shall thereafter be charged at
the standard rate for general usage in a metered or non-metered parking space.
§ 576-420. Parking against traffic flow.
[Added 3-13-2006 by Ord. No. 21-2006; 2-12-2007 by Ord. No. 14-2007; 9-10-2007
by Ord. No. 68-2007; 3-28-2022 by Ord. No. 18-2022]
   A.   It shall be unlawful for any vehicle to park against the flow of
traffic on one-way and two- way streets, exempting vehicles parked in violation
of this section due to winter weather conditions.
   B.   Any vehicle parked in violation of this Part, or as otherwise provided
by law, shall be provided with a parking violation notice indicating the
penalty as provided in §
576-416C. The penalty shall be paid to the Reading Parking Authority within 240
hours from the time of the violation. Violations not paid within 240 hours will
be assessed an additional fee as provided in §
576-416C. 13
13.   Editor's Note: Amended during codification (see
Ch. 1, General Provisions, Part 2).
Part 5
Parking Meters or Kiosks
[Amended 5-27-2003 by Ord. No. 16-2003; 6-26-2006 by Ord. No. 48-2006; 11-27-
2006 by Ord. No. 85-2006; 2-12-2007 By Ord. No. 3-2007; 11-10-2008 By Ord. No.
71-2008; 9-27-2010 By Ord. No. 75-2010; 9-26-2011 By Ord. No. 47-2011; 9-10-
2012 By Ord. No. 94-2012; 8-10-2015 By Ord. No. 41-2015]
A   Regulations
§ 576-501. Definitions.
The following words, whether in the singular or plural, when used in this Part,
shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this Part except in those instances
where the context clearly indicates otherwise:
   DIRECTOR — The Executive Director of the Reading Parking Authority or
designee.
   PARKING METER or KIOSK — A device intended to assist municipalities and
public authorities in enforcing ordinances limiting the time during which
vehicles may be parked on any street or highway or other public place within
parking zone. A parking meter shall include any area where payment may be made
by mobile electronic means.
   PARKING ZONE — Streets or highways, or portions thereof, or municipal
parking lots operated by the City or the Parking Authority of the City on which
parking meters or kiosks are installed, operated and used.
   PAYMENT — Any proper currency that is legal tender of the United States,
which shall also mean any and all other approved electronic means and methods
of payment of the amount due at a parking meter, kiosk or at any parking space,
including but not limited to credit cards, debit cards, any and all approved
mobile or other electronic means of transferring funds to pay for parking at a
space in the parking zone.
   PUBLIC PLACES — Any municipal parking lot operated by the City or the
Parking Authority of the City.
§ 576-502. Parking zones established; traffic control maps.
[Amended 1-25-2021 by Ord. No. 4- 2021; 3-28-2022 by Ord. No. 27-2022; 10-13-
2025 by Ord. No. 59-2025]
   A.   Parking zones shall be established and set forth by legend on the
traffic control maps of the City. The Reading Parking Authority shall make
recommendations for the introduction or elimination of parking zones.
   B.   The Parking Authority shall determine and regulate the time periods to
park in each zone by a properly adopted resolution of the Parking Authority.
   C.   Parking zones are hereby established on the following streets, highways
and blocks in the City of Reading:
      (1)   Parking Zone 1:
      Cherry Street - 800, 600, 500, 400
      Penn Street - 400, 700, 800, 900
      Court Street - 300, 400, 500 (500 has a mix of thirty-minute and one-
hour), 700, 800 (excluding three parking meters numbered CT 803, 805, 807 on
the north side of the 800 block of Court Street which are for fire personnel
parking only)
      Walnut Street - 400, 500
      Reed Street - 100
      Elm Street - 500
      Church Street - 000
      South Third Street - 000
      South Fourth Street - 000
      North Fourth Street - 000
      South Fifth Street - 100
      North Sixth Street - 100
      South Sixth Street - 000
      North Eighth Street - 100
      South Eighth Street - 000
      North Ninth Street - 000
      South Ninth Street - 000
      (2)   Parking Zone 2.
       Cherry Street - 300
      Penn Street - 200, 300, 600, 1000
      Franklin Street - 400, 500, 700
      Court Street - 200
      Walnut Street - 600, 700, 800
      North Third Street - 000 (meters added by Chiarelli Garage)
      North Second Street - 000
      North Fifth Street - 100, 200, 300
      South Sixth Street - 100
      North Sixth Street - 200
      North Eighth Street - 000 (exempting the east side of N. 8th Street
between Court and Washington Streets)
      Washington Street - 100, 700, 800 (exempting the north side of the 700
block between Cedar and N. 8th Streets)
      Cherry Street - 700
   (3)   Parking Zone 3.
      Court Street - 500
      North Fifth Street - 000
      East side of North Fifth Street from Court Street to Washington Street
      North side of Court Street from North Fifth Street to Church Street (post
office)
   (4)   Parking Zone 4.
       Penn Street - 500
      North Sixth Street - 000
      Court Street - 600
§ 576-503. Hours of Saturdays, Sundays and holidays excepted.
[Amended 1-4-2021 by Ord. No. 99-2020; 6-14-2021 by Ord. 43-2021; 3-14-2022 by
Ord. 19-2022]
Unless otherwise posted, the enforcement of timed parking in any parking zone
shall occur only between 8:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. Monday through Friday, only
between 8:00 a.m. and 2:00 p.m. on Saturday, and shall not occur on Sundays,
City holidays, New Year's Day, Memorial Day, Independence Day, Labor Day,
Thanksgiving Day, Christmas Eve and Christmas.
§ 576-504. (Reserved)
§ 576-505. Marking of spaces.
In all parking zones, either a parking meter, a sign for electronically
controlled areas or a kiosk shall be installed for each parking space or a
kiosk or sign for mobile electronically controlled areas for multiple spaces.
All parking spaces shall be plainly designated by lines or markings on the
surface of the street or highway or parking lot and may be placed parallel,
diagonal or perpendicular to the curb. Parking in other than designated parking
spaces where so marked is prohibited in any parking zone.
§ 576-506. Meter signals and kiosk receipts.
   A.   Parking meters shall be placed immediately adjacent to each designated
parking space and in such manner as to show or display by signal that the
parking space controlled by such meter is or is not legally occupied. Each
parking meter shall indicate by a proper legend the established legal parking
time and, when in operation, shall also indicate on or by its daily, display,
pointer or printed receipt the duration of the period of legal parking or any
legal or overtime parking.
   B.   Kiosks and signs for mobile electronically controlled spaces shall be
placed where they will cover multiple parking spaces within a block face. Upon
payment, the parking receipt shall be placed on driver's side dashboard or,
where applicable, the car's state license plate number shall be entered into
the kiosk. For mobile electronic applications, no receipt is necessary.
§ 576-507. Manner of parking.
Every vehicle parked parallel with the curb in any parking zone on a street or
highway shall be parked with the front end of such parked vehicle at or
immediately adjacent to the parking meter controlling such parking space, or in
the case of a kiosk or a mobile electronically controlled area, in the center
of the lines of the parking space. Every vehicle parked perpendicular to the
curb of any street or highway or any parking lot within a parking zone shall be
parked with the front end or the rear end of such parked vehicle, as the
situation may be, at or immediately adjacent to the parking meter controlling
such parking space, or in the case of a kiosk or a mobile electronically
controlled area, in the center of the lines of the parking space. All vehicles
shall be parked entirely within the confines of the designated parking space.
§ 576-508. Deposit of proper payments in parking zone.
   A.   Upon parking any vehicle in any parking space in a parking zone, the
operator shall immediately deposit in the parking meter, kiosk or through
mobile electronic means controlling such space the proper payment as designated
for such parking on the instructions for operations of such parking meter,
mobile electronically controlled space or the kiosk. Upon the deposit of such
payment, such space may be lawfully occupied during the period of parking time
as indicated on the parking meter, the mobile electronic program or the kiosk.
   B.   Pursuant to this section, the Executive Director is hereby authorized
and empowered to designate the methods of proper payment to be placed in such
parking meter, mobile electronic format or kiosk and to amend the instructions
on the parking meter or kiosk to reflect the proper payment or amount required
to occupy the parking space. Maximum parking meter rates for each parking zone
shall be established by the City Council from time to time in the City Fee
Schedule located in §
212-144, Vehicles and traffic, and authorizing the Parking Authority to reduce
the maximum parking meter rates established by City Council from time to time
by a properly adopted resolution of the Parking Authority.
§ 576-509. No parking beyond indicated time.
No owner or operator of any vehicle shall cause, allow, permit or suffer such
vehicle to be parked overtime or beyond the period of legal parking time as
indicated or set forth on the instructions of such sign, device, parking meter,
mobile electronic format or kiosk. A vehicle which continues to be parked in
violation for a period of three hours after receiving notice of such violation
may be cited with an additional violation notice for the same infraction.
§ 576-510. Use of parking meter or kiosk funds.
The payment required to be deposited in parking meters, kiosks or through
mobile electronic means is levied and assessed as fees to provide for the
proper regulations and control of traffic upon the streets and highways and
other public places in the City, including the cost of supervising and
regulating the parking of vehicles in the parking zones created hereby, and the
cost of the purchase, supervision, protection, inspection, installation,
operation, maintenance, control and use of the parking meters, the mobile
electronic formats or kiosks and municipal parking lots and garages. The
payment required to be deposited in parking meters, the mobile electronic
formats or kiosks shall be collected and accounted for under the direction of
the Executive Director of the Parking Authority and deposited by the Executive
Director or his/her designee.
§ 576-511. Slugs prohibited.
No person shall deposit or cause to be deposited in any parking meter or kiosk
any slug, device or metallic substitute for legal coins of the United States
(not issued by the Parking Authority) or attempt to substitute or evade any
electronic payment.
§ 576-512. Injuring or defacing meters.
No person shall deface, injure, tamper with, break, destroy or impair the
usefulness of any parking meter or kiosk installed by authority of Council or
by the Parking Authority of the City.
§ 576-513. Exceptions.
Nothing in this Part shall be construed as prohibiting the Mayor or Council
from providing for free parking space for loading or unloading of commercial
vehicles, for bus stops, taxicab stands or for other matters of a similar
nature.
§ 576-514. Enforcement.
[Amended 2-8-2021 by Ord. No. 11-2021]
The duty of enforcing the provisions of this Part shall be on the Department of
Police and the Reading Parking Authority. In case of emergency, any of the
provisions of this Part may temporarily be suspended by such Chief of Police or
Executive Director, who shall then have the authority to adopt and enforce such
other temporary rules and regulations as traffic conditions, during such
emergency, may demand or require. Notification in writing about the suspension
and temporary replacement of any rules or regulations shall be provided to the
Chief of Police or Executive Director immediately.
§ 576-515. Duty of police and authorized agents.
It shall be the duty of police officers, Parking Authority personnel or other
duly authorized employees of the City, acting in accordance with instructions
issued by Chief of Police or designee or the Director of the Parking Authority,
to deposit a copy of the violation ticket in a designated receptacle in the
Police or Parking Authority office. The copy shall contain:
   A.   The number of each parking meter, mobile electronically controlled
space or kiosk which indicates that the vehicles occupying the parking space
adjacent to such parking meter, mobile electronically controlled space or
designated by a kiosk is, or has been, parked in violation of any of the
provision of this Part.
   B.   The state license plate number of such vehicle.
   C.   The day and hour at which such vehicle is parked in violation of any of
the provisions of this Part at the time of inspection.
   D.   Any other facts and knowledge of which may be considered necessary to a
thorough understanding of the circumstances attending such violation.
§ 576-516. Verification of parking meters or kiosks.
All parking meters and kiosks located in the City shall be checked for accuracy
at least once every three years. A statement verifying that the inspection has
been completed shall be submitted to City Council. Parking meters and kiosks
shall meet maintenance and acceptable tolerances established by the
Pennsylvania Department of Agriculture, Bureau of Weights and Measures.
§ 576-517. Notice of violation; violations and penalties; waiver.
[Amended 2-8-2021 by Ord. No. 11-2021]
A police officer or duly authorized Parking Authority employee shall provide
notice of a motor vehicle/conveyance parked in violation of the provisions of
this Part, or as otherwise provided by law, by either (1) placing notice of the
violation on a motor vehicle/conveyance; (2) providing notice of the violation
by mail or (3) provide notice of the violation as otherwise permitted by law.
The owner or operator of the motor vehicle/conveyance shall pay the penalties
set forth in 576-416 within the timeframes noted therein. The Reading Chief of
Police shall have the discretion and authority to void any parking ticket
issued by the Reading Parking Authority and the Reading Police Department. The
Reading Police Department shall provide notice to the Reading Authority stating
when parking tickets are voided and documenting the circumstances under which
the ticket was voided. The authority of the Reading Police Chief to void
tickets under this provision shall in no way usurp the appeal process of the
Reading Parking Authority.
§ 576-518 Parking ticket appeal process.
[Added 8-8-2016 by Ord. No. 31-2016; amended 8-27-2018 by Ord. No. 47-2018]
   A.   Submission of written appeal.
      (1)   A parking ticket will include a notice to inform the owner/driver
of the vehicle ("owner") how the owner may submit, in writing, an appeal
setting forth the reason or reasons why the owner believes the parking ticket
issued by the City of Reading or Reading Parking Authority is in error.
      (2)   Such written appeal through a complaint and investigation form
shall be filed with the Reading Parking Authority within 10 business days of
the date of issuance of the parking ticket to make the lower penalty applicable
for any bond purpose. No written appeal will be accepted when not filed within
30 days of the issuance of the parking ticket.
      (3)   Individuals who submit an appeal will be contacted within 5
business days after the appeal is processed and advised whether the parking
ticket will be upheld or dismissed.
   B.   Hearing scheduling.
      (1)   Where the parking ticket is upheld, and subject to (2) below, the
Reading Parking Authority will schedule a hearing before an independent hearing
officer and notice of said hearing's date, time and location shall be provided
to owner.
      (2)   Owner will be required to post a bond payment in the relevant
amount indicated on the parking ticket. Said bond payment will be refunded to
owner where the independent hearing officer dismisses the parking ticket.
   C.   Determination.
      (1)   The independent hearing officer shall render a determination at the
end of the scheduled hearing. Where the appeal is denied, the independent
hearing officer shall direct owner to make appropriate payment of the ticket.
Additionally, owner shall receive in writing his/her right to appeal the denial
of his/her appeal to the Berks County Court of Common Pleas, 633 Court Street,
Reading, PA, within 30 days of the independent hearing officer's determination.
   D.   Responsibility for costs.
      (1)   Any and all costs associated with the filing of an appeal in the
Berks County Court of Common Pleas shall be the responsibility of the person or
entity filing said appeal.
      (2)   If the Berks County Court of Common Pleas denies the appeal, the
owner shall thereafter from the date of judgment is entered be assessed
interest, costs and penalties as may be set forth pursuant to the schedule of
fees of the Code of Ordinances of the City of Reading.
Part 6
Daytime Parking Restrictions
A   Short-Term Daytime Parking Restrictions
§ 576-601. Findings and purpose.
   A.   Findings. The City recognizes that on-street vehicular parking impairs
the City's ability to remove snow, collect leaves, clean streets and perform
other routine maintenance to the City's roadways and utilities.
   B.   Purpose. It is declared to be the purpose of this Part to provide
reasonable short-term daytime parking restrictions on City streets to promote
the efficient delivery of public works services.
§ 576-602. Daytime parking restrictions.
[Amended 6-12-2006 by Ord. No. 45-2006]
The Director of Public Works shall establish short-term parking restrictions on
City streets as necessary to clear streets for the effective implementation of
public works operations. The Director shall establish these restrictions within
the following guidelines:
   A.   Each City street will be posted no parking a maximum of once per week,
Monday through Friday.
   B.   Parking restrictions shall be enforced for a maximum four-hour period,
between 8:00 a.m. and 12:00 noon or 12:00 noon to 4:00 p.m.
   C.   Streets shall be posted 12 to 16 hours prior to the time posted on the
sign.
   D.   Only one side of any given street shall be posted "no parking" at a
time. The Director of Public Works shall not post both sides "no parking" for
the same period.
   E.   On each street designated for short-term parking restrictions, the
Director of Public Works shall post special signs one each block and/or
intervals not to exceed 660 feet and at all points where any street affected
joins another street with the wording "No Parking, (day and time interval)."
   F.   Restrictions shall be enforced January 1 to December 31.
   G.   Vehicles may park in posted parking restrictions zones covered under
this Part a minimum of 15 minutes after the street sweeper has passed the
affected block. However, posted restrictions will remain in effect for the
entire period during a declared snow emergency.
   H.   The Director of Public Works shall keep on file a detailed
implementation plan and route schedule for the street cleaning program and
other public works services as deemed necessary. The implementation plan shall
include the street sweeping schedule, street cleaning routes and procedures for
modifying and/or expanding the program. The plan and respective maps shall be
kept on file for public view.
§ 576-603. Notice of violation; violations and penalties; waivers.
[Amended 7-12-2004 by Ord. No. 32-2004; 7-12-2004 by Ord. No. 33-2004; 11-28-
2005 by Ord. No. 80-2005; 2-8-2021 by Ord. No. 10-2021]
   A.   Notice that a motor/conveyance is parked in violation of this Part
shall be provided and penalties assessed as stated in §
576-416.
   B.   All members of the Police Department and authorized employees of the
Parking Authority may immobilize or remove a vehicle if the vehicle has three
or more violations of this Part, or any other parking restriction or regulation
provided by law, or outstanding fines that total more than $200.00. The vehicle
may be towed to and placed at an area designated by the Chief of Police or the
Parking Authority for the storage of vehicles. The vehicle owner will be
responsible for all costs for removal, towing, storage or parking of any
vehicle removed under this Part. Unless otherwise disposed of pursuant to
applicable law, the vehicle shall remain in storage until all such costs,
including towing and storage, are paid.
   C.   Every property owner or resident within the City may obtain a maximum
of one dismissal per twelve-month period of any violation of this Part. Such
property owner or resident must present proof of current residency and/or
vehicle ownership within ten days of receiving notice of a violation of this
Part. The Reading Parking Authority shall determine if satisfactory evidence is
provided to warrant a dismissal. This dismissal process shall apply only to
this Part and shall not apply to any other parking restrictions or parking
regulations.
   D.   The Reading Chief of Police shall have the discretion and authority to
void any parking ticket issued by the Reading Parking Authority and the Reading
Police Department. The Reading Police Department shall provide notice to the
Reading Authority stating when parking tickets are voided and documenting the
circumstances under which the ticket was voided. The authority of the Reading
Police Chief to void tickets under this provision shall in no way usurp the
appeal process of the Reading Parking Authority.
Part 7
Commercial Contractor Parking
A   Commercial Contractor Parking Permit and Daily Parking Permit
§ 576-701. Purpose.
The City of Reading and the Reading Parking Authority realize the need for
contractors and delivery people to park at various meters and loading zones
throughout the City for short periods of time while working on construction
related projects and/or deliveries. This need creates an obvious problem of
carrying sufficient coinage in metered areas to be in compliance with the
parking laws of the City. As a result, the City of Reading and the Reading
Parking Authority have developed the commercial contractor permit and the daily
parking permit. These permits are designed to make legal parking more
convenient by having the motorist prepay the parking meter fee in return for a
permit that is to be displayed on the vehicle. These permits are in no way
designed or intended to be used in place of long-term off-street parking, they
are offered for short-term use or constant delivery. The commercial contractor
permit is good only at meters and loading zones within the City with the
exception of meters located on Penn Street from Fourth Street to Sixth Street.
Daily parking permits are good at all metered and nonmetered locations.
§ 576-702. Criteria for application.
The following is a list of criteria that shall be used in establishing
eligibility for issuance of a commercial contract permit:
   A.   The vehicle must be a clearly marked commercial vehicle or an obvious
construction vehicle.
   B.   If no identifiable markings exist, the Reading Parking Authority may
require other proof of eligibility based on City licenses issued for plumbing,
contracting, electrical, etc.
   C.   Note: A description of the vehicle and license plate number is required
and will be recorded on the permit. If this information is not available any
ticket(s) issued will be valid unless it can be proved that the permit was in
the vehicle in question at the time the ticket was issued.
§ 576-703. Display of permit.
Permits shall be displayed on the passenger side lower corner of the windshield
so as to be readily visible to enforcement personnel.
§ 576-704. Permit parking exemption.
   A.   A commercial contractor vehicle on which is appropriately displayed a
valid contractor parking permit or daily parking permit as provided for herein
shall be permitted to stand or be parked without being limited to time
restrictions at meters and shall receive twice the amount of time allotted in
loading and time zone requirements pursuant to this Part. However, said
commercial contractors vehicle shall not be exempt from parking restrictions or
prohibitions established pursuant to authority other than this Part, including
Part 4 and other special parking restrictions. All other vehicles shall be
subject to the time restrictions and meter requirements adopted as provided in
this Part as well as the penalties provided for herein.
   B.   Summary.
      (1)   A vehicle displaying a valid contractor parking permit is exempt
from activating parking meters and shall receive twice the amount of time
allotted in loading and timed zones.
      (2)   A contractors' parking permit does not allow:
         (a)   A vehicle to park indefinitely in loading zones, limited time
zones, passenger pickup zones, handicapped spaces or any other specifically
designated areas.
         (b)   For a vehicle to park on Penn Street between Fourth Street and
Sixth Street. Parking on Penn Street between Fourth Street and Sixth Street is
permitted with the purchase of a daily parking permit or by properly activating
a meter and/or observing loading zone restrictions.
         (c)   For a vehicle to park in otherwise prohibited areas such as
crosswalks, sidewalks, fire hydrants, etc.
         (d)   Note: Contractors' parking permits are not valid in metered
parking lots, i.e., the metered lot on the 300 block of Penn Street, Fifth
Street and Cherry Street, Seventh Street and Penn Street. Parking on metered
lots is permitted with the purchase of a daily parking permit.
§ 576-705. Daily parking permits.
Any vehicle displaying a daily parking permit is permitted to park at a meter
without depositing money. Daily parking permits are not exempt from parking
restrictions or prohibitions established in Part 4 of this chapter and other
special parking restrictions. A daily parking permit shall contain the name,
organization or event and location (i.e., a daily parking permit issued for a
moving van on the 100 block of North Ninth Street is only valid in that block).
   A.   Daily parking permits are exempt from street cleaning.
   B.   Daily parking permits are permitted in metered lots.
§ 576-706. Permit fees.15
   A.   Commercial contractor parking permit. The commercial contractor parking
permit is offered in an amount as provided in
Chapter 212, Fees, on a monthly basis only.
   B.   Daily parking permit. The daily parking permit is offered in an amount
as provided in
Chapter 212, Fees, per day for metered spaces and in an amount as provided in
Chapter 212, Fees, for nonmetered spaces.
   C.   There shall be no prorating fees, rebates or refunds for canceled
commercial contractor parking permit(s). A stolen commercial contractor permit
will be replaced at no charge upon submission of a police report company to the
Parking Authority. Replacement of lost permits shall be issued for a fee in an
amount as provided in
Chapter 212, Fees, and will only be issued to the previously registered vehicle
on file with the Reading Parking Authority or its replacement in case of total
loss, proof of which shall be required replacement.
15.   Editor's Note: Amended during codification (see
Ch. 1, General Provisions, Part 2).
§ 576-707. Revocation of permit.
These permits are subject to revocation at any time by the City or the Reading
Parking Authority. Grounds for revocation shall be based on repeated violation
of the intent and meaning of this Part, the interpretation of which shall be
rendered by the Chief of Police or Executive Director of the Parking Authority.
Any and all fees charged for revoked permits are entirely nonrefundable.
§ 576-708. Violations and penalties. 16
Any vehicle parked in violation at a meter, loading or timed zones without a
valid commercial contractor parking permit or daily parking permit shall be
subject to the fines and provisions of §
576-416 for such offenses as outlined in this chapter.
16.   Editor's Note: Amended during codification (see
Ch. 1, General Provisions, Part 2).
Part 8
Impounding And Immobilization Of Vehicles
A   Removal and Impoundment of Illegally Parked Vehicles
§ 576-801. Applicability and scope.
[Amended 3-1-2005 by Ord. No. 10-2005 17; amended 7-24-2017 by Ord. No. 73-
2017; 5-9-2022 by Ord. No. 41-2022; 3-13-2023 by Ord. No. 29-2023]
The City of Reading Home Rule Charter and the PA State Vehicle Code (175
Pa.C.S. 6109(a)(22)) provide the local governing body with the authority to
adopt ordinances and regulations to address local problems. This Part provides
the City with the authority to remove and impound those vehicles which are
parked in a tow-away zone, in violation of the Noise Ordinance as per
Chapter 387, in violation of the Park Use Ordinance as per
Chapter 396 Part 3 or in violation of any other section of the Code of the City
of Reading adopted pursuant to the PA State Vehicle Code. Any such vehicle may
be immediately removed by the Reading Police Department or the Reading Parking
Authority. Vehicles located or parked in a tow-away zone may also be removed
seven days after the registered owner is provided with written notice to remove
the vehicle. Notice shall be transmitted by posting a notice on the vehicle
itself, by hand delivery to such owner, or by certified mail. The notice will
advise the owner of the violation and direct that the owner take necessary
corrective action within five days or the vehicle will be removed by the City,
with the cost of the removal and storage to be levied against the owner.
Subject to the limitation in subsection 802, vehicles in violation of the Noise
Ordinance as per
Chapter 387, in violation of the Park Use Ordinance as per
Chapter 396 Part 3 or in violation of any other section of the Code of the City
of Reading adopted pursuant to the PA State Vehicle Code are exempt from
written notice.
17.   Editor's Note: Amended during codification (see
Ch. 1, General Provisions, Part 2).
§ 576-802. Authority to remove and impound.
[Amended 7-24-2017 by Ord. No. 73-2017; 5-9- 2022 by Ord. No. 41-2022; 3-13-
2023 by Ord. No. 29-2023]
The City and the Parking Authority shall have authority to remove and impound
any vehicle parked overtime, in violation of the Noise Ordinance as per
Chapter 387, in violation of the Park Use Ordinance as per
Chapter 396 Part 3 or otherwise in violation of any applicable City Ordinance
adopted pursuant to the PA State Vehicle Code but only in strict adherence to
the provisions of City Ordinance or the provisions of the Vehicle Code, as
applicable, and provided that removal and impoundment for a violation of the
Noise Ordinance as per
Chapter 387 or the Park Use Ordinance as per
Chapter 396 Part 3 shall only be enforced against a person or vehicle that is a
repeat offender meaning a person or vehicle that has previously committed a
violation of said Noise Ordinance and/or Park Use Ordinance without time
limitation on the lookback for the previous violation. In addition, any device,
equipment or property used to broadcast sound or music in connection with a
removed or impounded vehicle hereunder may be seized in accordance with
Chapter 396, Part 312.
§ 576-803. Authority to remove and impound unattended vehicles on private
property by any privately operated towing businesses operating within the City
of Reading, as per 75 Pa.C.S. § 3353.3.b.
[Added 7-24-2017 by Ord. No. 73-2017; Amended 5-9-2022 by Ord. No. 43-2022]
   A.   No person shall park or leave an unattended vehicle on private property
without the consent of the owner or person in control or possession of the
property except in case of emergency or disablement of the vehicle, in which
case the operator shall arrange for the removal of the vehicle as soon as
possible.
   B.   The provisions of this section shall only apply to privately owned lots
where signage is posted to notify the public about the restriction. For
purposes of this section, “private parking lot” shall mean a parking lot open
to the public or used for parking without charge; or a parking lot used for
parking with charge.
   C.   The required signage shall be posted at each entry to the parking lot.
If there are no designated entrances—such as when a lot has one or more sides
continuously open to a roadway—one or more signs should be erected so as to be
readily visible to an ordinarily observant driver.
      1.   The sign(s) shall conform to 67 Pa. Code, § 212.115. Posting of
private parking lots and contain language approved by the City of Reading
Police Department.
      2.   Letters must have a minimum height of 3 inches.
      3.   The sign must have a retro-reflectorized sign message or background
and be positioned so as to be illuminated by the headlight beams of entering
vehicles, or the sign may be illuminated during applicable hours of darkness so
as to be readily visible to an ordinarily observant driver.
      4.   Under 75 Pa.C.S. § 3353(b), the prosecution of an owner or towing a
vehicle from a private parking lot is prohibited unless restrictions are posted
in accordance with this subsection.
   D.   The property owner or person in control or possession of the property
shall have the ability to remove or have removed an unattended vehicle by a
privately operated towing business if (i) the vehicle in violation of this
section is reported to the City of Reading Police Department by the property
owner, or person in control or possession of the property; (ii) a citation is
issued to the vehicle by the City of Reading Police Department; and (iii) the
property owner provides the City of Reading Police Department with a valid
contract permitting the privately operated towing business to conduct business
on the private property or, in lieu thereof, the private property owner has,
prior thereto, provided the City of Reading Police Department with
documentation indicating the private property that the privately operated
towing business has authority to conduct business at along with a copy of the
fully signed contract between the private property owner and the privately
operated towing business. Any towing company contracted to remove vehicles from
private property shall not charge more than $100 for towing, $50 for "dropping"
the vehicle on site with no tow and no more than $10 a day for storage, charged
to the owner of the vehicle, beginning the day after the vehicle is towed as
per
Chapter 212, Tow Service Charges.
   E.   This section shall be enforced by the City of Reading Police Department
and shall apply to all private property and privately owned towing businesses
operating within the City of Reading. The enforcement hereunder shall include,
but not be limited to, ensuring compliance of the signage required under
subsection C above.
   F.   Violations and penalties. Whoever violates any provision of this
section shall be, upon conviction thereof, sentenced to pay a fine not less
than $100 nor more than $1,000 plus costs and, in default of payment of said
fine and costs, to a term of imprisonment not to exceed 30 days. Each day
during which any person violates any provision of this chapter shall constitute
a separate offense.
§ 576-803.1. Tow-away zones designated.
[Amended 7-24-2017 by Ord. No. 73-2017]
The following designated streets and/or parking lots are hereby established as
tow-away zones. Signs shall be posted to place the public on notice that their
vehicles may be towed for violation of City parking regulations:
 
Street     Side Between Parking Lot
(Reserved)             
 
§ 576-804. Designation of approved storage garages; bonding; towing and
storage.
Removal and impounding of vehicles under this Part shall be done only by
"approved storage garages" that shall be designated from time to time by the
City Council. Every such garage shall submit evidence to the City Council that
it is bonded or has acquired liability insurance in an amount satisfactory to
the City Council as sufficient to indemnify owners of impounded vehicles
against loss or damage to those vehicles while in the custody of the garage
keeper for the purpose of towing or storage. The approved storage garage shall
submit to the City Council its schedule of charges for towing and storage of
vehicles under this Part and, when the schedule is approved by the City
Council, those charges shall be adhered to by the approved storage garage; no
different schedule of charges shall be demanded of or collected from any person
whose vehicle is removed or impounded under this Part by any approved storage
garage. The City Council shall delete from its list of approved storage garages
any garage that makes any unapproved charge in connection with any vehicle
removed or impounded under this Part.
§ 576-805. Payment of towing and storage charges.
The payment of towing and storage charges shall not relieve the owner or driver
of any vehicle from liability for any fine or penalty for the violation of the
provision of this Part for which the vehicle was removed or impounded.
§ 576-806. Reclamation costs.
[Amended 8-26-2013 by Ord. No. 35-2013; 3-13-2023 by Ord. No. 29-2023]
In order to reclaim his vehicle, the owner shall pay towing and storage costs
plus a $100 fee, of which $25 shall be transferred to the Pennsylvania
Department of Transportation by the garage to which the vehicle was taken.
§ 576-807. Records of vehicles removed and impounded.
The City shall cause a record to be kept of all vehicles impounded under this
Part and shall be able at all reasonable times to furnish the owners or the
agents of the owners of those vehicles with information as to the place of
storage of the vehicle.
§ 576-808. Restrictions upon removal of vehicles.
[Amended 5-9-2022 by Ord. No. 41-2022; 3-13- 2023 by Ord. No. 29-2023]
No vehicle shall be removed under the authority of this Part or the Vehicle
Code if, at the time of the intended removal, the owner or the person for the
time being in charge of the vehicle is present and expresses a willingness and
intention to remove the vehicle immediately. This shall not apply to vehicles
in violation of the Noise Ordinance as per Chapter 387 and/or in violation of
the Park Use Ordinance as per
Chapter 396 Part 3 and to the removal of vehicles for unpaid violations,
defaulted payment plans or immobilized vehicles and shall not include the
removal of vehicles pursuant to §
576-817.
§ 576-809. Violations and penalties.
[Amended 3-13-2023 by Ord. No. 29-2023]
Any person who shall violate any provision of this Part shall, upon conviction
thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of $100 together with all costs of
disposing of the vehicle under the provisions of the Vehicle Code, 75 P.S. §
7301 et seq.
§ 576-810. Reports and disposition of unclaimed vehicles.
If after a period of 15 days the vehicle in storage remains unclaimed, a report
shall be filed with PennDOT in accordance with § 7311 of the Vehicle Code, 75
Pa.C.S.A. § 7311, by the person having legal custody of the vehicle. If the
vehicle has not been claimed after 30 days, the vehicle may be transferred to a
licensed salvor who will then be responsible for filing the proper reports and
disposing of the vehicle in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 73 of the
Vehicle Code, 75 Pa.C.S.A. § 7301 et seq.
B   Immobilization of Motor Vehicles
§ 576-811. Definitions.
[Amended 5-9-2022 by Ord. No. 41-2022]
As used in this Part, the following words shall have the following meanings:
IMMOBILIZE — Use ofa device to prevent the operation of a motor vehicle.
UNSETTLED PARKING VIOLATIONS—- Outstanding violation(s) of City Ordinance or
the Pennsylvania Motor Vehicle Code indicated by notice, ticket or citation to
which no response has been made. [Amended 12-9-2013 by Ord. No. 69-2013]
§ 576-812. Basis for immobilization.
[Amended 6-23-2008 by Ord. No. 46-2008; 9-24-2012 by Ord. No. 95-2012; 12-9-
2013 by Ord. No. 69-2013; 5-9-2022 by Ord. No. 41-2022]
Upon the direction of the Police Department or the Parking Authority, any
vehicle or conveyance parked within the City upon any public ground at any time
may be immobilized pursuant to §
576-603 or as otherwise provided by City Ordinance.
§ 576-813. (Reserved) 18
§ 576-814. Release of immobilized vehicle.
[Amended 5-9-2022 by Ord. No. 41-2022]
   A.   The owner of an immobilized vehicle or other authorized person shall be
permitted to secure the release of a vehicle upon:
      (1)   Payment of all outstanding fines and penalties for each unsettled
parking violation; and
      (2)   Payment of the immobilization fee set forth in §
212-144.
§ 576-815. Towing and storage of immobilized vehicles.
[Amended 9-24-2012 by Ord. No. 95-2012; 5-9-2022 by Ord. No. 41-2022]
The Parking Authority may immediately tow any vehicle that is immobilized,
pursuant to §
576-603 or as otherwise provided by City Ordinance. Towing and storage fees
shall be paid, along with the payments required by §
576-814 before the owner of such vehicle or authorized person shall be
permitted to secure the release of the vehicle. Unclaimed vehicles shall be
deemed abandoned and subject to disposal as authorized by law.
§ 576-816. Immobilization fee.19
The owner of an immobilized vehicle shall be subject to the fees set forth in §
212-144 and as otherwise provided in this Part.
19.   Editor's Note: Amended during codification (see
Ch. 1, General Provisions, Part 2).
§ 576-817. Tampering with immobilization device prohibited.
[Amended 3-13-2006 by Ord. No. 22-2006; 5-9-2022 by Ord. No. 41-2022]
Any person who tampers with, removes or attempts to remove any device used to
immobilize a motor vehicle pursuant to this Part or applicable City Ordinance,
or who shall move or attempt to move an immobilized vehicle before release of
the vehicle has been officially secured shall have their vehicle subject to an
immediate tow and shall pay the costs of repairing or replacing said device.
§ 576-818. Implementation and enforcement.
[Amended 5-9-2022 by Ord. No. 41-2022]
This Part shall be enforced by the Police Department and the Parking
Authorityeach of which may promulgate such rules and regulations as are
necessary therefor, which shall become effective upon approval by Council.
§ 576-819. Right to hearing not waived.
Nothing in this Part shall be construed to deprive any person of the
constitutional right to a hearing or trial as to the violations for which
citations have been issued.
C   Selection of Towing Contractors
§ 576-821. Police to contact approved towing contractors; exceptions.
In all situations covered by § 3352 of Vehicle Laws of Pennsylvania (75
Pa.C.S.A. § 3352), as may be amended, which is incorporated herein by reference
and where towing of vehicles is authorized pursuant to the Code of the City of
Reading relating to parking and operation of vehicles, members of the Police
Department shall contact only towing contractors authorized by Council in
accordance with the provisions of this Part, except in an emergency situation,
to include a declared snow emergency, where such towing contractors are not
otherwise available.
§ 576-822. Definitions.
The term "tower" (authorized towing contractor) as used herein, and in
regulations promulgated pursuant to this Part, shall include: vehicle tower,
emergency wrecker (towing) service, towing firm, towing company and the plural
of any such term.
§ 576-823. Selection of towing contractors.
[Amended 1-13-2003 by Ord. No. 2-2003; 2-10-2003 by Ord. No. 5-2003]
The Managing Director or his designee, along with the Purchasing Manager, are
authorized to solicit bids and enter into contracts for a period of not more
than three years with one or more reputable private towing contractors, in
accordance with the City's purchasing procedures. Towing contractors will be
required to pay to the City, as surety, an amount determined by the bidding
process, in return for being granted the contract to tow for the City. A
performance bond or cash in the amount of the successful proposer's bid will be
accepted as required surety. Contracts will coincide with the calendar year.
Bids will be awarded for a period of three years, with the beginning and end of
each term coinciding with the calendar year. Contracts may be renewed for a
second term, which may be for a period of years equal than or lesser than the
first term. Bid specifications will be promulgated by the Purchasing Manager in
conjunction with the Police Department and the Public Works Department.
§ 576-824. Qualifications of tower.
The qualifications of towers eligible to provide towing services under the
jurisdiction of City authorities acting in accordance with the Pennsylvania
Vehicle Code, the Code of the City of Reading, and any other statutory
regulation will be set by City administration. Such qualifications will be
specified in the request for proposals that will be available during the bid
process.
§ 576-825. Duties of towers.
[Amended 1-13-2003 by Ord. No. 2-2003]
Towers will be responsible for fulfilling all duties and responsibilities as
specified in the contract. Authorized towing contractor(s), approved pursuant
to this Part, will provide towing service for the City of Reading including,
but not limited to, motor vehicle accident tows as requested; removal of
illegally parked and abandoned vehicles, towing of City-owned vehicles, snow
emergency towing, and removal of those vehicles declared to be health and
safety hazards as per the Vehicle Code and the Code of the City of Reading.
Vehicles declared "health hazards" under provisions of
Chapter 564 of the Code of the City of Reading may be declared and tagged as
"abandoned" immediately.
§ 576-826. Towing service charges.
[Amended 1-13-2003 by Ord. No. 2-2003; 2-10-2003 by Ord. No. 5-2003; 10-12-2015
by Ord. No. 54-2015; 7-24-2017 by Ord. No. 70-2017; 9-9-2024 by Ord. No. 56-
2024]
TOWING SERVICE FEE SCHEDULE
(SUBJECT TO CHANGE AT DISCRETION OF THE CITY OF READING)
                Day Charge
Type of Service (8:00 a.m to 6:00 p.m.)    Night Charge
                Weekends                   (6:00 p.m. to 6:00 a.m.)1
                (10:00 a.m. to 2:00 p.m.)1
TOWING SERVICE FEE SCHEDULE
(SUBJECT TO CHANGE AT DISCRETION OF THE CITY OF READING)
                          Day Charge
Type of Service           (8:00 a.m to 6:00 p.m.)    Night Charge
                          Weekends                   (6:00 p.m. to 6:00 a.m.)1
                          (10:00 a.m. to 2:00 p.m.)1
Basic Service
                          Primary Tower: Annual fee  Primary Tower: Annual fee
Municipal Administrative  (see amount set forth      (see amount set forth
Fee                       proposal)                  proposal)
                          Secondary Towers: $50 per  Secondary Towers: $50 per
                          tow                        tow
Service Call2             $59                        $74
Illegal Parking Tow Fee2  $180                       $205
Accident Tow2             $325                       $345
Snow Emergency Tow Fee2   $200                       $215
Additional Charges
Accident Tow (past first  $50 for each 1/2 hour      $50 for each 1/2 hour
hour)
Open locked vehicle       $25                        $40
                          $753                       $603 plus service call
                          $125 fee may be assessed   charge
Dropping hooked up        if the vehicle is fully    $125 fee may be assessed
vehicle                   loaded and ready to be     if the vehicle is fully
                          towed away                 loaded and ready to be
                                                     towed away
Dolly towers              $60                        $75
Rollback tows (see note)  $150 flat                  $175
Storage (regular tow)     $45 per day with 24-hour grace period
illegal only
Storage (accident tow and $55 per day with 24-hour grace period
all others)
Disconnect fee (drive     $25                        $35
shaft)
Winching from curb        $20 non-accident; if an    $35; if an accident $65
                          accident $50
Winching: Recovery, per
truck
First 30 minutes          $20 plus service charge    $20 plus service charge
Additional time           $65 up to each 1/2 hour    $85 up to each 1/2 hour
Vehicles greater than     $175 per hour              $175 per hour
11,000 GVW
45 ton truck4             $300 per hour              $300 per hour
Specialized equipment     $25 per hour extra if needed
Disposal of debris        Price shall be determined by degree of hazardous
                          waste
Clean out of vehicle at   $75
request of the City
Retrieval of personal
property from vehicle     $55
stored longer than 20
days
 
1   Any vehicle released outside of these hours or on a legal holiday may be
charged a $75 additional charge.
2   Twenty-four-hour grace period from the time of the tow.
3   Dropping hooked up vehicle. This fee may be charged to the owner/operator
of any illegal parked vehicle, or any vehicle ordered towed by a member of the
RPO, if a tow truck is attached in any way to a vehicle, or a substantial
effort has been initiated to tow the vehicle and the owner/operator arrives at
the scene to claim same prior to removal. No charges shall be assessed if no
substantial effort such as lowering the flatbed of the tow truck or moving the
vehicle has occurred. All charges will be paid to driver before vehicle is
released to owner.
4   Forty-five ton truck, or such designation as may be determined for towing
vehicles capable of towing a vehicle that may have a maximum weight rating as
allowed by Vehicle Laws of Pennsylvania (75 Pa. C.S.A., as may be amended).
§ 576-827. Towing zones.
In order to provide for the immediate removal of those vehicles interrupting
the proper and orderly flow of traffic and thereby constituting an emergency
situation, City of Reading shall be divided into zones, the number of zones not
to exceed two, the boundaries which shall be determined by statistical analysis
of the volume of vehicles towed by the Police Department with the exception of
abandoned motor vehicle tows. Authorized towing contractors for each zone will
be determined through the competitive bid process.
   A.   Method of altering zones. At the beginning of each contract period,
City administration may review the efficiency and suitability of the authorized
towing contract zones which have been established and shall make such changes
as the traffic control in the City and the welfare and safety of the public
shall require.
   B.   Nontransferability of zone assignments. An authorized towing contractor
that provides towing service within an assigned towing zone shall not sell,
assign, mortgage or otherwise transfer the right to service their assigned
towing zone. In cases where a vacancy occurs, applications for the vacant
towing zone will be accepted for 30 days and awarded in compliance with the
time specified by City Council.
§ 576-828. Nonliability of City for services.
[Amended 1-13-2003 by Ord. No. 2-2003]
The City shall not be liable to the authorized towing contractor for any
services in connection with the removal and storage of vehicles pursuant to
this Part, or charges incidental thereto. The authorized towing contractor
shall seek reimbursement exclusively from the owner of the vehicle, unless the
City of Reading has possession of the vehicle.
§ 576-829. Investigation of applicants and facilities.
Upon receipt of such application, the Chief of Police, or his designee, shall
cause an investigation to be made of such applicant and the facilities and
equipment of the applicant. Failure of an applicant to allow the inspection of
the applicant's facilities and equipment shall result in disqualification of
the applicant for approval. In the even the investigation shall determine that
the applicant has not met the requirements of this Part, the Chief of Police
shall notify the applicant in writing, to be hand delivered or mailed via
certified mail.
§ 576-830. Right of inspection.
The Chief of Police, or his designee, shall at all times have the right to
inspect the authorized towing contractor(s) facilities and equipment in order
to ascertain the towing contractor(s) continued compliance with the terms of
this Part.
§ 576-831. Promulgation of regulations and penalties.
The City of Reading shall have the authority to promulgate reasonable
regulations, including amendments thereto, governing towing procedures,
reporting requirements, and penalties as may be imposed for noncompliance.
§ 576-832. Prohibited behavior.
   A.   Running calls without police dispatch or request from the owner. In
addition to other penalties or sanctions as may be provided by law, an
authorized towing contractor violating this rule on two or more occasions in a
two-year period shall be terminated as an approved towing contractor.
   B.   In the event that a call is received directly from a vehicle owner, or
their representative, to respond to an accident scene, or to the location of a
vehicle where the vehicle has the appearance of having been recently involved
in an accident, no authorized towing contractor shall remove the vehicle from
the scene of the accident, or location of the vehicle, without notification to,
and approval by, the Police Department.
   C.   Soliciting for towing work at the scene of an accident is strictly
prohibited and violations of such will be dealt with in accordance with the
schedule of penalties provided herein.
   D.   Authorized towing contractors shall not perform any repair work on
towed vehicles without the owner's advanced written authorization.
§ 576-833. Compliance and responsibility.
   A.   In all situations as enumerated within this Part 8C, approved towing
contractors shall comply with all standards, procedures, restrictions and
regulations as may be promulgated. Failure to comply with said standards,
procedures, restrictions and regulations shall result in the assessment of
penalties as provided for by contract.
   B.   The Reading Police Department, as directed by the Chief of Police,
shall have the oversight responsibility of all approved, authorized towing
contractors. The Reading Police Department shall maintain records and
information on all approved authorized towing contractor/s including, but not
limited to, towing logs; towing receipts; communications; complaints;
disposition of complaints; penalties imposed and statistical review
information.
§ 576-834. Complaint procedure.
[Amended 1-13-2003 by Ord. No. 2-2003]
   A.   Upon receipt of a complaint regarding a possible violation of the
provisions of this Part by an approved authorized towing contractor, the
Reading Police Department shall conduct a thorough investigation into the
allegations and document the result of the investigation.
   B.   On completion of the investigation by police personnel, they shall
submit, in writing, the results of the investigation to the Chief of Police, or
his designee, and classify the complaint as:
      (1)   Sustained. The allegation/s are supported by sufficient evidence/
information.
      (2)   Not sustained. There is insufficient evidence/information to prove
or disprove the allegation.
      (3)   Unfounded. The allegation is false or not factual.
   C.   If the complaint is sustained, the Chief of Police shall direct the
imposition of penalties as described in the current contract between the City
and the authorized tower(s). In any case, the complainant and the approved
authorized towing contractor shall be notified of the disposition of the
investigation.
   D.   If the recommended penalty for a violation of this Part is termination
of the contract between the City and the authorized towing contractor, the
towing contractor shall have the right to a meeting before the Managing
Director. The Managing Director may uphold the recommendation, or impose any
such other recommendations as they may deem applicable. The towing contractor
shall have the ability to appeal the Managing Director's decision to the body
of Council at a hearing.
§ 576-835. Violations and penalties.
Regulations and penalties for violations are specified in the contract between
the City and the authorized tower(s). The reckoning period for the first,
second and third violations is the length of the contract period or one year,
whichever is shorter, or any other time limit specified by the contract.
Part 9
Snow And Ice Emergency
A   Snow and Ice Emergency Regulations
[Amended 2-14-2022 by Ord. No. 7-2022]
§ 576-901. Definitions.
The terms used in this Part shall have the meanings defined in the Pennsylvania
Vehicle Code unless otherwise defined below:
COMMERCIAL CORE DISTRICT - The downtown center for government services,
offices, shopping, hotels, entertainment and cultural activity encompassing the
area set forth on the Zoning Map of the City of Reading pursuant to § 600-501.
DIRECTOR - The Director of Public Works or his designated representative.
EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR - The Executive Director of the Reading Parking Authority or
his designated representative.
PARKING ZONE - Streets or highways, or portions thereof, or municipal parking
lots operated by the City or the Reading Parking Authority on which parking
meters or kiosks are installed, operated and used.
SNOW EMERGENCY ROUTE - Those streets marked as such in accordance with the
provisions of this Part.
STREET - The entire paved surface between curbs, open to the use of the public
as a matter of right for the purpose of vehicular travel.
§ 576-902. Declaration of snow emergency.
   A.   In the event weather conditions make it necessary for motor vehicle
traffic to be expedited and parking on City streets prohibited or restricted
for snow removal or other purposes, the Mayor or, in his absence, the Managing
Director shall declare a snow emergency.
   B.   Declaration of a snow emergency may occurwhile snow is falling within
the City; whenever there is a covering or coating of newly fallen snow; or
whenever the Mayor or, in his absence, the Managing Director receives a firm
forecast of snow from a recognized weather forecasting service.
   C.   Once in effect, prohibition under this section shall remain in effect
until terminated by announcement of the Mayor or Managing Director. While the
prohibition is in effect, no persons shall park or allow to remain parked any
vehicle on any portion of the snow emergency routes identified in this Part.
Vehicle owners shall have a maximum of four hours following the declaration of
a snow emergency to remove their vehicles from a snow emergency route.
   D.   Declaration of a snow emergency, and its subsequent termination, shall
be publicly announced as outlined in the City's emergency operations plan.
   E.   Nothing in this section shall be construed to permit parking at any
time or place where it is forbidden by any other provision of law.
   F.   The Reading Parking Authority shall provide parking at no charge at its
garages to City residents when a snow emergency is declared or when there is
prohibited parking pursuant to §
576-903. The Parking Authority shall control the time and manner of vehicles
parked in its garages.
§ 576-903. Declaration of prohibited parking for snow removal or inclement
weather.
   A.   The Director may post any City street no parking at any time, for the
purpose of snow removal or inclement weather, regardless of whether a snow
emergency is declared. Under any such circumstance, the following shall apply:
      (1)   When posted, it shall be unlawful for any person to park a vehicle
or to fail to remove a vehicle from any place along such posted street.
      (2)   The Director shall post any such street with temporary "no parking"
signs.
      (3)   The parking restrictions shall remain in effect until otherwise
declared by the Director.
      (4)   Vehicle owners shall have a maximum of four hours from the time "no
parking" signs are posted to remove vehicles on posted streets.
   B.   Commercial Core District and Parking Zones. The Mayor, the Managing
Director, Director or the Executive Director may post any City street in the
Commercial Core District or in a Parking Zone no parking at any time, for
purpose of snow removal, or inclement weather, regardless of whether a snow
emergency is declared. Under any such circumstance, the following shall apply:
      (1)   When posted, it shall be unlawful for any person to park a vehicle
or to fail to remove a vehicle from any place along such posted street.
      (2)   The Executive Director shall post any such street with temporary
"no parking" signs.
      (3)   The parking restrictions shall remain in effect until otherwise
declared by the Mayor, the Managing Director, Director or the Executive
Director.
      (4)   Vehicle owners shall have a maximum of four hours from the time "no
parking" signs are posted to remove vehicles on posted streets in the
Commercial Core District or in a Parking Zone.
§ 576-904. Moving, impounding and returning vehicles.
Vehicles parked in violation of the provisions of this Part shall be subject to
an immediate tow by the Police Department or the Parking Authority. All costs
of removal, towing, and storage or parking of any vehicle removed under the
provisions of this Part shall be paid by the owner of the vehicle and that
vehicle shall remain impounded until all costs are paid.
§ 576-905. Signs to mark snow emergency routes.
On each street designated as a snow emergency route, the Director shall post
special signs, one on each block and/or at intervals not exceed 660 feet and at
all points where any street affected joins another street with the wording:
"Snow Emergency Route. No Parking During Emergency. Tow Away Zone." These signs
shall be distinctive and uniform in appearance and shall be plainly readable to
persons traveling on the street.
§ 576-906. Official snow emergency routes.
   A.   The following streets are designated snow emergency routes:
Buttonwood Street
Centre Avenue
Clymer Street
Fifth Street
Fourth Street
Franklin Street
Hampden Boulevard
Hancock Boulevard
Hiester's Lane
Kenhorst Boulevard
Lancaster Avenue
Laurel Street
Mineral Spring Road
Morgantown Road
Museum Road
Old Wyomissing Road
Penn Street
Perkiomen Avenue
River Road
Schuylkill Road
Spring Street
Thirteenth Street
Walnut Street
Washington Street
Wyomissing Boulevard
B.   The snow emergency routes are shown in Figure 1.20
20. Editor's Note: The snow emergency routes map is on file in the Public Works
Department.
§ 576-907. Snow removal operations.
   A.   The Director and Chief of Police are hereby jointly authorized to close
any street and redirect traffic whenever necessary to plow, clear or otherwise
remove snow. It shall be unlawful for any person to pass through a closed area,
unless authorized.
   B.   Equipment owned by the City or Parking Authority, or contracted
equipment is permitted to operate in any direction on any street, at any time
upon orders of the Director or Executive Director.
   C.   No person shall remove snow or ice from private property or any
sidewalk and place it upon any City street.
§ 576-908. Violations and penalties.
No person shall park a motor vehicle in violation of any provision of this
Part. Violations shall be issued in the manner and amounts set forth in Part 4
of this chapter.
Part 10
Pedalcycles And Nonmotorized Vehicles
A   Regulations
§ 576-1001. Riding and parking of pedalcycles on sidewalks along certain
streets prohibited.
[Amended 3-26-2012 by Ord. No. 34-2012; 5-14-2012 by Ord. No. 47-2012]
   A.   It shall be unlawful for any person to ride or to park a pedalcycle on
the sidewalk unless authorized by City ordinance or provided herein.
   B.   No person shall ride a bicycle on the sidewalk except for members of
the Police Department, employees of the Reading Downtown Improvement District,
and employees of the Reading Parking Authority, while on duty, when required
for emergency action, who have been duly trained.
   C.   Any person who violates any provision of this section shall, upon
conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of $5 and costs.
§ 576-1002. Restrictions on use of pushcarts.
   A.   The word "pushcart," as used in this section, shall mean a vehicle,
including a pedalcycle, propelled solely by human power, and used or intended
for use for the display, transport, exhibit or sale of goods, wares or
merchandise.
   B.   It shall be unlawful for any person to propel a pushcart upon any
sidewalk in any business district except as necessary to move the pushcart to a
location from which it is to be loaded or unloaded or from which goods, wares
or merchandise are to be sold or dispensed under permit from the City Council
as provided in Subsection C of this section.
   C.   It shall be unlawful for any person to park a pushcart upon any
sidewalk except for the purpose of selling or dispensing from that pushcart
goods, wares or merchandise to passersby under permit from the City Council.
Every such permit shall be issued to the person making application for the
permit, upon payment of a fee, which shall be for the use of the City as
provided in
Chapter 212, Fees. The permit shall be granted to the applicant, upon payment
of the fee, and upon the applicant signing an agreement with the City Council
that he shall be bound by the conditions imposed by City Council and made a
part of the permit, dealing with the following matters: 21
      (1)   Restricting or limiting the parking of the pushcart to one or more
stated locations upon the sidewalk and to stated days and hours at each
location.
      (2)   Stating requirements to be adhered to in connection with the
disposal of garbage and refuse resulting from the operations carried on.
      (3)   Requiring that there be no violation of any law, ordinance or
regulation pertaining to health, sanitation and the handling of food or drink.
   D.   Any person who violates any provision of this section, or any condition
of any permit granted under this section, upon conviction, shall be sentenced
to pay a fine of $25 and costs.
21.   Editor's Note: Amended during codification (see
Ch. 1, General Provisions, Part 2).
§ 576-1003. Skates, skateboards, coasters, sleds and other toy vehicles.
   A.   It shall be unlawful for any person to ride on a sled upon any sidewalk
in the City, or upon any roadway unless that roadway is on a portion of a
street blocked off for sledding by authority of §
576-105 or 576-217. Provided, nothing in this subsection shall prevent a
pedestrian from pulling a sled, with or without a rider, upon a sidewalk.
   B.   It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in roller-skating,
skateboarding or to ride upon or propel any coaster or other toy vehicle upon:
      (1)   Any street except in order to cross the roadway.
      (2)   Any sidewalk located in a business district, except that nothing in
this subsection shall prevent a pedestrian from pulling a coaster or other toy
vehicle, with or without a rider, upon a sidewalk.
   C.   Any person who violates any provision of this section shall, upon
conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of $5 and costs.
Part 11
Pedestrians
A   Regulations
§ 576-1101. Pedestrians to obey traffic-control signs.
At all locations in the City where official traffic-control signals are
installed, pedestrians, except where directed otherwise by pedestrian-control
signals installed under §
576-1102, shall obey the directions of those traffic-control signals, as
follows:
   A.   When facing a green signal, a pedestrian may proceed across the roadway
within a crosswalk.
   B.   When facing a steady yellow signal, a pedestrian shall not start to
cross the roadway.
   C.   When facing a steady red signal, a pedestrian shall not enter the
roadway.
§ 576-1102. Pedestrian-control signal locations established.
   A.   At the following locations, official pedestrian-control signals shall
be erected (or are ratified if previously erected):
 
Location
(Reserved)
 
   B.   Every pedestrian facing a steady or flashing "Don't Walk" signal shall
obey the directions of that signal, as follows:
      (1)   When facing a steady "Don't Walk" signal, a pedestrian shall not
start to cross the roadway in the direction of the signal, but any pedestrian
who has partially completed his crossing on the "Walk" signal should proceed to
a sidewalk or safety zone while the "Don't Walk" signal is showing.
      (2)   When facing a flashing "Don't Walk" signal, a pedestrian shall not
start to cross the roadway in the direction of the indication, but any
pedestrian who has partly completed crossing during the "Walk" indication
should proceed to a sidewalk or safety zone.
   C.   Any pedestrian who fails to obey the directions of a "Don't Walk"
signal, as indicated above, shall be guilty of an offense and a violation of
this Part.
§ 576-1103. Locations where pedestrian crossing in unmarked crosswalks
restricted.
Except when authorized by a police officer or other appropriately attired
person authorized to direct, control or regulate traffic, it shall be unlawful
for any pedestrian to cross the roadway at any of the following streets, at the
intersection with that street indicated:
 
Street     Intersection Direction of Travel
(Reserved)
 
§ 576-1104. Locations where pedestrians may cross only in crosswalk.
   A.   It shall be unlawful for any pedestrian:
      (1)   To cross any roadway in a business district within the City except
in a crosswalk.
      (2)   To cross the roadway, in any of the following portions of streets
in the City, except in a crosswalk:
 
Street     Between
(Reserved)
 
   B.   Provided, nothing in this section shall permit any pedestrian to cross
in a crosswalk at any location where that crossing is prohibited by §
576-1102.
§ 576-1105. Pedestrians only.
Cedar Street, from the north building line of Court Street to the south
building line of Washington Street, be and the same are hereby restricted to
use by pedestrian traffic only.
§ 576-1106. Violations and penalties.
Any pedestrian who violates any provision of this Part shall be guilty of a
summary offense and, upon conviction, shall be sentenced to pay a fine of $5
and costs.
Part 12
Parades, Special Events, And Public Gatherings
A   Parades, Special Events, and Public Gatherings
 
Publisher's Note: This Part has been AMENDED by new legislation (Ord. 32-2022,
enacted 4-25-2022). The text of the amendment will be incorporated below when
the ordinance is codified.
§ 576-1201. Short title.
[Amended 5-10-2010 by Ord. No. 16-2010]
This Part shall be known and cited as the "Parade and Special Events Ordinance"
of the City of Reading, Pennsylvania.
§ 576-1202. Definitions.
[Amended 5-10-2010 by Ord. No. 16-2010; 8-23-2010 by Ord. No. 60-2010]
As used in this Part, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
   APPLICANT — A person who has filed a written application for a special event
or community event site reservation permit and who assumes responsibility for
all duties and responsibilities, including payment, under this Part. [Amended
6-27-2011 by Ord. No. 30-2011]
   BLOCK PARTY — A large public party in which many members of a single
neighborhood congregate, either to observe an event of some importance or
simply for mutual enjoyment. [Added 10-28-2013 by Ord. No. 49-2013; Amended 4-
25-2022 by Ord. No. 32-2022]
   A.   Neighborhood groups requesting block parties may request the use of
City barricades for a fee. Block party applications must be filed 30 days prior
to the planned event.
   CHIEF OF POLICE — The Chief of Police of the City of Reading, Pennsylvania,
or his designee. [Amended 4-25-2022 by Ord. No. 32-2022]
   CITY — The City of Reading, Pennsylvania.
   COMMUNITY SITE RESERVATION - A temporary event, gathering, or organized
activity on any City street, public property or in any City building or other
facility, when use of a site is desired by a community or group of citizens but
no disruption of other citizen's passage occurs and no use of City services is
needed. A Community Site Reservation does not apply to the use of City
pavilions, field houses, or recreation facilities. [Amended 10-28-2013 by Ord.
No. 49-2013; 4-25-2022 by Ord. No. 32- 2022]
   A.   A community site reservation permit must be filed 30 days prior to the
planned event.
   B.   Examples of community site reservation activities are small gatherings
of persons distributing information and/or literature on advocacy, political,
religious or other topics while exercising the rights of free speech and
peaceful assembly.
   COMMUNITY SITE RESERVATION PERMIT - A document expressing the written and
signed authorization to hold a community event site reservation. This document
shall be based upon an application and issued by the City of Reading Police
Department. [Amended 6-27-2011 by Ord. No. 30-2011; 10-28-2013 by Ord. No. 49-
2013; 4-25-2022 by Ord. No. 32-2022]
   EVENT - A special event, block party and community site reservation. [Added
6-27-2011 by Ord. No. 30-2011; Amended 4-25-2022 by Ord. No. 32-2022]
   PARADE — Any parade, march or procession of any kind in or upon any street
or public park within the City.
   PERSON — Any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company or
organization of any kind.
   RECREATION FACILITY/SITE RESERVATION - A temporary event, gathering or
organized activity at a City pavilion or recreational facility. [Added 10-28-
2013 by Ord. No. 49-2013; Amended 4-25- 2022 by Ord. No. 32-2022]
   RECREATION FACILITY/SITE RESERVATION PERMIT — A document expressing the
written and signed authorization to hold a recreation facility/site
reservation. This document shall be based upon an application and issued by the
Reading Recreation Commission. [Added 10-28-2013 by Ord. No. 49-2013]
   SIDEWALK — That portion of a street between the curblines or lateral lines
of a roadway and the adjacent property lines intended for the use of
pedestrians.
   SPECIAL EVENT — A temporary event, gathering or organized activity on any
City street, public or private property or in any City park, building or other
facility, involving one or more of the following factors: [Amended 6-27-2011 by
Ord. No. 30-2011; 10-28-2013 by Ord. No. 49-2013]
   A.   Closing of a public street, sidewalk or alleyway.
   B.   Blocking or restricting public property.
   C.   Blocking or restricting access to private property of others.
   D.   Use of pyrotechnics or special effects.
   E.   Use of open flame, explosions, or other potentially dangerous displays
or actions.
   F.   Use or display of animals, aircraft or watercraft only when such use or
display could create a disturbance or affect the public safety of persons
attending or in the immediate area of the event.
   G.   Sale or service of merchandise, food or nonalcoholic and alcoholic
beverages on public and private property where otherwise prohibited by
ordinance.
   H.   Installation of a stage, band shell, vehicle(s) of any kind, trailer,
van, portable building, booth, grandstand, or bleachers on public property, or
on private property where otherwise prohibited by ordinance.
   I.   Placement of portable toilets on public property, or on private
property where otherwise prohibited by ordinance.
   J.   Placement of "no parking" signs or barricades in a public right-of-way.
   K.   Amplification of music, voices, sounds, or activities in excess of
Chapter 387, Noise.
   L.   The Public Works, Fire or Police Departments reasonably determine that
the event will result in substantial impact on City resources, facilities or
public safety services in response thereto.
   M.   Examples of special events include but are not limited to: concerts,
dances, assemblages, processions, parades, circuses, amusement rides, fairs,
festivals, community events, marathons and other running events, bicycle races
and tours, car races, boat races and other organized activity conducted for the
purpose of fund-raising for profit, nonprofit fund- raising, community
promotion or charity.
   N.   The Police Department Traffic Unit shall determine if a special event
permit is required.
   SPECIAL EVENT PERMIT - A document expressing the written and signed
authorization to hold a special event issued by the City of Reading Police
Department and approved by City of Reading's Risk and Safety Coordinator, City
Solicitor, Manager of Property Maintenance, Public Works Director and the Fire
and Police Chief. This document shall be based upon an application submitted to
City of Reading Police Department. [Amended 6-27-2011 by Ord. No. 30-2011; 10-
28-2013 by Ord. No. 49-2013; 4- 25-2022 by Ord. No. 32-2022]
   SPECIAL EVENT VENUE — That area for which a special event permit has been
issued.
   STREET — The entire width between the boundary lines of every publicly
maintained right-of-way when any part thereof is open to use by the public for
the purpose of vehicular traffic.
   VENDOR — A person or entity that promotes or exchanges goods or services for
money. [Amended 10-28-2013 by Ord. No. 49-2013]
§ 576-1203. Permit required.
[Amended 5-10-2010 by Ord. No. 16-2010]
   A.   Except as provided in this Part, no person or entity shall conduct,
facilitate, promote, manage, aid, or solicit attendance at a special event,
community event site reservation activity or recreation facility/site
reservation activity until an applicable permit has been issued by the City of
Reading or the Reading Recreation Commission. [Amended 10-28-2013 by Ord. No.
49-2013]
   B.   Exceptions. This Part shall not apply to:
      (1)   Funeral processions by a licensed mortuary;
      (2)   House-moving and construction activities;
      (3)   Activities of a governmental agency or the Reading Recreation
Commission acting within the scope of its authority and functions; [Amended 6-
27-2011 by Ord. No. 30-2011; 10-28-2013 by Ord. No. 49-2013]
      (4)   Lawful exercise of free speech and right to assemble on sidewalks
or other public property where such demonstration does not impede the passage
of others and all laws, ordinances, and regulations are obeyed;
      (5)   Students traveling to and from classes or participating in school
district-sanctioned educational activities, provided such conduct is under the
immediate direction and supervision of the proper school authorities. [Amended
6-27-2011 by Ord. No. 30-201122]
22.   Editor's Note: This ordinance also repealed original Subsection E,
regarding a governmental agency, which immediately preceded this subsection.
§ 576-1204. Application (fees).
[Amended 5-10-2010 by Ord. No. 16-2010; 8-23-2010 by Ord. No. 60-2010; 6-27-
2011 by Ord. No. 30-2011; 10-28-2013 by Ord. No. 49-2013; 4-25-2022 by Ord. No.
32-2022]
An individual requiring a special event permit, block party permit or a
community site reservation permit shall pick up and submit a completed
application for the event online or at the City's Police Department Traffic
Office. An individual requiring a recreation facility/site reservation permit
shall pick up and submit a completed application for the event online or at the
Reading Recreation Commission. The application shall be signed by the
applicant. The application will serve as a contract between the applicant and
the City of Reading or the applicant and the Reading Recreation Commission as
applicable.
   A.   Filing period.
      (1)   A special event permit application shall be submitted to the City
at least 90 days (three months) but no more than 180 days (six months) prior to
the date proposed for the special event.
      (2)   A block party permit application shall be filed 30 days prior to
the planned event.
      (3)   A community site reservation permit application shall be filed 30
days prior to the planned event.
      (4)   A recreation facility/site reservation permit application shall be
filed 30 days prior to the planned event.
   B.   Late applications. The Mayor and Chief of Police, where good cause is
shown, may, but is not required to, consider an application filed less than the
applicable time frame only if all requirements for the permit can be met.
      (1)   Late fees will apply, see the following section for more
information, §
576-1205. Fees, time limit and cost of event.
   C.   Special event permit application contents. The application for a
special event permit shall set forth the following information:
      (1)   The name, address and daytime telephone number, cell phone number,
and email address of the person seeking to conduct such event.
         (a)   A copy of the applicant's driver's license/ID will need to
accompany the application.
      (2)   If the event is proposed to be conducted for, on behalf of, or by
an organization, the name, address and telephone number of the headquarters of
the organization and those who are authorized and responsible for such
organization.
      (3)   The name, address and telephone number of the person who will be
the event chairman and who will be responsible for its conduct.
      (4)   The location of the event.
      (5)   The purpose of the event.
      (6)   The date, days, and times when the event is to be conducted.
      (7)   The setup, tear-down, and cleanup dates and times.
      (8)   The route to be traveled, the starting point and the termination
point for parades.
      (9)   The approximate number of persons who will be attending the special
event and the approximate number of person who will participate in the event as
volunteers or workers. Note: The PA Department of Health requires an ambulance
on standby at the event for all events expecting 5,000 or more people.
      (10)   The hours when such event will start and terminate.
      (11)   Maps detailing proposed site locations and/or routes along with
written descriptions of the following:
         (a)   Amplification devices: types used and for what purposes.
         (b)   Electrical requirements: voltage, amperage, and apparatus
associated with electrical needs for activities, vendors, etc.
         (c)   Emergency medical stations: first aid or emergency medical
services based on special event risk factors as determined by the City Managing
Director or designee.
         (d)   Equipment: types of equipment used to service special event and/
or to be showcased in the event.
         (e)   Fire lanes: contingency plan for access by fire-fighting and
emergency medical vehicles, equipment and personnel.
         (f)   Fireworks or pyrotechnic displays: amount, type, and firesafety
plans, including proof of application for state permit. All pyrotechnic/
fireworks/flame display plans must be reviewed by the Fire Marshal's office and
a member of the Fire Marshal's staff must be present at the time of the
display.
         (g)   Litter control: number, size and location of trash receptacles,
as well as trash removal and disposal.
         (h)   Parade, race, other similar activities: show start and finish
locations for marathons, “fun-runs,” “walk-a-thons,” trail rides, cycle and
motorbike tours, watercraft events, scavenger hunts, etc.
         (i)   Portable toilets: the number of portable sanitation facilities
based on the Portable Sanitation Association International (PSAI) policy, City
policies, and City codes, including quantity that will be in compliance with
the Americans with Disabilities (ADA) Act.
         (j)   Signage: type of proposed on-site and off-site signage,
including quantity, dimensions and materials.
         (k)   Street closures and detours: a statement as to whether the
special event will occupy all or only a portion of the width of the streets,
sidewalks, or other public rights-of-way proposed for pedestrian and vehicular
traffic control.
         (l)   Structures: all temporary structures, including but not limited
to booths, buildings, stages, bleachers, fences, tents, awnings and canopies.
If any temporary structure is equal to or larger than 200 square feet in
diameter, a certificate confirming the use of flame-retardant material shall be
provided by applicant.
         (m)   Vendors: list each vendor, including products and services
offered. The merchandise, products and services offered cannot be in violation
of the duly enacted Code of the City of Reading and cannot include items that
are “adult” related and can only be sold to persons over 21 years of age. All
vendors must also provide a valid tax ID number, as required by Pennsylvania
law, A valid City of Reading business license, a copy of a current City- or
state-issued health permit and a food handler certificate.
         (n)   Vehicles: types of vehicles used to support services to the
special event and/ or to be showcased in the event along with the approximate
number of and description of any vehicles which will participate in the special
event.
         (o)   A plan to accommodate the anticipated parking requirements for
those participating or attending the event.
      (12)   Alcoholic beverages:
         (a)   Conditions and restrictions on the use of alcoholic beverages.
         (b)   Submit a list of all vendors who will be providing alcohol.
         (c)   Note: Alcoholic beverages are prohibited in all City parks,
playgrounds and facilities except as specifically authorized by the City and in
compliance with the Pennsylvania Liquor Control Board (PLCB).
       (13)   Admission fees: the cost of admission, if any, and whether the
event is a public or private event.
      (14)   Animals: the approximate number and description of the types of
animals anticipated to be part of the special event, if any. Refer to the
Animal Control Ordinance23 for requirements for proper control and handling of
animals and animal waste during special events. Event applications including
the use of animals will be reviewed by the Animal Control Agency.
      (15)   Insurance: proof of comprehensive general liability insurance in
the amount of $1,000,000, naming the City of Reading and other affected
entities as additional insured as explained in §
576-1220.
      (16)   Water/wastewater: if applicable, a plan for the disposal of
wastewater, including capture and containment, as approved by the Public Works
Department. All water generated must be disposed of through an approved
sanitary sewage system that is constructed, maintained, and operated according
to law.
      (17)   Miscellaneous: any additional information which the Chief of
Police shall find reasonably necessary to a fair determination as to whether a
permit should be issued.
   D.   Block party application contents. The application for a block party
shall set forth the following information:
      (1)   Name of applicant.
      (2)   Contact information of applicant.
      (3)   Organization name where applicable.
      (4)   Organization contact information where applicable.
      (5)   Location of the event.
      (6)   Purpose of the event.
      (7)   Date of the event.
      (8)   Number of persons expected for the event.
      (9)   Acknowledgement that the applicant accepts the proposed site in as-
is condition at the time of the event.
      (10)   A copy of the applicant's driver's license/ID will need to
accompany the application.
      (11)   The petition document which must be signed by 75% of the
residents/businesses affected by the proposed closure.
   E.   Community site reservation application contents. The application for a
community event site reservation shall set forth the following information:
      (1)   Name of applicant.
      (2)   Contact information of applicant.
      (3)   Organization name where applicable.
      (4)   Organization contact information where applicable.
      (5)   Location of the event.
      (6)   Purpose of the event.
      (7)   Date of the event.
      (8)   Number of persons expected for the event.
      (9)   Acknowledgement that the applicant accepts the proposed site in as-
is condition at the time of the event.
      (10)   A copy of the applicant's driver's license/ID will need to
accompany the application.
   F.   Recreation facility/site reservation application contents. The
application for a recreation facility/site reservation shall set forth the
following information:
      (1)   Name of applicant.
      (2)   Contact information for applicant.
      (3)   Facility requested.
      (4)   Purpose of the event.
      (5)   Date of the event.
      (6)   Number of persons expected for the event.
      (7)   Acknowledgement that the applicant is responsible for cleanup.
23.   Editor's Note: See Ch. 141, Part 2, Animal Control.
§ 576-1205. Fees, time limit and cost of event.
[Amended 5-10-2010 by Ord. No. 16-2010; 6-27-2011 by Ord. No. 30-2011; 8-26-
2013 by Ord. No. 35-2013; 10-28-2013 by Ord. No. 49-2013; 4-25-2022 by Ord. No.
32-2022]
Fees. All permit fees are due and payable at the time of filing of the
application. A copy of the receipt from the City's Treasury Office must
accompany the application through the approval process in order for the permit
to be issued.
   A.   Special event permit: Each applicant requesting a special event permit
shall be required to pay a processing fee and a security deposit fee, neither
of which will be waived. Such applicant may also be required to pay an
additional fee for City services or facilities as described in §
576-1205 below.
      (1)   All fees required for a special event permit shall be adopted by
City Council and contained within the City of Reading Fee Schedule.24
         (a)   Special event applications submitted between 60 and 89 days
prior to the event date will be subject to a $25 late fee.
         (b)   Special event applications submitted between 30 and 59 days
prior to the event date will be subject to a $50 late fee.
         (c)   Special event applications submitted 29 days or less prior to
the event will not be accepted.
      (2)   If the event is canceled or not held after the permit has been
issued by the City, the processing fee will be refunded, minus an
administrative processing fee of $50 and other costs incurred by the City.
      (3)   Security deposit:
          (a)   All security deposit fees required under this Part shall be
adopted by City Council and contained within the City of Reading Fee
Schedule.25
          (b)   The full security deposit will be refunded if the location of
the special event is clean and free of litter and damage and City services
costs are paid. The refund of the security deposit will be prorated based upon
the condition of the premises at the conclusion of the event as determined by
the City's Police Department Traffic Office or its designee.
         (c)   The fee amount does not include any additional fees charged by
various City departments for the use of City facilities or City services.
         (d)   Additional fees that arise during the event will be billed to
the applicant and will be due within 30 days after mailing of the invoice.
   B.   Block party permit: All fees required for a block party, including
barricade fees shall be adopted by City Council and contained within the City
of Reading Fee Schedule. No security deposit will be required.
   C.   Community site reservation: The community event site reservation is
free of charge.
   D.   Recreation facility/site reservation: All fees required for a
recreation facility/site reservation shall be adopted by City Council and
contained within the City of Reading Fee Schedule.
   E.   Use of City personnel resources for event:
      (1)   Fire and EMS, Police, Public Works, and the Reading Parking
Authority will determine the number of and duration of personnel needed to
provide services for the event based on the nature, the location, and the
number of expected attendees. Extra employees will often have to be scheduled
as to not significantly interfere with regular City operations. [Amended 10-26-
2015 by Ord. No. 59-2015]
      (2)   Costs for needed services shall be paid according to the current
City hourly rate for the personnel involved in the event and in adherence to
conditions set forth in bargaining agreements, such as the minimum number of
hours to be paid for such employee service. The overtime rate for employees
will most likely be applicable.
   (3)   Cost estimates will be provided to the applicant at least 30 days
prior to the event. Payment for estimated City services are due in full 14 days
prior to the event.
   (4)   Any complaints concerning the amount and cost of personnel needed to
provide a clean and safe event will be heard and decided by the City Managing
Director or designee.
24.   Editor's Note: See
Ch. 212, Fees.
25.   Editor's Note: See
Ch. 212, Fees.
§ 576-1206. Changes to application.
[Amended 5-10-2010 by Ord. No. 16-2010; 6-27-2011 by Ord. No. 30-2011; 10-28-
2013 by Ord. No. 49-2013; 10-26-2015 by Ord. No. 59-2015; 4-25-2022 by Ord. No.
32-2022]
Any proposed changes to the application prior to the date of the event must be
approved by the City's Police Department or the Reading Recreation Commission,
as applicable, with possible consultation with Public Works, Manager of
Property Maintenance, Fire, Risk and Safety, the Reading Parking Authority and
the City Solicitor.
§ 576-1207. Date of permit issued.
[Amended 5-10-2010 by Ord. No. 16-2010; 6-27-2011 by Ord. No. 30-2011; 10-28-
2013 by Ord. No. 49-2013; 4-25-2022 by Ord. No. 32-2022]
   A.   Notwithstanding the acceptance of a completed application, no date for
an event shall be considered confirmed until an applicant has fully complied
with all necessary requirements and the permit has been approved and issued. If
an application for an event has been submitted for a specific date but is
waiting for approval, no other application can be accepted for that same date
and location until a decision on the first application has been made.
   B.   Certain annual special events have a “standing tentative reserved
date,” such as the Holiday Parade. These dates will be honored providing the
applicant submits the special event permit application in accordance with this
Part.
   C.   To avoid double-booking a City facility, the person responsible for
City facilities should be notified immediately of the proposed date and event
so that the venue can be tentatively reserved for said date.
§ 576-1208. Conditions for issuance of permit, where applicable.
[Amended 5-10-2010 by Ord. No. 16-2010; 6-27-2011 by Ord. No. 30-2011; 10-28-
2013 by Ord. No. 49-2013; 4-25-2022 by Ord. No. 32-2022]
The City's Police Traffic Office or the Reading Recreation Commission may issue
a permit, where applicable, when:
   A.   An application is successfully completed and filed in accordance with
this Part; and
   B.   All of the following conditions are satisfied:
      (1)   The event will not substantially interrupt the safe and orderly
movement of vehicular and pedestrian traffic.
      (2)   The event will not require the diversion of police officers, Fire
Department personnel or other department employees so as to significantly
impact the City departments' ability to respond appropriately to regular City
duty throughout the remainder of the community.
      (3)   The concentration of persons, animals, vehicles, or things at the
staging and disbanding areas, as well as along the event or street activity
route, will not unduly interfere with the movement of police, fire, ambulance,
and other emergency vehicles on the streets.
      (4)   The event is not being conducted for an unlawful purpose, nor will
it violate any ordinance of the City or any other applicable law.
      (5)   The event will not substantially interfere with any other event for
which an event permit has already been issued; nor shall it substantially
interfere with the provision of City services in support of other scheduled
events or unscheduled government functions.
      (6)   The event will not have any unmitigated adverse impact upon
residential or business access and traffic circulation in the same general
venue.
       (7)   All sponsor(s), participants, and attendees at events are subject
to all laws, ordinances, and regulations not specifically exempted by the
special event permit or the community event site reservation permit, including
but not limited to noise volume, disorderly conduct, and intoxication. Police,
fire and code officers may order the shutdown of a special event, block party,
community site reservation or a recreation facility/ site reservation that
becomes disorderly or hazardous.
§ 576-1209. Denial or revocation of permit.
[Amended 5-10-2010 by Ord. No. 16-2010; 6-27-2011 by Ord. No. 30-2011; 10-28-
2013 by Ord. No. 49-2013]
The City's Police Department Traffic Office, in consultation with the City
Mayor or Managing Director or the Reading Recreation Commission, may deny or
revoke an application or subsequent permits if the applicant fails to satisfy
or violates any of the requirements set forth in this Part; or
   A.   The applicant has made or permitted the making of a false or misleading
statement or omission of material fact on the permit application; or
   B.   The applicant has violated this Part or has had a permit revoked within
the preceding 12 months; or
   C.   The applicant violates or has violated within the past 12 months
another City ordinance or state law; or
   D.   The City's Police Department Traffic Office or the Reading Recreation
Commission believes that persons or property are at risk as a result of the
activities or conduct of persons at the event; or
   E.   The applicant has violated any terms or conditions of the permit as
issued.
§ 576-1210. Notice of decision.
[Amended 5-10-2010 by Ord. No. 16-2010; 6-27-2011 by Ord. No. 30-2011; 10-28-
2013 by Ord. No. 49-2013]
If the application is rejected, notice shall be provided by facsimile
transmission, e-mail, telephone, and/or U.S. mail directed to the applicant
within 10 business days after the date upon which the application was filed, a
notice of its action, stating the facts and conclusions, which are the basis
for the denial of the permit. If the permit is revoked, notice shall similarly
provide to the applicant a reason for its action within 10 business days after
the event.
§ 576-1211. Street activity and route restrictions.
[Amended 5-10-2010 by Ord. No. 16-2010; 8-23-2010 by Ord. No. 60-2010; 6-27-
2011 by Ord. No. 30-2011; 10-28-2013 by Ord. No. 49-2013]
The City's Police Department and/or City Managing Director may alter the time
restrictions stated herein upon review of the event's location, time, type,
safety concerns, the City's capabilities, and proximity to residential
properties. Events shall comply with the following restrictions:
   A.   Events held on public property within the City limits or on a publicly
maintained right-of- way may begin staging (setting up) at 6:00 a.m. and shall
disband (shut down) at 10:00 p.m. Cleanup must be completed by midnight.
   B.   Events held primarily in a residential area may begin staging (setting
up) at 10:00 a.m. and shall disband (shut down) by 8:00 p.m. Cleanup must be
completed by 10:00 p.m.
   C.   For events held primarily in a residential area and requiring street
closures, the appropriate safety/security measures must be approved by the
Chief of Police and/or the Managing Director for the duration of the event and
at the expense of the applicant.
   D.   Noise levels for such events shall not exceed maximum permissible sound
levels in accordance with the City's Noise Ordinance. 27  This includes but is
not limited to air horns and other horn-blowing apparatus, whistles, and
amplified music, speech, and other sounds.
   E.   Throwing any items, including but not limited to candy, gum, food,
beads, confetti, balloons, and toys, from any and all kinds of moving vehicles,
equipment, trailers, bicycles, motorcycles, animals, etc., during event parades
is strictly prohibited. However, such items may be handed to individuals
curbside.
   F.   Only licensed drivers may operate motorized vehicles and equipment
during parades. This includes but is not limited to automobiles, tractors,
trucks of all makes, all-terrain vehicles (ATV), and go-carts.
   G.   The merchandise, products and services offered cannot be in violation
of the duly enacted Code of the City of Reading and cannot include items that
are "adult" related and can only be sold to persons over 21 years of age.
27.   Editor's Note: See
Ch. 387, Noise.
§ 576-1212. Temporary signs for events.
[Amended 5-10-2010 by Ord. No. 16-2010; 10-28-2013 by Ord. No. 49-2013]
   A.   It is unlawful for any person to place, post, paint, erect, display,
secure, or maintain any sign, banner, lighting, or advertising without the
prior written approval of the Public Works Department. In case of conflict with
the City's sign regulations in the Code of the City of Reading, the City's sign
ordinance shall control. 28
   B.   All event signs, banners, flyers, or advertisements of any kind shall
be contained within the boundaries of the event location and shall be removed
within 24 hours of the completion of the event. An event sign not removed in
compliance with this section may be removed by the City at the expense of the
applicant to include costs incurred by the City for removal of same. If an
event sign, banner, flyer, or advertisement becomes a hazard to the public's
safety or welfare due to inclement weather, inadequate maintenance, accidental
damage, or other cause, the City shall remove the sign immediately at the sole
cost of the applicant. After removal by the City, the City may store, dispose,
destroy, or otherwise handle the sign as it deems appropriate and shall have no
liability to the applicant or sign owner related to same. All banners not
picked up by the applicant or designee within one week after completion of said
event may be disposed, destroyed, or otherwise handled as deemed appropriate
with no liability on the part of the City.
28.   Editor's Note: See
Ch. 485, Signs.
§ 576-1213. Appeal procedure.
[Amended 5-10-2010 by Ord. No. 16-2010]
   A.   Any person aggrieved by the action of the Chief of Police shall have
the right to have the action of the Chief of Police reviewed by the Mayor of
the City upon written request to the Mayor delivered by registered mail to the
Mayor's office or to the Reading Recreation Commission, as applicable. The
Mayor shall thereupon review the action of the Chief of Police and the reasons
for his action and notify the aggrieved party by mail within 10 days of the
receipt of the appeal of his action thereon. [Amended 10-28-2013 by Ord. No.
49-2013]
   B.   Where a late application has been denied by the Chief of Police, the
action of the Chief of Police may be reviewed by the Mayor, upon receipt of a
written request for review by the aggrieved party. Failure to issue a permit
within three days of the receipt of the appeal shall be deemed notice of
dismissal of the appeal.
§ 576-1214. Alternative permit.
[Amended 5-10-2010 by Ord. No. 16-2010; 6-27-2011 by Ord. No. 30-2011; 10-28-
2013 by Ord. No. 49-2013]
The Chief of Police, in denying an application for an event permit, shall be
empowered to authorize the conduct of the event on a date, at a time, or over a
route different from that named by the applicant. An applicant desiring to
accept an alternate permit shall, within five days after notice of the action
of the Chief of Police, file a written notice of acceptance with the Chief of
Police. An alternate event permit shall conform to the requirements of, and
shall have the effect of, an event permit under this Part.
§ 576-1215. Notice to City and other officials.
[Amended 5-10-2010 by Ord. No. 16-2010; 6-27-2011 by Ord. No. 30-2011; 10-28-
2013 by Ord. No. 49-2013; 4-25-2022 by Ord. No. 32-2022]
Immediately upon the issuance of a special event, block party or community site
reservation permit, the Chief of Police shall send a copy thereof to the
following:
   A.   The Mayor.
   B.   The City Solicitor.
   C.   The Fire Chief.
   D.   The Director of Public Works.
   E.   Executive Director of the Parking Authority. [Added 10-26-2015 by Ord.
No. 59-2015]
§ 576-1216. Duties of permittee.
[Amended 5-10-2010 by Ord. No. 16-2010]
   A.   A permittee hereunder shall comply with all permit directions and
conditions and with applicable laws and ordinances.
   B.   Possession of permit. The applicant or other person heading or leading
such activity shall carry the event permit upon his person during the conduct
of the event. [Amended 6-27-2011 by Ord. No. 30-2011]
§ 576-1217. Public conduct during event.
[Amended 5-10-2010 by Ord. No. 16-2010; 6-27-2011 by Ord. No. 30-2011]
   A.   Interference. No person shall unreasonably hamper, obstruct or impede
or interfere with any event or with any person, vehicle or animal participating
or used in an event.
   B.   Driving through events. No driver of any vehicle shall drive between
the vehicles or persons comprising an event when such vehicles or persons are
in motion and are conspicuously designated as an event. [Amended 10-28-2013 by
Ord. No. 49-2013]
   C.   Parking on special event routes. The Chief of Police, Police Traffic
Supervisor, City Managing Director or designated representative shall have the
authority, when reasonably necessary, to prohibit or restrict the parking of
vehicles along a highway or part thereof constituting a part of the route of an
event. [Amended 10-28-2013 by Ord. No. 49-2013]
§ 576-1218. Inspections.
[Amended 5-10-2010 by Ord. No. 16-2010]
   A.   Amusement rides and/or attractions associated with special events shall
conform to statutory rules and regulations set forth in the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania. Copies of inspection or approval reports shall be required prior
to use in the City limits and verified by authorized City personnel. Amusement
rides in enclosed areas greater than 1,000 square feet are required to be
"fire-sprinkler-ready" with an external Fire Department connection (FDC) and be
inspected by the Fire Marshal's office.
   B.   All temporary structures, including but not limited to booths,
buildings, stages, bleachers, fences, tents, awnings, and canopies. If any
temporary structure is equal to or larger than 200 square feet in diameter, a
certificate confirming the use of flame-retardant material shall be provided by
applicant and shall be inspected by the Fire Marshal's office.
   C.   Special electrical and water/wastewater needs must be inspected prior
to the event.
§ 576-1219. Animal waste.
[Amended 5-10-2010 by Ord. No. 16-2010; 10-28-2013 by Ord. No. 49-2013]
Refer to
Chapter 141, Part 2, Animal Control, for requirements related to event
activities involving animals. Applicants are responsible for properly
controlling and handling all animals and animal waste.
§ 576-1220. Insurance required to conduct special event or recreation facility/
site reservation event involving City gymnasium rentals.
[Amended 5-10-2010 by Ord. No. 16-2010; 10-28-2013 by Ord. No. 49-2013]
   A.   An applicant for a special event must provide a certificate of
insurance showing proof of comprehensive general liability insurance in the
amount of $1,000,000. Such insurance shall name the City of Reading, its
officers, employees, agents, and, if required, any other public entity involved
in the event, as additional insured on a separate endorsement maintained for
the duration of the event. Notice of limitation, reduction, or cancellation of
insurance coverage shall be provided immediately to the City of Reading by the
carrier and the applicant.
   B.   The insurance required shall encompass all liability insurance
requirements imposed for other permits required under other sections of this
Part and is to be provided for the benefit of the City and not as a duty,
expressed or implied, to provide insurance protection for spectators or
participants.
   C.   A certificate of insurance must be submitted to the Police Traffic
Office no later than two weeks prior to the event. Failure to provide the
insurance or the letter of intent for insurance could result in the denial/
revocation of the permit.
§ 576-1221. Indemnification.
[Amended 5-10-2010 by Ord. No. 16-2010; 10-28-2013 by Ord. No. 49-2013]
The applicant for a permit shall acknowledge that he or she will indemnify and
hold harmless the City, its officers, employees, agents, and representatives
against all claims of liability and causes of action resulting from injury or
damage to persons or property arising out of the event.
§ 576-1222. Conditions for premises after event.
[Amended 5-10-2010 by Ord. No. 16-2010; 10-28-2013 by Ord. No. 49-2013]
The applicant is required to bring the premises back to the same or better
condition; and failure to comply will result in no future events to be held by
the applicant or organization and loss of security deposit.
§ 576-1223. Violations and penalties.
[Amended 5-10-2010 by Ord. No. 16-2010; 6-27-2010 by Ord. No. 30-2011; 10-28-
2013 by Ord. No. 49-201329; 4-25-2022 by Ord. No. 32-2022]
   A.   It shall be unlawful for any person to stage, present, or conduct or
attempt to stage, present or conduct an event without first having obtained a
permit therefor as herein provided or who shall otherwise violate any of the
provisions of this Part.
   B.   A person commits a summary offense if he/she:
      (1)   Knowingly commences or holds an event without an event permit or
with a permit that has expired or has been revoked; or
      (2)   Knowingly violates any terms or provisions of this Part.
   C.   Violations of this Part shall be treated as strict liability offenses
regardless of intent.
   D.   This Part governs fire safety and public health, safety, and general
welfare. Accordingly, any person, firm, corporation, or organization violating
or failing to comply with any of the provisions of this Part shall be subject
to the penalty as provided for in the Code of the City of Reading.
   E.   The penalty upon conviction of any violation of this Part is $500. 30
   F.   The administration may promulgate further regulations concerning this
section.
29.   Editor's Note: This ordinance also repealed former §§
576-1223, Revocation of permit, amended 5-10-2010 by Ord. No. 16-2010; and 576-
1224, Prohibited activities, amended 5-10-2010 by Ord. No. 16-2010; and
redesignated former § 576-1225, Violations and penalties, as §
576-1223.
30.   Editor's Note: Original § 15-1226, Fee Schedule, as amended, which
immediately followed this Subsection, was repealed 6-27-2011 by Ord. No. 30-
2011.
Part 13
Motorized Devices and All-Terrain Vehicles
[Added 7-12-2004 by Ord. No. 34-2004; Amended 12-19-2016 by Ord. No. 68-2016;
6-14-2021 by Ord. 44-2021]
A   Use and Operation
§ 576-1301. Operation of motorized devices is restricted.
No person shall operate an unlicensed, unregistered or uninspected motorized
device or all-terrain vehicle on any alley, public property or street.
§ 576-1302. Definitions.
[Amended 8-12-2024 by Ord. No. 47-2024]
   A.   For the purposes of this Part, a “motorized device” means a device
commonly referred to as a “dirt bike,” “motor scooter” or “powerboard,” that is
not registered with the State for legal use on streets, roads and highways but
not a motorized assistive device used by a person with a disability, that is
designed to allow operation powered by an internal combustion engine or
electric motor that is capable of propelling the device and operator without
human propulsion.
   B.   An “All-terrain vehicle” or “ATV” shall have the same meaning as used
in Section 7702 of the Vehicle Code, 75 Pa. C.S. § 7702.
   C.   “Forfeiture” - loss of property due to a violation of law.
   D.   “Operator” - a person who is operating a motorized device or ATV.
   E.   “Owner” - Any person who has legal or equitable title to the motorized
device or ATV and/or to the property on which a motorized device or ATV is
being operated.
   F.   “Private Property” - Any land, right-of-way, road or property under the
control of an owner other than the City of Reading and not available for
general use by the public.
   G.   “Seizure Notice” - notice mailed via first class mail to the owner of
the vehicle and to the person who was issued a notice of violation of City Code
Chapter 576 Part 13.
   H.   “Service Station” - a facility where motor vehicles of all types obtain
fuel, repair work and/or maintenance.
   I.   “Snow mobile” - an engine driven vehicle intended to travel over snow
or ice with a width of 48 inches or less.
   J.   “Vehicle” - ATV and/or motorized device.
§ 576-1303. Registration and Title.
[Amended 8-12-2024 by Ord. No. 47-2024]
   A.   Registration.
      (1)   All ATVs and/or motorized vehicles in the City of Reading, except
all-terrain vehicles used solely in support of a licensed commercial business
or agricultural purposes, need to be registered and titled with the
Pennsylvania Department of Conservation and Natural Resources (DCNR) for an ATV
or with PennDOT for a motorized device. Registration permits the ATV and/or
motorized vehicle to be operated exclusively on the owner’s private property,
on another landowner’s private property with written consent, or any local
highway or property designated by the municipality or the State for ATV and/or
motorized vehicle operation.
      (2)   Upon registration with DCNR, the plate must be attached and
prominently displayed on the rear of the ATV. Upon registration with PENNDOT,
the plate must be attached and prominently displayed on the rear of the
motorized device.
      (3)   Exempt from registration requirements are ATVs and/or motorized
vehicles owned by nonresidents of Pennsylvania provided that it is covered by a
valid registration in their state or province. If the vehicle is purchased at a
registered dealer, the dealer will handle the application for title and
registration. If the vehicle is purchased privately, the purchaser will need to
contact the Department of Conservation and Natural Resources or PENNDOT to
register and title the vehicle.
   B.   Title.
      (1)   All ATVs in the City of Reading must have a title issued by DCNR
and all motorized devices in the City of Reading must have a title issued by
PENNDOT. Title is not required for ATVs registered with DCNR before February
1987 until they are sold by the owner. For non-residents, the ATV must be
registered as per the regulations administered by the State within the United
States of America or its territories in which the owner resides.
      (2)   Title is not required for ATVs used exclusively as utility vehicles
for agricultural or support of a licensed commercial business operations; those
owned and operated by a governmental body; owned by a registered dealer prior
to sale; or an ATV owned by a resident of Pennsylvania but properly registered
in another state.
§ 576-1304. Operation and Use.
[Amended 8-12-2024 by Ord. No. 47-2024]
   A.   Operation.
      (1)   No person shall operate, park, stop, stand, place or maintain any
all-terrain vehicle and/or motorized vehicle on any public sidewalk, street or
any public property, including without limitation any park or recreation
facility, except where expressly authorized by law; provided that the owner or
a person with lawful permission of the owner may temporarily place an all-
terrain vehicle and/or motorized vehicle on the sidewalk abutting his or her
house or abutting any premises where the vehicle is lawfully stored, for
purposes of lawfully transporting the vehicle to a location outside the City
within 48 hours of notice to the Reading Police Department Police Chief or his
designee.
      (2)   Nothing in this section prohibits the lawful transport of an all-
terrain vehicle and/or motorized vehicle on a licensed trailer or other safe
carrier, or the manual transport of a vehicle onto or off of such a carrier, so
long as the motor or engine of the vehicle remains off at all times.
Additionally, this does not grant the operator authority to state or local
highways to gain access to a permitted ATV area of operation.
   B.   Permitting another to drive, possess or ride. No owner or other person
in control or custody of a dirt bike, ATV or other motorized vehicle prohibited
by this Part may permit it to be driven, possessed or ridden by any other
person on any public or private property that is located within the City of
Reading or regulated by the City of Reading.
   C.   Parents and Guardians. No parent or guardian of a minor may knowingly
permit the minor to violate any provision of this Part.
   D.   Motor Fuel Sales.
      (1)   In general - no service station, business selling motor fuel or any
other person may sell, transfer, or dispense motor fuel for delivery into any
unregistered dirt bike, ATV or other motorized vehicle prohibited by this Part.
      (2)   All service stations and businesses selling motor fuel shall
prominently post signs notifying the public about this prohibition at fuel
pumps and pay stations.
   E.   Nuisance.
      (1)   An ATV and/or motorized vehicle operator must remain at least 100
feet from any adjoining or adjacent property line, and must remain at least 150
feet from an off-site residential dwelling.
      (2)   No person shall operate an ATV and/or motorized device without an
effective and suitable muffling device on its engine which efficiently deadens
or muffles the noise of the exhaust.
      (3)   This does not include municipal, emergency and law enforcement
vehicles or vehicles used exclusively for agricultural or in support of a
licensed commercial business operations.
§ 576-1305. Towing and Storage.
   A.   The owner of the vehicle or the person charged with a violation of this
part shall be responsible for paying the towing and storage fees as per Chapter
212-144 of the City of Reading Codified Ordinances and the City's towing
contract with a towing contractor.
   B.   Vehicles shall be stored at a location determined to be secure by the
Public Works and Police Departments. The owner of the vehicles towed and stored
shall be responsible for the payment of the towing and storage fees, along with
any other penalties or fines assigned by the Police Department, prior to the
release of the vehicle.
   C.   Payment of the towing and storage fee alone shall not relieve the owner
from liability from any fine or penalty for the violation of this part for
which the vehicle was removed or stored.
§ 576-1306. Enforcement.
[Amended 10-11-2021 by Ord. No. 74-2021; 3-25-2024 by Ord. No. 18-2024; 8-12-
2024 by Ord. No. 47-2024; 9-9-2024 by Ord. No. 61-2024; 2-10-2025 by Ord. No.
10-2025]
   A.   Penalties. The penalty for a violation of this section relating to the
operation of motorized devices and all-terrain vehicles shall be notice of
violation and forfeiture of the vehicle. Automatic forfeiture shall apply to
all subsequent violations of this section. The penalty for any other violation
of this section shall be notice of violation and monetary penalties or fines in
the amounts listed in B.1. below and imprisonment, provided that an employee or
other non-owner of a service station or business selling motor fuel shall not
be personally liable for any violations of § 576-1304D.
   B.   Notices of violation and a seizure notice shall be issued by the Police
Department. Contested charges shall be resolved, penalties shall be imposed,
and payments shall be collected and processed by the Police Department.
      (1)   The following penalties shall be imposed:
         (a)   Penalty - An individual who violates this ordinance shall commit
a summary offense:
            [1]   For a first offense, be sentenced to pay a fine of not less
than $250 nor more than $1,000 and costs of prosecution and, in default of the
payment of the fine or costs, be imprisoned for not more than 10 days.
            [2]   For a subsequent offense, be sentenced to pay a fine of not
less than $500 and costs of prosecution and, in default of the payment of the
fine or costs, be imprisoned for not more than 30 days.
   C.   Seizure. In addition to the notice of violation, whenever a police
officer has probable cause to believe a vehicle has been used or is being used
in violation of this section, the officer may seize the vehicle. The vehicle
shall be stored at a secure location as determined by the Public Works and
Police Departments until the final adjudication of the offense.
   D.   Forfeiture. Forfeiture, other than voluntary forfeiture (as set forth
below) by the owner, of the impounded vehicle shall be approved or rejected by
the Code and License Appeals Board though an appeal by the defendant or vehicle
owner. If an appeal hearing is not requested within 30 days of the date of the
seizure notice, the Police Department shall issue a list of vehicles with a
copy of the violation notices and seizure notices to the Code and License
Appeals Board for approval or rejection.
      (1)   If forfeiture is not awarded, the Police Department shall return
the vehicle to the owner after:
         (a)   The owner pays all penalties and fees for the seizure, tow and
storage of the vehicle defined herein; and
         (b)   The owner provides proof of registration, title and proof of
insurance.
      (2)   If forfeiture is awarded, the Police Department shall dispose of
the vehicle in an appropriate manner which may include destruction of the
vehicle to reduce the opportunity for the vehicle to be used in any manner that
would violate this section. The Police Department may also, by contract,
transfer the forfeited vehicle to another municipal government for public
service and public safety purposes. That contract shall require the destruction
of the transferred vehicle when it goes out of service. Additionally, the
Police Department may authorize the City's towing contractor to sell any
vehicle forfeited under this section provided that the buyer is located further
than 300 miles from the City of Reading.
      (3)   If the Police Department cannot identify the legal owner of the
impounded vehicle within 45 days, the Department shall file a request for
forfeiture that includes the methods used to determine the ownership of the
vehicle with the Code and License Appeals Board. The Board shall approve or
reject the request at their next meeting. If the request is approved the
vehicle(s) shall be immediately destroyed.
   E.   Voluntary Forfeiture. Any person to whom a notice of violation is
issued may, if he provides proof that he is the registered owner of the
vehicle, within 45 days of the date of the seizure notice, agree to forfeit the
vehicle in lieu of contesting the violation and in lieu of other fines and
penalties or file an appeal with the Code and License Appeals Board.
§ 576-1307 Vehicles Seized Prior to the Effective Date of this Part.
[Amended 10-11-2021 by Ord. No. 74-2021]
Notices of seizure shall be issued to the owners of vehicles that have been
seized prior to the effective date of this Part by certified and first class
mail notifying the owner that he/she has 30 days to claim the vehicle as per §
576-1306 D.(1) above or appeal the seizure to the Code and License Appeals
Board as per §
576-1306 B. (1) above. Failure to take either action by the owner of the
vehicle shall result in the Police Department making a request for forfeiture
to the Code and License Appeals Board as per §
576-1306 D. (3) above.
Part 14
Handicapped Parking Regulations
A.
Regulations
§ 576-1401. Definitions.
The following words, whether in the singular or plural, when used in this Part,
shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this Part except in those instances
where the context clearly indicates otherwise:
ADJACENT PROPERTY OWNERS - Owners of properties in the City of Reading which
share a common property line with the property occupied by the resident for
whom a handicapped parking space is requested.
APPLICANT - One who is handicapped or who is a severely disabled veteran who
occupies real estate as his or her principal residence in the City of Reading
and who files an application for the installation of a handicapped parking
sign.
CITY - The City of Reading, Berks County, Pennsylvania.
HANDICAPPED PARKING SPACE - A parking space reserved for use by handicapped
persons or severely disabled veterans utilizing vehicles lawfully bearing
handicapped registration or severely disabled veterans plates or placards.
PENNDOT - The Pennsylvania Department of Transportation.
PLACARD - An instrument of notice that is hung from the inside rearview mirror
of a vehicle indicating that said vehicle is currently authorized to park in a
handicapped parking space.
§ 576-1402. Application for Handicapped Parking Space.
Any applicant wishing to reserve a handicapped parking space in front of or
near his or her residence on any street within the City upon which public
parking is currently permitted shall submit a written request to the Zoning
Administrator on a form drafted by the Zoning Administrator. This requirement
shall not apply to any currently pending application submitted prior to the
effective date of this Ordinance. Information on said form shall include:
1.   The name, address and telephone number of the applicant.
2.   The registration number of the handicapped or severely disabled veteran
registration plate or placard issued by PennDOT to the resident or the
applicant on behalf of the resident.
3.   Proof of ownership of a vehicle by the applicant or the resident for whom
the handicapped parking space is requested along with the make, model and
license plate number of such vehicle.
4.   A description of the physical impairment of the resident, a statement as
to whether the impairment is permanent or temporary (if temporary, a detailed
statement of the anticipated term of the impairment) and whether a device such
as wheelchair, crutches or walker is used by such resident for locomotion. The
applicant shall supply with the written request proof of the resident's
asserted medical disability from a medical doctor, doctor of osteopathy or
doctor of podiatry medicine (collectively, "physician"). The physician's
statement must be signed by the resident's physician, must not be issued more
than six months prior to the date of the written request and must specifically
set forth the nature of the impairment, how the impairment limits the
resident's mobility and the estimated duration of the resident's impairment.
5.   The location of the requested handicapped parking space.
6.   The names, addresses and telephone numbers (if listed in a published
telephone directory) of adjacent property owners of all real estate sharing a
common property line with the resident's.
7.   Copy and proof of a valid driver's license issued to the applicant.
§ 576-1403. Review process and criteria.
Both the Zoning Administrator, or his or her designee, and the Director of
Public Works, or his or her designee, shall meet regularly to review all
applications for handicapped parking spaces and before granting an application,
shall do an in-person inspection of the proposed space.
The grant or denial of a handicapped parking space application shall lie solely
and absolutely in the discretion of both the Zoning Administrator and the
Public Works Director. While the possession of a handicapped or severely
disabled veteran's registration plate or placard does not guarantee that the
applicant's request will be granted, the following factors in rendering a
decision on each request shall be as follows:
1.   Whether the person for whom the handicapped parking space is requested is
a resident;
2.   Whether PennDOT has issued a handicapped or severely disabled veteran
registration plate or placard to the resident or on behalf of the resident for
whom the request is made. Notwithstanding the foregoing, should no one residing
in the dwelling with the resident have such a handicapped or severely disabled
veteran registration plate from PennDOT, the resident or the applicant shall
not be entitled to the issuance of a handicapped parking space under this
article.
3.   Whether there exists a reasonably accessible and practicable off-street
parking space to serve the location, it being understood that if such off-
street parking place exists, the City shall not grant the request;
4.   Whether the resident has any other handicapped parking spaces reserved
unto him in the City such that there shall be no more than one parking space
per resident;
5.   The recommendations and findings of any traffic and/or engineering
studies, if any, for the location;
6.   The nature of the resident's disability, and whether that disability
creates a need for a reserved handicapped parking space that outweighs the
public interest in maintaining that space for general public use;
7.   All information set forth in the written request of the applicant; and
8.   Any other information which the Zoning Administrator and the Director of
Public Works deems applicable or appropriate under the particular facts and
circumstances of each request.
§ 576-1404. Notice to adjacent property owner.
The Zoning Administrator shall, in writing, notify the adjacent property owners
that an application has been submitted and that they can submit to the City in
writing, their support or opposition to the request. The notice shall set forth
the date and time by which such written support or objection must be received
by the Zoning Administrator. This requirement shall not apply to any currently
pending application submitted prior to the effective date of this Part.
§ 576-1405. Renewals.
All applications, which are approved in accordance with this Part, shall be
subject to an annual renewal process. An applicant may request renewal of an
approved handicap parking space by submitting an application for renewal. An
application for renewal shall be made on a form provided by the Zoning
Administrator. Failure to file an application shall subject the applicant to
the removal of his or space as an approved handicapped space.
§ 576-1406. Changes in conditions.
In the event that the disabled person experiences a material improvement in his
or her physical condition (as supported by documentation from his/her treating
physician) to the extent that the disabled person would no longer qualify under
the criteria set forth this Part, the disabled person shall immediately notify
the Zoning Administrator of such change in condition within 15 days of notice
from the treating physician to the disabled person. Upon receipt of such
notice, the Zoning Administrator shall cause the removal of any painted blue
curb and the handicap-parking-only sign from the location.
Upon the death of a disabled person, the personal representative of the
disabled person shall immediately notify the Zoning Administrator of such
change in condition within 15 days of notice of such event. Upon receipt of
such notice, the Zoning Administrator shall cause the removal of any painted
blue curb and the handicap-parking-only sign from the location.
In the event that the disabled person would no longer reside at the address of
the location of an approved handicap parking space for a period of more than 30
consecutive days for whatever reason, the disabled person shall immediately
notify the Zoning Administrator of such change in condition within 15 days of
moving from said residence.
Chapter 583
VENDING MACHINES
Part 1
Vending Machine Permits
§
583-101.   Purpose.
§
583-102.   Title.
§
583-103.   Interpretation.
§
583-104.   Definitions.
§
583-105.   Permit required.
§
583-106.   Issuance of permit(s).
§
583-107.   Permit fees.
§
583-108.   Permit renewal and expiration.
§
583-109.   Suspension of permit(s).
§
583-110.   Revocation of permits.
§
583-111.   Service of notices.
§
583-112.   Inspections.
§
583-113.   Violations and penalties.
§
583-114.   Construction and severability.
§
583-115.   Enforcement.
[HISTORY: Adopted by the City Council of the City of Reading as indicated in
part histories. Amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Food code — See
Ch. 251.
Construction codes — See
Ch. 180.
Zoning — See
Ch. 600.
STATE LAW REFERENCES
Retail Food Facility Safety Act — See 3 Pa.C.S.A. § 5701 et seq.
Food Safety Act — See 3 Pa.C.S.A. § 5721 et seq.
Sales and tax rate for vending machines — See 72 P.S. § 7202.
Food Vending Machines — See 25 Pa.C.S.A. Ch. 155.
Part 1
Vending Machine Permits
[Adopted 11-22-2010 by Ord. No. 94-2010 (Ch. 10, Part 21, of the 2001 Code of
Ordinances)]
§ 583-101. Purpose.
The purpose of this Part is to provide for the regulation of vending machines
in the City of Reading. The City of Reading has the responsibility to protect
the public health and welfare of its residents and visitors. It is the finding
of City Council that the regulation of vending machines is necessary to achieve
this end.
§ 583-102. Title.
This Part shall be known as the "Vending Machine Ordinance."
§ 583-103. Interpretation.
The provisions of this Part shall be construed to be the minimum requirements
necessary to serve the general public health and welfare of the residents of
and visitors to the City of Reading. Where the provisions of any statute, other
ordinance or regulation impose greater restrictions or higher standards than
those enumerated in this Part, the provisions of such statute, ordinance or
regulation shall govern.
§ 583-104. Definitions.
[Amended 6-26-2017 by Ord. No. 54-2017]
For the purpose of this Part, certain terms shall be defined as follows:
   CODE AND LICENSE APPEALS BOARD - The Board authorized to hear appeals of and
render decisions in matters concerning aggrieved applicants whose vending
permits have been denied, suspended, revoked or is not renewed pursuant to this
Part.
   OPERATOR - A person who manages a vending machine in the City of Reading.
   PERMIT - The written authorization, issued by the City of Reading, to
operate a vending machine within the City of Reading.
   PROPERTY MAINTENANCE DIVISION - A division of the City of Reading
administration under the Managing Director charged with enforcing the Code of
the City of Reading governing issues including, but not limited to, housing,
property maintenance and trade.
   VENDING MACHINE - Any self-service device offered for public use which, upon
insertion of a coin, coins or token, or by similar means, dispenses unit
servings of food or beverage either in bulk or in package, without the
necessity of replenishing the device between each vending operation.
   VENDING MACHINE BANK - Two or more vending machines on an account or at a
given location.
   VENDING MACHINE ENCLOSED - A vending machine located within a building.
   VENDING MACHINE PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY - A vending machine located in any
approved location which is legally open to public use and is located on a
public street, alley, sidewalk, and roadway.
§ 583-105. Permit required.
   A.   No person shall operate one or more vending machines without a valid
permit(s) issued by the Property Maintenance Division. Persons who do not
comply with the requirements of this Part shall not be entitled to operate a
vending machine in the City of Reading. The City of Reading is excluded from
this Part. Permit(s) are not transferable.
   B.   The operator's company name and service telephone number shall be
displayed on each vending machine or conspicuously adjacent to the vending
machine bank.
   C.   All operators of vending machines shall:
      (1)   Comply with the requirements of this Part.
      (2)   Maintain at the operator's headquarters or at some other designated
location a list of all vending machines operated by such operator within the
jurisdiction and the complete address of each machine location or other
establishments from which his/her machines are serviced. This information shall
be available to the Property Maintenance Division upon request, and shall be
kept current.
      (3)   Notify the Property Maintenance Division of any change in
operations involving new types of vending machines or conversions of existing
machines to dispense products other than those for which the machines were
built.
§ 583-106. Issuance of permit(s).
   A.   Any person desiring to operate one or more vending machines shall make
written application for a permit(s) on forms provided by the Property
Maintenance Division that will include registration information on each vending
machine to be located within the City of Reading.
   B.   Upon receipt of such application, the Property Maintenance Division
shall make an inspection of the vending machine and equipment location to
ensure that the vending machine and equipment location are compliant with all
provisions of the Code of the City of Reading including the Health, Plumbing
and Electrical Ordinances (
Chapter 180) and Zoning Ordinance (
Chapter 600).
   C.   A numbered operator's permit(s) shall be issued to the applicant by the
Property Maintenance Division after compliance by the operator with the
applicable provisions of this Part. The Property Maintenance Division will
track the vending machines by using the operator's permit number.
   D.   All vending operation locations in the public right-of-way must be
approved by the Property Maintenance Division.
   E.   Existing vending machine operators shall register their current vending
machines with the Property Maintenance Division for the 2011 permit year.
§ 583-107. Permit fees. 1
The operator shall submit an application and an annual permit fee to operate
one or more vending machines. Every operator requesting to have an enclosed
vending machine or a vending machine bank shall pay an annual permit fee per
machine for the privilege of operating a vending machine. Every operator
requesting a vending machine on the public right-of-way shall pay an annual
permit fee for the privilege of operating a vending machine in the public
right-of-way. Such fees shall be set by ordinance, as provided in
Chapter 212, Fees.
§ 583-108. Permit renewal and expiration.
All vending machine permits shall begin January 1 and expire on December 31 of
each year. It shall be the responsibility of each vending machine operator to
see that his machine(s) is/are properly permitted by the Property Maintenance
Division.
§ 583-109. Suspension of permit(s).
[Amended 6-26-2017 by Ord. No. 54-2017]
   A.   The Property Maintenance Division may, without prior warning, notice or
hearing, suspend any permit(s) to engage in a vending operation if the
operation constitutes a substantial hazard to public health. Suspension is
effective upon service of the notice required by Subsection B. When any permit
is suspended, vending operations shall immediately cease. Whenever any permit
is suspended, the operator shall be afforded the opportunity for a hearing with
the Code and License Appeals Board within 20 days of receipt of a request for a
hearing and the payment of an appeals fee as per City Code Chapter 212. The
appeal fee shall be refunded if the appeal is successful.
   B.   Whenever any permit is suspended, the operator shall be notified in
writing that the permit(s) is, upon service of this notice, immediately
suspended and that an opportunity for a hearing will be provided if a written
request of a hearing is filed with the Code and License Appeals Board by the
operator within five days. If no request for hearing is filed within five days,
the suspension is sustained. Prior to the hearing, the Property Maintenance
Division may end the suspension if reasons for the suspension no longer exist.
   C.   A sustained suspension may be rescinded by the Code and License Appeals
Board after the Property Maintenance Division has confirmed by inspection that
the requirements of this Part have been satisfied.
   D.   The Code and License Appeals Board, in lieu of suspending any permit,
may suspend applicability of the permit to a particular vending machine,
machines or specific products.
§ 583-110. Revocation of permits.
[Amended 6-26-2017 by Ord. No. 54-2017]
Prior to revocation, the Property Maintenance Division shall notify in writing
the operator of the reasons for which the permit(s) is subject to revocation.
Any permit may be revoked for serious or repeated violations of any of the
items of this Part as delineated on the inspection report form or for
interference with the Property Maintenance Division in the performance of its
duties. The permit(s) shall be revoked at the end of five days following
service of a revocation notice. Unless a request for a hearing is filed with
the Property Maintenance Division by the operator within such a five-day
period, the revocation of the permit(s) becomes final. The hearing shall be
held by the Code and License Appeals Board within 20 days of the receipt of the
request and the payment of an appeals fee as per City Code
Chapter 212. The appeals fee shall be refunded if the appeal is approved by the
Board.
§ 583-111. Service of notices.
A notice provided for in this Part is properly served when such notice is
posted in a conspicuous place on the vending machine, posted on the property of
which the vending machine is located, delivered to the operator or when it is
sent by first class or certified mail, return receipt requested, to the last
known address of the operator. A copy of any notice shall be filed in the
records of the Property Maintenance Division.
§ 583-112. Inspections.
   A.   Inspection frequency. The Property Maintenance Division shall select a
minimum of 10 machines or no more than 33.3% of an operator's vending machines
(to be identified by the Property Maintenance Division) located within the City
of Reading for inspection.
   B.   Access for inspection. The Property Maintenance Division, after proper
identification, shall be permitted to enter at any reasonable time and after
reasonable notice, upon any private or public property where vending machines
are operated, or from which such machines are otherwise serviced, for the
purpose of determining compliance with the provisions of this Part. The
operator shall make provision for the Property Maintenance Division to have
access, either in company with an employee or otherwise, to the interior of all
food vending machines operated by him.
   C.   Notification of inspection findings. Whenever an inspection of food
vending machines is made, a copy of the completed inspection form set out in
this Part shall be furnished to the operator. Whenever the Property Maintenance
Division discovers a violation of any provision of this Part, it shall notify
the operator concerned either by the inspection report form set out in this
Part or by other written notice. Such form or notice, which is a public
document, shall:
      (1)   Describe the condition found.
      (2)   Provide a specific and reasonable period of time for the correction
of the condition.
      (3)   State that an opportunity for a hearing on inspection findings will
be provided if a written request for such hearing is filed with the Property
Maintenance Division within five days of receipt of the notice. The Property
Maintenance Division may also advise the operator in writing that unless the
violations are corrected within the specified period of time, any permit issued
under the provision of this Part may be suspended or revoked in accordance with
the provisions of this Part, or court action may be initiated.
      (4)   Inspection fee. On the year of inspection, every operator shall pay
an inspection fee of per machine for those machines that are inspected. The
cost of inspection for a vending machine bank shall be set by ordinance, plus
an additional amount for each additional machine located within the vending
machine bank. Said fees shall be as provided in
Chapter 212, Fees.
      (5)   Report forms. Inspection report forms will be provided by the
Property Maintenance Division.
§ 583-113. Violations and penalties.
Any person violating any provision of this Part or of the regulations
promulgated hereunder, shall, upon conviction thereof in a summary proceeding,
be sentenced to pay a fine of $75 to $1,000 for each and every offense, to be
collected as other fines and costs are by law collectible, or shall be
imprisoned for not more than 90 days, or both. Each day during which the person
violated any provision of this Part shall constitute a separate offense.
Institution of a prosecution for the imposition of the foregoing penalty shall
not be construed to limit or deny the right of the City to such equitable or
other remedies as may be allowed by law.
§ 583-114. Construction and severability.
In the event any provision, Section, sentence, clause or part of this Part
shall be held to be invalid, illegal or unconstitutional, such invalidity,
illegality or unconstitutionality shall not affect or impair any remaining
provision, Section, sentence, clause or part of this Part, it being the intent
of the Council of the City of Reading that such remainder shall remain in full
force.
§ 583-115. Enforcement.
This Part will be enforced under the jurisdiction of the Property Maintenance
Division.
Chapter 586 WELCOMING CITY
Part 1
Welcoming City
§
586-101.   Definitions.
§
586-102.   Certified Welcoming City Designation.
§
586-103.   Non-intervention with respect to citizenship and immigration.
§
586-104.   Advocacy requirements.
Part 1
Welcoming City
[Adopted 10-27-2025 by Ord. No. 65-2025]
§ 586-101. Definitions.
When used in this Part, the following words, terms, and phrases, and their
derivations, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except
where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
ADMINISTRATIVE WARRANT - A document issued by an immigration enforcement
official, including those from the United States Department of Homeland
Security (OHS), United States Immigration and Customs Enforcement (ICE) or an
administrative immigration judge (IJ), relating to suspected violations of
immigration law. This includes an I-200 "Warrant for Arrest of Alien," an I-205
"Warrant of Removal/Deportation," and any successor or similar forms. The term
includes civil administrative warrants, administrative subpoenas, detainer
requests, removal orders, database entries (e.g., from the National Crime
Information Center) and any similar civil order for the arrest or detention of
an individual or for information. An administrative warrant is not a judicial
warrant, nor is it a court order.
CERTIFIED WELCOMING CITY - A designation provided by Welcoming America under
its Certified Welcoming Standard 2.0 star system.
CITIZENSHIP OR IMMIGRATION STATUS - Citizenship refers to whether a person is a
citizen of the United States (including individuals who hold United States
citizenship in addition to citizenship of another country) or is solely a
citizen of another country (a "non-citizen"). Immigration status refers to the
type of authorization a non-citizen has for their presence in the United States
(e.g., lawful permanent resident, conditional permanent resident, visa holder,
temporary protected status or undocumented, among other types of status).
Perceived citizenship or immigration status refers to characteristics that
suggest a person may be a non- citizen or of uncertain immigration status, such
as actual or assumed place of birth, country of origin, ancestry, native
language, looking or sounding "foreign", any other national origin indicator or
absence of a social security number. These characteristics are separate from,
and not included in the term "citizenship or immigration status."
CONTACT INFORMATION - Home address, work address, telephone number, electronic
mail address, social media contact information, or any other means of
contacting an individual.
COURT ORDER - An order entered by a state or federal court, not to include an
administrative immigration court.
IMMIGRATION AND CUSTOMS ENFORCEMENT (ICE) - The federal law enforcement agency
under the United State Department of Homeland Security (OHS) responsible for
enforcement of immigration laws in the interior United States and for
representation of the United States in administrative immigration proceedings.
This definition shall also encompass any successor agency to ICE.
IMMIGRATION DETAINER - A request by ICE or CBP to a federal, state, or local
law enforcement agency that the law enforcement agency provide notice of
release or maintain custody of an individual for purposes of civil immigration
law enforcement, including Form I-247-A "Immigration Detainer - Notice of
Action"; Form I-247D "Immigration Detainer - Request for Voluntary Action"; I-
247X "Request for Voluntary Transfer"; Form I-247N "Request for Voluntary
Notification of Release," or any successor forms, as well as informal and
verbal requests.
IMMIGRATION ENFORCEMENT OFFICIAL - Any federal employee or agent engaged in
immigration enforcement operations including but not limited to agents of U.S.
Customs and Border Patrol (CBP), the Department of Homeland Security (OHS), and
Immigration and Customs Enforcement (ICE).
IMMIGRATION ENFORCEMENT OPERATION - Any operation that has as its main
objective the identification or apprehension of a person or persons: 1) in
order to subject them to civil immigration detention, removal or deportation
proceedings, and/or removal or deportation from the United States; or 2) to
criminally prosecute a person or persons for offenses related to immigration
status, including but not limited to violations of Sections 1253, 1304(e), 1306
(a) and (b), 1325, or 1326 of Title 8 of the United States Code, or violations
of Sections 1028A or 1546 of Title 18 of the United States Code.
JUDICIAL WARRANT - Either issued by a state court or a warrant based on
probable cause and issued by a judge appointed pursuant to article III of the
United States constitution or a federal magistrate judge appointed pursuant to
28 U.S.C. 631, that authorizes federal immigration authorities to take into
custody the person who is the subject of such warrant. This does not include
warrants or orders issued by employees of the Department of Homeland Security,
the Department of Justice, or the Executive Office for Immigration Review.
OFFICIAL OR EMPLOYEE - Any person employed by or acting on behalf of the City
of Reading including all members of the City of Reading Bureau of Police as an
employee, agent or representative. Other immigration enforcement document: any
document, other than an administrative warrant or immigration detainer, that is
used in immigration detention or removal proceedings, including a removal
order, order to, detain or release aliens, notice to appear, notice of custody
determination, and any similar or successor forms.
§ 586-102. Certified Welcoming City Designation.
   A.   Mandated Star Ratings. The City, during its 2025 certification, shall
use its best efforts to obtain an initial rating and work to achieve and
thereafter use its best efforts to maintain a star rating of no less than 3
stars under Welcoming America's Certified Welcoming Standard 2.0 star system.
Notwithstanding the foregoing, the City may and should continue efforts to
create policies and procedures and to take actions towards obtaining higher
star ratings including those designated as 4 and 5, all in an effort to advance
the City's commitments to:
      (1)   Ensure equitable and inclusive access to all residents, including
immigrants, to the City's governmental programing, services, and processes;
      (2)   Provide a culturally and ethnically diverse workforce;
      (3)   Further strengthen the City's workforce by improving integration;
      (4)   Promote and support the elimination of barriers to both child and
adult education for immigrants;
      (5)   Assure that the City's residents continue to be treated equitably
and fairly without regard to their immigrant status, disability, language
preference, gender or sexual orientation; and
      (6)   Ensure that the City takes a lead in promoting these principles.
   B.   Reporting. City Administration shall report no less than annually to
City Council on its efforts to both obtain and maintain its 3 Star Certified
Welcoming City rating and to adopt policies, procedures and practices
consistent with Welcoming City 4 and 5 star ratings.
§ 586-103. Non-intervention with respect to citizenship and immigration.
   A.   Requesting, Accessing or Disclosing Information Prohibited.
   (1)   No official or employee of the City shall inquire into an individual's
citizenship or immigration status, unless required to do so by state or federal
law or court order.
      (2)   All applications, questionnaires, and interview forms used in
relation to City benefits, opportunities, or services shall be promptly
reviewed by the pertinent agencies. Any questions regarding citizenship or
immigration status, other than those required by ordinance, court order, or
state or federal law shall be deleted within 60 days of the adoption of this
chapter.
      (3)   No official or employee of the City shall request, record, or
access in government records the citizenship or immigration status of an
individual, unless the action is required by state or federal law or court
order.
      (4)   No official or employee of the City shall disclose to any person or
entity the citizenship or immigration status of an individual, unless the
action is required by state law, federal law, regulation, warrant, court order
or subpoena or has been authorized by the individual or their legal guardian.
      (5)   The City shall not retain information related to an individual's
citizenship or immigration status, unless required to do so by state or federal
law or court order.
      (6)   Officials or employees of the City shall not utilize City resources
(including but not limited to facilities, equipment, cell phones, office
supplies, radios, emails, databases and employee time while on-duty) to provide
any information to immigration enforcement officials, unless the employee's
action is expressly authorized under this chapter.
      (7)   Notwithstanding the foregoing, City officials may in the hiring/
application for employment process ask an applicant if they are legally
authorized to be employed by the City and/or if they will need an employer
sponsor to be or remain lawfully employed.
   B.   Prohibited Actions.
      (1)   Officials or employees of the City shall not threaten, coerce, or
intimidate anyone based on their citizenship or immigration status, actual or
perceived, or the actual or perceived citizenship or immigration status of a
member of the person's household.
      (2)   Officials or employees of the City shall not initiate an
investigation or take law enforcement action on the basis of actual or
perceived citizenship or immigration status, including, but not limited to, the
initiation of a stop, apprehension, arrest, or any other field contact.
      (3)   Officials or employees of the City shall not make inquiries into
the citizenship or immigration status of any individual, including those who
are not the subject of the law enforcement encounter (e.g., household members,
friends or family of the person being questioned), except as authorized by this
chapter.
      (4)   Officials or employees of the City shall not make any threats of
immigration actions or consequences as a result of any interaction with law
enforcement, including in the context of criminal investigations.
      (5)   If an official or employee learns of an individual's citizenship or
immigration status, the official or employee may not act solely on that
individual's citizenship or immigration status, unless with the consent of the
individual to pursue a benefit afforded to them under state or federal law or
regulation or required by any international treaty.
      (6)   Nothing in this section is intended to prevent the collection and
publication of data, other than citizenship and immigration status, useful to
program evaluation as long as the underlying data is kept confidential and not
disclosed outside the City of Reading. Nothing herein should be construed to
restrict the sharing of de-identified aggregate data outside the City of
Reading.
      (7)   No official or employee or agency shall enter into any contractual
agreement or arrangement with a federal agency to provide access to any
database operated by a City agency where the purpose of such access includes
assisting or supporting immigration enforcement operations. Any existing
contractual agreement or arrangement shall be terminated within 60 days from
the effective date of this Order or as soon as permitted without penalty by
contract terms, whichever occurs earlier.
   C.   Immigration Enforcement Actions - Federal Responsibility.
      (1)   No official, employee, or agency shall stop, arrest, detain, or
continue to detain a person after that person becomes eligible for release from
custody or would otherwise be free to leave an encounter with an agency or
agent, based on any of the following: (a) an immigration detainer; (b) an
administrative warrant; or (c) other immigration enforcement document; or
information or suspicion that the person is not present legally in the United
States, or that the person has committed an immigration violation.
      (2)   No official, employee, or agency shall support or assist ICE, CBP,
or other agencies in any capacity with immigration enforcement operations,
including but not limited to requests to (1) provide information (including
contact information, custody status, release date, home address, or work
address) for the purpose of immigration enforcement operations except as
provided under subsection F. of this section; (2) investigate or interrogate
such persons for the purpose of immigration enforcement; (3) establish traffic
perimeters for the purpose of immigration enforcement; or (4) otherwise be
present to assist or support an immigration enforcement operation. In the event
an agent receives a request to support or assist in an immigration enforcement
operation, he or she shall report the request to his or her supervisor, who
shall decline the request, except as provided under subsection F. of this
section, and document the declination in an interoffice memorandum to the
agency director through the chain of command.
      (3)   No official or employee or agency shall investigate a person's
citizenship or immigration status for the purpose of immigration enforcement,
except as required by state or federal law or provided under subsection F. of
this section.
      (4)   No official or employee or agency shall enter into an agreement
under Section 1357(g) of Title 8 of the United States Code or any other federal
law that permits state or local governmental entities to enforce federal civil
immigration laws.
      (5)   No agency shall enter into any contractual agreement with ICE or
CBP to house immigration detainees in the agency's jail facilities, including
an Intergovernmental Service Agreement, an Intergovernmental Agreement, a Basic
Ordering Agreement, or any similar agreement.
      (6)   Unless presented with a valid and properly issued judicial warrant,
no agency or official or employee shall: permit ICE or CBP agents to access a
person being detained by, or in the custody of, the agency or agent; transfer
any person into ICE or CBP custody.
      (7)   Permit ICE or CBP agents to use agency facilities, or equipment,
including any agency electronic databases, for investigative interviews or
other investigative purpose or for purposes of executing an immigration
enforcement operation.
      (8)   Expend time to respond to ICE or CBP inquiries or communicate with
ICE or CBP regarding a person's custody status, release date, home address,
work address, or other information.
   D.   Acceptable Identification.
      (1)   Unless required by federal or state law or regulation or an
explicit funding requirement, in order to provide public services or benefits,
employees of the City shall accept a combination of documents to verify an
individual's identification and an address or other information sufficient to
reasonably demonstrate the individual's residence or address, including but not
limited to:
         (a)   Photo identity document (ID) issued by a state and/or foreign
government (such as a driver's license, passport or consular identification
documents).
         (b)   Presentation of an alternate form of ID shall not subject the
person to a higher level of scrutiny or different treatment than if the person
had provided a driver's license or state identification card.
      (2)   This section does not apply to completion of federal I-9 forms or
similar federal or state forms requiring a specific form of identification or
license under defined circumstances.
   E.   Certification Requests. Nothing in this chapter shall prohibit Reading
City Police Department from approving certification requests for crime victims
or witnesses applying for U or T visas, or other benefits.
   F.   Compliance with Federal Law. This policy is to be construed in
accordance with federal law including 8 U.S.C. § 1644 and 8 U.S.C. § 1373(a)
which provides "Notwithstanding any other provision of Federal, State, or local
law, a Federal, State, or local government entity or official may not prohibit,
or in any way restrict, any government entity or official from sending to, or
receiving from, [ICE] information regarding the citizenship or immigration
status, lawful or unlawful, of any individual.
   G.   Complaints Regarding Alleged Violations of this chapter.
      (1)   Any person who alleges a violation of §
586-103 by a member of the City Police Department may file with the Police
Department a civilian complaint for investigation in accordance with the
Reading Police policies and procedures.
      (2)   Any person who alleges a violation of §
586-103 by an official or employee of the City may file a complaint for
investigation with the Department of Human Resources of the City of Reading for
investigation in accordance with the City of Reading Code of Ordinances,
Chapter 70 Personnel.
§ 586-104. Advocacy requirements.
   A.   City Council Advocacy Requirements. City Council members may, as part
of its annual work, advocate for the adoption of inclusive policies, such as
those referenced in this chapter and as set forth and described by Welcoming
America in its star designation process, by other local municipalities. Those
efforts can include, but not be limited to:
      (1)   Promoting the Welcoming America standards to other local, state and
federal municipalities and bodies;
      (2)   Working collaboratively with the Mayor's office to support and
encourage work on immigrant inclusion by other local municipalities;
      (3)   Participating in and supporting efforts for advocacy at the state
and federal level to promote immigrant and refugee inclusion; and
      (4)   Partnering with other entities and associations to promote and
advocate for immigrant and refugee inclusion.
   B.   Reporting. City Council members that participate in advocacy efforts
may individually prepare and present at a regular meeting a report detailing
the advocacy efforts taken and the progress and results of such advocacy work,
including, but not limited to, the advocacy efforts taken by other entities and
associations City Council partnered with for such matters.
Chapter 600
ZONING
Part 1
Short Title, Purposes and Interpretations
§
600-101.   Short title.
§
600-102.   Intent.
§
600-103.   Purposes.
§
600-104.   Interpretation.
§
600-105.   Applicability to City, buildings for public purposes.
§
600-106.   Validity and severability.
§
600-107.   Curative amendments.
§
600-108.   Repealer.
§
600-109.   Applicability to utilities.
Part 2
Enforcement and Administration
§
600-201.   Zoning Administrator.
§
600-202.   Finances and fees.
§
600-203.   General administrative procedures.
§
600-204.   Enforcement notice.
§
600-205.   Causes of action.
§
600-206.   Violations and penalties.
Part 3
Permits and Certificates
§
600-301.   Zoning permit.
§
600-302.   Certificates of occupancy.
§
600-303.   Temporary certificate of occupancy.
§
600-304.   Denial and revocation of permits and certificates.
§
600-305.   Continuance of existing permits.
§
600-306.   Records.
§
600-307.   Certificate of nonconforming use or structure.
§
600-308.   Report.
Part 4
Zoning Hearing Board
§
600-401.   Continuation.
§
600-402.   Membership and filling of vacancies.
§
600-403.   Alternate members.
§
600-404.   Removal of members.
§
600-405.   Organization.
§
600-406.   Zoning Hearing Board functions.
§
600-407.   Expenditures for services.
§
600-408.   Applications.
§
600-409.   Time limitations, persons aggrieved.
§
600-410.   Hearing procedures.
§
600-411.   Stay of proceedings.
§
600-412.   Decision; findings.
§
600-413.   Notice of decision.
§
600-414.   Effect of Board's decision.
§
600-415.   Mediation option.
§
600-416.   Appeals.
Part 5
Zoning Map and Boundaries
§
600-501.   Zoning Map and boundaries.
§
600-502.   Overlays.
Part 6
Types of Uses
§
600-601.   Classifications of uses.
§
600-602.   Permitted-by-right uses.
§
600-603.   Accessory uses.
§
600-604.   Temporary uses.
§
600-605.   Special exception uses.
§
600-606.   Conditional uses.
§
600-607.   Nonconforming uses, buildings, structures and lots.
§
600-608.   Prohibited uses, general.
§
600-609.   Similar uses.
Part 7
Zoning Districts
§
600-701.   Districts.
§
600-702.   Intent of districts.
Part 8
Districts
§
600-801.   R-1A Residential District.
§
600-802.   R-1 Residential District.
§
600-803.   R-2 Residential District.
§
600-804.   R-3 Residential District.
§
600-805.   (Reserved)
§
600-806.   R-PO Residential/ Professional Office District.
§
600-807.   C-C Commercial Core District.
§
600-808.   C-R Commercial Residential District.
§
600-809.   C-N Commercial Neighborhood District.
§
600-810.   C-H Commercial Highway District.
§
600-811.   M-C Manufacturing Commercial District.
§
600-812.   H-M Heavy Manufacturing District.
§
600-813.   P Preservation District.
§
600-814.   P-S Penn Square Corridor Overlay Zone.
§
600-815.   RR Riverfront Redevelopment Overlay Zone.
§
600-816.   MU Municipal District.
§
600-817.   INS Institutional Overlay Zone.
§
600-818.   Riparian Buffer Overlay District.
§
600-819.   Steep Slope Overlay District.
Part 9
General Provisions
§
600-901.   Application to all zoning districts.
§
600-902.   Limit of one principal use per lot; limit on dwellings per lot;
limit on dwelling occupancy; alley frontage.
§
600-903.   Multiple occupancy.
§
600-904.   Side yard setback in R-3 and C-R Districts.
§
600-905.   Proposed right-of-way.
§
600-906.   Emergency access.
§
600-907.   Frontage along a street.
§
600-908.   Front yards.
§
600-909.   Front yard exception.
§
600-910.   Projections.
§
600-911.   Height exceptions.
§
600-912.   Lighting control.
§
600-913.   Shade tree requirement.
§
600-914.   Urban renewal projects.
§
600-915.   Odors and dust.
§
600-916.   Garbage dumpster screening and location.
§
600-917.   Noise control.
§
600-918.   Green incentives.
Part 10
Accessory Uses
§
600-1001.   General requirements.
§
600-1002.   Private garages.
§
600-1003.   Storage sheds, greenhouses and animal shelters.
§
600-1004.   Drive-through service lanes and canopies.
§
600-1005.   Entertainment (as an accessory use).
§
600-1006.   Home occupations.
§
600-1007.   Portable home storage units.
§
600-1008.   Off-premises parking areas in the R-3 and C-C Districts.
§
600-1009.   Vending machines and used clothing receptacles.
§
600-1010.   Amusement devices.
§
600-1011.   Yard and garage sales.
§
600-1012.   Alternative energy systems.
§
600-1013.   Swimming pools.
Part 11
Additional Requirements for Specific Uses or Zoning Districts
§
600-1101.   Mid-rise or low-rise apartments.
§
600-1102.   High-rise apartments.
§
600-1103.   Barber and beauty shops; massage therapy; and nail salons.
§
600-1104.   Manufactured home parks.
§
600-1105.   Auto service stations, auto repair and car washes.
§
600-1106.   (Reserved)
§
600-1107.   Additional requirements and performance standards for permitted
uses in MU Zoning District.
§
600-1108.   Short-term rentals.
Part 12
Provisions For Special Exception and Conditional Uses
§
600-1201.   Criteria and limitations.
§
600-1202.   Conditions for special exception uses.
§
600-1203.   Conditions for conditional uses.
§
600-1204.   Conditional use applications and procedures.
Part 13
Fences and Walls; Sight Triangles
§
600-1301.   Fence and wall permits.
§
600-1302.   Fence and wall heights.
§
600-1303.   Required sight triangle.
§
600-1304.   Prohibited fences, walls, materials or similar structures.
§
600-1305.   Temporary fences, walls or similar structures.
§
600-1306.   Exceptions.
Part 14
Buffer Strips and Screening
§
600-1401.   Buffer strips.
§
600-1402.   Screening.
Part 15
Private Roads, Driveways and Parking Areas; Sidewalks
§
600-1501.   Private roads and driveways.
§
600-1502.   Private parking areas.
§
600-1503.   Private driveways.
§
600-1504.   Access driveways.
§
600-1505.   Sidewalks.
Part 16
Off-Street Parking and Loading
§
600-1601.   New and existing uses.
§
600-1602.   Design and construction.
§
600-1603.   Off-street parking standards.
§
600-1604.   Off-street loading spaces.
§
600-1605.   Miscellaneous.
Part 17
Signs
§
600-1701.   Sign purposes and scope.
§
600-1702.   Sign policies.
§
600-1703.   Signs allowed in Residential Districts (R-1A, R-1, R-2, and R-3)
and the INS Institutional Overlay Zone.
§
600-1704.   Signs allowed in Residential-Professional Office District (R-PO).
§
600-1705.   Signs allowed in Commercial Core and Commercial Residential
Districts (C-C, C-R).
§
600-1706.   Signs allowed in Commercial Neighborhood District (C-N).
§
600-1707.   Signs allowed in Commercial Highway Districts (C-H).
§
600-1708.   Signs allowed in Heavy Manufacturing and Manufacturing/ Commercial
Districts (H-M and M-C).
§
600-1709.   Signs allowed in Preservation District.
§
600-1710.   Special exception signs.
§
600-1711.   Temporary signs on private property.
§
600-1712.   Additional allowed signs.
§
600-1713.   Landscape designs and landscaping requirements.
§
600-1714.   Illumination and electronically changing message signs.
§
600-1715.   Projection of signs.
§
600-1716.   Prohibited signs.
§
600-1717.   Billboards and other off- premises signs.
§
600-1718.   Sign permit and fee exceptions.
§
600-1719.   Sign inspections.
§
600-1720.   Sign maintenance.
§
600-1721.   Unsafe sign removal.
§
600-1722.   Abandoned sign removal.
§
600-1723.   Illegal sign removal.
§
600-1724.   Cost of sign removal.
§
600-1725.   Sign appeals to Zoning Hearing Board.
§
600-1726.   Signs within RR Overlay Zone.
Part 18
Floodplain Overlay Zone
§
600-1801.   Statutory authorization.
§
600-1802.   Purpose.
§
600-1803.   Applicability.
§
600-1804.   Abrogation and greater restrictions.
§
600-1805.   Severability.
§
600-1806.   Warning and disclaimer of liability.
§
600-1807.   Designation of Floodplain Administrator.
§
600-1808.   Floodplain zoning permits required.
§
600-1809.   Duties and responsibilities of Floodplain Administrator.
§
600-1810.   Floodplain permit application procedures and requirements.
§
600-1811.   Review of permit application by others.
§
600-1812.   Changes to permit.
§
600-1813.   Placards.
§
600-1814.   Start of construction.
§
600-1815.   Enforcement.
§
600-1816.   Appeals.
§
600-1817.   Floodplain Overlay Zone identification.
§
600-1818.   Description and requirements of the floodplain overlay
subdistricts.
§
600-1819.   Changes in identification of Floodplain Overlay Zone.
§
600-1820.   District boundary disputes.
§
600-1821.   Jurisdictional boundary changes.
§
600-1822.   General technical provisions.
§
600-1823.   Elevation and floodproofing requirements.
§
600-1824.   Design and construction standards.
§
600-1825.   Development which may endanger human life.
§
600-1826.   Special requirements for subdivisions.
§
600-1827.   Special requirements for manufactured homes.
§
600-1828.   Special requirements for recreational vehicles.
§
600-1829.   Prohibited uses.
§
600-1830.   Special exception uses and special exception application
requirements.
§
600-1831.   Special exception application review procedures.
§
600-1832.   Special exception technical requirements.
§
600-1833.   Existing structures in identified floodplain areas.
§
600-1834.   Improvements to existing structures.
§
600-1835.   Granting of variances.
§
600-1836.   Variance procedures and conditions.
§
600-1837.   Word usage.
§
600-1838.   Specific definitions.
§
600-1839.   Adoption.
Part 19
Heliports
§
600-1901.   Where permitted.
§
600-1902.   General requirements.
§
600-1903.   Permits.
§
600-1904.   Revocation of permits.
Part 20
Airport Overlay Zones
§
600-2001.   Purposes.
§
600-2002.   Applicability.
§
600-2003.   Airport zones.
§
600-2004.   Airport Approach Zone identification.
§
600-2005.   Airport height limitations.
§
600-2006.   Airport exceptions.
§
600-2007.   Airport use restrictions.
§
600-2008.   Airport nonconforming uses.
§
600-2009.   Special Airport Zone permits.
§
600-2010.   Existing uses in Airport Zones.
§
600-2011.   Airport variances.
Part 21
Wireless Communications Facilities
§
600-2101.   Purpose and scope.
§
600-2102.   General requirements for all wireless communications facilities.
§
600-2103.   Tower-based wireless communications facilities outside the rights-
of-way.
§
600-2104.   Non-tower wireless communications facilities outside the rights-of-
way.
§
600-2105.   Small wireless communications facilities.
Appendix A, Small Wireless Communications Facility Design Manual
Part 22
Definitions
§
600-2201.   Word usage.
§
600-2202.   Definitions.
§
600-2203.   Airport Zone definitions.
§
600-2204.   (Reserved)
§
600-2205.   Sign definitions.
§
600-2206.   Telecommunications definitions.
Zoning Map
[HISTORY: Adopted by the City Council of the City of Reading 7-26-2010 by Ord.
No. 47-2010 (Ch. 27 of the 2001 Code of Ordinances). Amendments noted where
applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Construction codes — See
Ch. 180.
Health and safety — See
Ch. 288.
Historic districts — See
Ch. 295.
House numbering — See
Ch. 302.
Housing — See
Ch. 308.
Signs — See
Ch. 485.
Storage facilities — See
Ch. 502.
Stormwater management — See
Ch. 505.
Streets and sidewalks — See
Ch. 508.
Subdivision and land development — See
Ch. 515.
Part 1
Short Title, Purposes And Interpretations
§ 600-101. Short title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "City of Reading Zoning
Ordinance of 2010," as amended.
§ 600-102. Intent.
The intent of this chapter is to establish a precise set of policies and
regulations for the use of land and structures in the City of Reading
(hereinafter referred to as the "City"). This chapter is enacted to promote and
to protect the public health, safety, comfort, convenience, and general welfare
of the people in accordance with the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code,
as reenacted and amended, 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq., and to implement and foster
policies that are generally consistent with the adopted City of Reading
Comprehensive Plan.
§ 600-103. Purposes.
The purposes of this chapter are:
   A.   To protect the established character and the social and economic well-
being of both private and public property.
   B.   To promote, in the public interest, the utilization of land for the
purposes for which it is most appropriate.
   C.   To prevent loss from fire, panic or other danger.
   D.   To provide adequate light and air.
   E.   To provide convenience of access.
   F.   To prevent overcrowding of land and buildings.
   G.   To avoid undue concentration of population.
   H.   To lessen and, where possible, to prevent traffic congestion on public
streets and highways.
   I.   To preserve and enhance the value of buildings and land.
   J.   To preserve and enhance the visual character and natural beauty of the
City.
   K.   To minimize the impact incompatible uses have on individual
neighborhood character.
   L.   To carry out goals, policies and recommendations in the Berks County
Comprehensive Plan.
   M.   To serve the authorized purposes for zoning regulations as provided in
the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, as amended, 53 P.S. § 10101 et
seq.
   N.   To serve the purposes provided for each zoning district.
   O.   To carry out the purposes of the Pennsylvania Floodplain Management
Act, as amended, 32 P.S. § 679.101 et seq.
   P.   To carry out the City of Reading and Berks County Comprehensive Plans.
§ 600-104. Interpretation.
The provisions of this chapter shall be construed to be the minimum
requirements necessary to serve the community development objectives of the
City of Reading. Where the provisions of this chapter impose greater
restrictions upon use or development or higher standards regarding a specific
matter than those of any statute, ordinance or regulation, the provisions of
this chapter shall govern, except where the provisions of this chapter do not
have jurisdiction. Where the provisions of any statute, other ordinance or
regulation impose greater restrictions upon use or development or higher
standards than those enumerated in this chapter, the provisions of such
statute, ordinance or regulation shall govern.
§ 600-105. Applicability to City, buildings for public purposes.
[Amended 12-16-2013 by Ord. No. 83-2013]
See §
600-1202L, Special exceptions, parks, playgrounds and public buildings.
§ 600-106. Validity and severability.
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase of this chapter or
amendment thereto is for any reason held to be unconstitutional, unenforceable
or invalid, such decision shall not affect the remaining portions of the
chapter. The Reading City Council (hereinafter referred to as "City Council")
hereby declares that it would have passed this chapter and each remaining
section and subsection and amendment thereof irrespective of the fact that any
one or more of its sections, subsections, clauses, phrases or amendments may be
found to be unconstitutional or otherwise invalid.
§ 600-107. Curative amendments.
Provisions of the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, 53 P.S. § 10101 et
seq., shall apply. As of the enactment date of this chapter, such provisions
included §§ 609.1 and 609.2 of such Code, 53 P.S. §§ 10609.1 and 10609.2.
§ 600-108. Repealer.
All previous zoning ordinances or parts of zoning ordinances of the City of
Reading are hereby expressly repealed in their entirety.
§ 600-109. Applicability to utilities.
[Amended 12-16-2013 by Ord. No. 83-2013]
See §
600-1203H, Conditional use.
Part 2
Enforcement And Administration
§ 600-201. Zoning Administrator.
   A.   Appointment. This chapter shall be administered and enforcement actions
undertaken by an agent of the City to be appointed by the Mayor, with the
approval of City Council; who shall be known as the Zoning Administrator. The
terms "Zoning Administrator" and "Zoning Officer" shall have the same meaning.
The Director of the Department of Community Development, or his/her successor,
may designate a City employee or employees to serve as Assistant Zoning Officer
(s) who shall exercise all the powers of the Zoning Administrator at such times
or for such matters as the Zoning Administrator indicates and/or during the
absence of the Zoning Administrator. Such Assistant Zoning Officers shall
include the Zoning Inspector and Zoning Technician or their successor
positions.
   B.   Duties. The Zoning Administrator shall:
      (1)   Administer this chapter in accordance with its literal terms.
      (2)   Be available to register nonconforming lots, uses, and structures,
upon request of the owner or lessee.
      (3)   Receive and examine all applications required under this chapter.
      (4)   Issue or refuse permits after receiving a complete application,
except as specifically provided in this chapter.
      (5)   Prepare agendas, schedules and information packets for Zoning
Hearing Board meetings.
      (6)   Receive complaints of violations of this chapter.
      (7)   Issue an enforcement notice to any person violating any provision
of this chapter, and institute civil enforcement proceedings as a means of
enforcing this chapter, as hereinafter set forth.
      (8)   Keep records of applications and permits issued for actions of the
Zoning Hearing Board, complaints received, inspections made, reports rendered,
and notice or orders issued. Such records shall be and are the property of the
City, and shall be available for the use of the Zoning Hearing Board, City
Council, other City officials and staff, and City residents.
      (9)   Make all required inspections and perform all other duties as
called for in this chapter.
      (10)   Have the authority to enter, at any reasonable hour, any
structure, premises or land in the City to enforce the provisions of this
chapter, within the limitations of state law. If refused entry, the Zoning
Administrator shall have the authority to seek an administrative warrant.
      (11)   Complete such other roles as provided in this chapter.
      (12)   In accordance with
Chapter 308, Housing, of the Code of the City of Reading, as amended, 1  the
Zoning Administrator shall be empowered to perform the duties described and
imposed therein. [Added 10-24-2011 by Ord. No. 53-2011]
      (13)   Have the authority to enforce the Historic District Ordinance.
[Added 12-16-2013 by Ord. No. 83-20132]
   C.   Conflicts. The Zoning Administrator shall not hold any elective office
within the City.
   D.   Qualifications. The Zoning Administrator shall demonstrate a working
knowledge of municipal zoning and shall meet all qualifications established by
the Mayor and City Council.
   E.   Limitations of authority. The Zoning Administrator shall not have the
power to permit any construction, use or change of use that does not conform to
this chapter.
   F.   Stop-work orders.
      (1)   Upon notice from the Zoning Administrator that work on or use or
occupancy of any structure, sign, land or premises is conducted contrary to the
provisions of this chapter, the Zoning Administrator may require that such work
shall be stopped immediately. The stop-work order shall be served to the owner
of record of the property, or to the designated owner's agent, by certified
mail and be posted on the property.
      (2)   Any person who authorizes or continues any work, use or occupancy
in or about any structure, sign, land or premises after having been served with
a stop-work order, except such work as is directed by the City to be performed,
shall be in violation of this chapter and subject to the penalties as set forth
in §
600-206 hereof.
      (3)   Any person who has been served with a stop-work order or
discontinues or abandons work shall not leave any structure, sign, land or
premises in such condition as to be hazardous to the public health, safety and
welfare. In the event any structure, sign, land or premises is abandoned or
left in a condition which, in the opinion of the Zoning Administrator,
constitutes a hazard to the public health, safety and welfare, the Zoning
Administrator may declare the same to be a nuisance. Such hazard shall
thereafter be abated as permitted by statute or ordinance.
   G.   Relief from personal responsibility. The Zoning Administrator or any
employee charged with the enforcement of this chapter, while acting in such
capacity, shall not be personally liable for any actions, effects, consequences
or results undertaken in furtherance of the provisions of this chapter.
Additionally, the Zoning Administrator shall be indemnified against any cost
and/or damage occurred as a result of the execution of his or her official
duties. Any suit instituted against the Zoning Administrator or any employee
because of an act performed in the lawful discharge of his or her duties
pursuant to the chapter in good faith and without malice shall be defended by
the legal representative of the City and all costs associated with such action
or actions shall be borne by the City.
1.   NOTE: Section 308-104B, enacted 12-12-2011 by Ord. No. 52-2011.
2.   Editor's Note: See
Ch. 295, Historical and Conservation Districts.
§ 600-202. Finances and fees.
   A.   City Council shall appropriate from general funds monies to finance the
preparation, administration and enforcement of this chapter, to finance the
work of the Zoning Hearing Board, and to support or oppose, upon appeal to the
courts, decisions of the Zoning Hearing Board. For the same purposes, City
Council may accept gifts and grants of money and services from private sources
and from county, state and federal governments which are not prejudicial to the
fair and impartial enforcement and administration hereof.
   B.   City Council shall prescribe reasonable fees to be charged with respect
to the administration of this chapter and all applications filed hereunder.
§ 600-203. General administrative procedures.
   A.   All persons or entities desiring to undertake any new construction,
structural or site alteration, razing, grading or changes in the use of a
structure or lot shall apply to the Zoning Administrator for a zoning permit by
completing the appropriate application form and by paying all required fees. No
application shall be accepted or deemed complete until all forms, materials and
plans are filed and any fees are fully paid.
   B.   The Zoning Administrator shall, as applicable:
      (1)   Issue the zoning permit;
      (2)   Require submittal of additional information;
      (3)   Refuse the permit, indicating in writing the reason therefor; and/
or
      (4)   Defer his or her decision until such time as the required approvals
of City Council or the Zoning Hearing Board are rendered.
   C.   If a request for a permit is denied or deferred, or a determination is
made by the Zoning Administrator, the applicant may appeal that action to the
Zoning Hearing Board in accordance with the provisions of this section.
   D.   Until a permit is issued, no construction shall be undertaken, and any
construction that has occurred prior to the issuance of the permit shall, if
requested by the Zoning Administrator, be removed.
   E.   If a permit has been issued, the action proposed may be undertaken. It
is recommended, however, that applicants wait 30 days to begin construction if
there is a possibility of an appeal by another party to have the permit or
approval revoked.
   F.   Prior to occupancy, the applicant shall apply to the Building Inspector
for a certificate of occupancy (where such is required under
Chapter 180, Construction Codes).
§ 600-204. Enforcement notice.
   A.   If it appears to the Zoning Administrator that a violation of any
provision of this chapter has occurred, an investigation shall occur. The
Zoning Administrator shall then initiate enforcement proceedings against a
violation by sending an enforcement notice as provided in this section. Prior
to sending a formal enforcement notice, the Zoning Administrator may seek
compliance in a less formal manner.
   B.   The enforcement notice shall be sent to the owner of record of the
parcel on which the violation has occurred, to a known occupant involved in a
violation (if different from the owner), or to any person who has filed a
written request to receive enforcement notices regarding that property.
   C.   An enforcement notice shall state at least the following:
      (1)   The name of the owner of record and any other person known by the
Zoning Administrator to be involved in the violation.
      (2)   The location of the property in violation.
      (3)   The specific violation(s), with a description of the requirements
that have not been met, citing in each instance the applicable provisions of
this chapter.
      (4)   The date before which the steps for compliance must be commenced
and the date before which the steps must be completed.
      (5)   That the recipient of the notice has the right to appeal in writing
to the Zoning Hearing Board within 30 days of receipt of the notice.
   D.   Any person who authorizes or continues any work, use or occupancy in
any structure, sign, land or premises after having been served with an
enforcement notice, except such work as is directed by the City to be
performed, shall be in violation of this chapter and subject to the remedies
set forth in §§
600-205 and 600-206 hereof.
   E.   Any person who has been served with an enforcement notice or
discontinues or abandons work shall not leave any structure, sign, land or
premises in such condition as to be hazardous to the public health, safety and
welfare. In the event any structure, building, sign, land or premises is
abandoned or left in a condition which, in the opinion of the Zoning
Administrator, constitutes a hazard to the public health, safety and welfare,
the Zoning Administrator may declare the same to be a nuisance. Such hazard
shall, thereafter, be abated as permitted by statute, ordinance or law.
   F.   In any appeal of an enforcement notice to the Zoning Hearing Board, the
City shall have the responsibility of presenting its evidence first.
   G.   Any filing fee paid by a party to appeal an enforcement notice to the
Zoning Hearing Board shall be returned to the appealing party by the City if
the Zoning Hearing Board or any court in a subsequent appeal rules in the
appealing party's favor.
§ 600-205. Causes of action. 3  
In the event any structure, or land is, or is proposed to be, erected,
constructed, reconstructed, altered, converted, maintained or used in violation
of any provision of this chapter, the City, through its designated staff, or
any aggrieved owner or tenant of real property who can show that his or her
property or person will be substantially affected by the alleged violation, may
institute any appropriate legal, equitable or otherwise, action or proceeding
to prevent, restrain, correct or abate such building, structure, or land, or to
prevent, in or about such premises, any act, conduct, business or use
constituting a violation. When any such action is instituted by a landowner or
tenant, notice of that action shall be served upon the Zoning Administrator
with a copy of the complaint thereon at least 30 days prior to the time the
action is begun. No such action may be maintained until such notice has been
given.
3.   Editor's Note: Amended during codification (see
Ch. 1, General Provisions, Part 2).
§ 600-206. Violations and penalties.
Any person, partnership or corporation who or which has violated or permitted
the violation of any of the provisions of this chapter shall, upon being found
liable therefor in a civil enforcement proceeding, pay a judgment of not less
than $100, and not more than $500, plus all court costs, including reasonable
attorney fees incurred by the City as a result thereof. No judgment shall
commence or be imposed, levied or be payable until the date of the
determination of a violation by the Magisterial District Judge. If the
defendant neither pays nor timely appeals the judgment, the City may enforce
the judgment pursuant to the applicable rules of civil procedure. Each day that
a violation continues shall constitute a separate violation. All judgments,
costs and reasonable attorney fees collected for the violation of this chapter
shall be paid over to the City of Reading. This chapter does not authorize
imprisonment.
Part 3
Permits And Certificates
§ 600-301. Zoning permit.
   A.   Scope.
      (1)   No person shall commence to erect, alter or convert any structure,
building, lot or sign, nor alter the use of any land or structure until the
Zoning Administrator has reviewed such change or construction and has issued a
zoning permit or has determined that a permit is not required. Repairs and
renovations (such as painting) shall not require Zoning Administrator review.
      (2)   Zoning permit required. A zoning permit indicates that a zoning
application complies with this chapter to the best knowledge of the applicable
municipal staff.
         (a)   A zoning permit is required to be issued prior to the start of
any of the following activities:
            [1]   Erection, construction, movement, placement or expansion of a
structure, building or sign.
            [2]   Change of the type of use or expansion of the use of a
structure or area of land.
            [3]   Creation of a new use.
            [4]   Demolition of a building.
            [5]   Establishment of mineral extraction or an outdoor business
storage area.
            [6]   Construction or expansion of a vehicle parking area.
            [7]   Increase the number of dwelling units or boarding house
units.
      (3)   No person shall expand or change a nonconforming use, nor add to a
nonconforming structure, nor change the use of land on which a nonconforming
use or structure is situated, until the Zoning Administrator issues a zoning
permit authorizing such activity.
      (4)   If a property with a nonresidential use changes ownership, the new
owner shall submit a form to the City to transfer the zoning permit. Such form
shall be completed to describe whether the new owner intends to continue the
existing use or make any changes to the use. [Added 2-14-2011 by Ord. No. 8-
2011]
      (5)   See also the requirements of
Chapter 308, Housing, including but not limited to requirements for the
designation of a local agent if the owner does not live locally. [Added 2-14-
2011 by Ord. No. 8-2011]
   B.   Types of uses.
      (1)   A zoning permit for a permitted by right use may be issued by the
Zoning Administrator.
      (2)   A zoning permit for a use requiring a special exception or variance
shall be issued by the Zoning Administrator only upon the written order of the
Zoning Hearing Board after a hearing.
      (3)   A zoning permit for a conditional use shall be issued by the Zoning
Administrator only upon the written order of the City Council following a
review by the Planning Commission.
   C.   Application.
   (1)   Form. All applications for a zoning permit shall be in writing on a
form provided by the Zoning Administrator and shall be submitted to the Zoning
Administrator, together with the required fee.
   (2)   By whom applications are made. All requests for permits shall be made
in writing by the legal owner of the subject property. If the applicant is not
the legal owner, the applicant shall execute an affidavit, on a form provided
by the Zoning Office and signed by the legal owner, through which the legal
owner states that the applicant is authorized to make the application pursuant
to this section. [Amended 3-10-2025 by Ord. No. 15A-2025]
   (3)   Review. The Zoning Administrator may submit a copy of any plan and
application to any appropriate agency and/or individual (such as Planning
Commission, Department of Public Works, etc.) for review and comment.
   D.   Plans and specifications. Requests for zoning permits shall be
accompanied by two copies of a plot plan that shall conform to the following
requirements:
      (1)   Drawn to the scale one inch equals 20 feet, one inch equals 50
feet, or a scale deemed appropriate by the Zoning Administrator.
      (2)   Show the size and location of all new construction, as well as the
location of all existing buildings, structures and signs.
      (3)   Show the dimensions and area, in square feet, of the lot and
buildings situated thereon.
      (4)   Show the distance of all lot lines to the building setback line.
      (5)   Show the location of all adjacent streets, alleys and rights-of-
way.
      (6)   Show all proposed and existing parking and loading areas with any
proposed storm drainage facilities.
      (7)   Describe adjacent land uses.
      (8)   Show all required buffer zones and/or landscape areas.
   E.   Conditions of permit. The Zoning Administrator shall not issue a zoning
permit unless the following conditions have been met or are satisfied:
      (1)   The use, building, structure or lot conform to the provisions of
this chapter, except for:
         (a)   Variances to this chapter granted or special exceptions allowed
and approved by the Zoning Hearing Board as hereinbefore set forth.
         (b)   Legal nonconforming buildings or uses existing prior to the
enactment of this chapter.
      (2)   Written approval, where required, from the Zoning Hearing Board
with all conditions required.
      (3)   Written statement from the Zoning Administrator that the conditions
as listed in the Zoning Hearing Board's written approval have been met,
satisfied or are substantially complete.
      (4)   All applications and documents have been revised in accordance with
the conditions of any approval given by the Zoning Hearing Board.
   F.   Issuance. [Amended 3-10-2025 by Ord. No. 15A-2025]
   (1)   The Zoning Administrator shall issue or refuse an application for a
zoning permit for a use permitted by right after receiving a complete
application except as specifically provided for in this chapter.
   (2)   One copy shall be conspicuously posted by the applicant on the
premises. No person shall perform development, construction or renovation
activities regulated by this chapter of any kind unless a zoning permit is
being displayed as required by this chapter.
   (3)   After the issuance of a zoning permit by the Zoning Office, no changes
of any kind shall be made to the application, permit, plans, specifications or
other documents submitted with the application without the written consent of
the Zoning Administrator.
   G.   Compliance with permit. All work to or any use of any building,
structure, sign or land shall conform to the approved application and plan for
which the zoning permit was issued and any approved amendments thereto. The
permit shall not be construed as authority to violate, cancel or set aside the
provisions of this or any other ordinance unless otherwise expressly stated
upon the zoning permit.
   H.   Duration of permit. [Amended 3-10-2025 by Ord. No. 15A-2025]
   (1)   A zoning permit shall be valid until such time as there is a change in
use, condition, owner or lessee for which the permit was originally issued,
except where the duration of the use or building is limited by action of the
Zoning Hearing Board or provisions of this chapter or any amendment thereto.
   (2)   A zoning permit shall be deemed invalid 24 months after its date of
issuance if the authorized work fails to commence within such time or, if the
authorized work is suspended or abandoned for a period of 24 months or more
after commencing the work. The Zoning Office may grant one or more extensions
of time for additional periods not exceeding six months each, based upon an
applicant's request. Upon expiration or invalidation of the zoning permit, all
other permits issued thereon shall become invalid.
   (3)   Where the duration of the use or building has been limited by action
of the Zoning Hearing Board or provisions of this chapter, or any amendment
thereto, the life of the zoning permit shall be equally limited. In the event
that a variance has been granted or other action has been authorized by the
Zoning Hearing Board, the applicant shall secure the necessary permits within
24 months and commence the authorized action, construction or alteration within
36 months of the final action of the Zoning Hearing Board. The applicant may
request, in writing, extensions of the 24-month period stating the reasons for
delay. Unless the Zoning Office finds such reasons for delay justifiable, it
may refuse to extend the 24-month and 36-month periods and may, after
expiration of said 24-month and 36-month periods, rescind or revoke the granted
variance, authorization and permit.
   (4)   All conditions of approval that have been rendered by the Zoning
Hearing Board shall be contained within the written decision, which may include
that terms of the approval and duration of any required zoning permits.
§ 600-302. Certificates of occupancy.
   A.   Certificate requirement. It shall be unlawful to use or occupy any
structure, building, sign or land, or portion thereof, for which a permit is
required herein or for which site improvements are required by the City or any
agency with jurisdiction until a certificate of occupancy or conditions of
approval for site improvements for such structure, building, sign, use or land
or portion thereof has been authorized or approved by the City. [Amended 3-10-
2025 by Ord. No. 15A-2025]
   B.   Application. The application for a certificate of occupancy shall be in
such form as the Building Inspector may prescribe. The application shall set
forth the intended use or occupancy of any structure, building, sign or land or
portion thereof, for which a permit is required herein.
   C.   Inspection. The Zoning Administrator may inspect any structure,
building or sign for conformity and compliance with the work listed in the
issued permit and all other pertinent laws. No certificate of occupancy shall
be issued if the Zoning Administrator has determined that the structure,
building or use does not conform to the provisions of this chapter.
   D.   Maintenance of permit. The certificate of occupancy or a true copy
thereof shall be kept available for official inspection at all times.
§ 600-303. Temporary certificate of occupancy.
   A.   A temporary certificate of occupancy may be secured from the Building
Inspector when it is necessary to continue a preexisting activity during
modification, alteration or expansion of a building. A temporary certificate of
occupancy may also be secured when it is necessary to occupy a portion of a
large building or project before the entire building or project is completed.
   B.   The permit shall indicate that the portion occupied complies with the
terms and the intent of the zoning permit and with the provisions of this
chapter and any other applicable codes or regulations.
   C.   The Zoning Administrator may deny approval of a temporary certificate
of occupancy if it is apparent that the intended occupants or the general
public will be subject to hazards that may result from the continued
construction activity or any other cause.
   D.   A temporary certificate of occupancy shall be reviewed whenever
conditions for which it was issued change.
   E.   Temporary certificates of occupancy automatically terminate when the
final certificate of occupancy is issued, or when the time period on such
certificate expires.
§ 600-304. Denial and revocation of permits and certificates.
   A.   A request for zoning permits or certificates of occupancy shall be
denied if the information submitted therewith is incomplete, erroneous or
otherwise unsatisfactory, or if the application fee is not remitted in full.
   B.   Revocation.
      (1)   The Zoning Administrator shall have the authority to revoke a
zoning permit or approval issued under the provisions of this chapter in case
of one or more of the following:
         (a)   Any false statement or misrepresentation of fact in the
application or on the plans on which the permit or approval was based. (Note:
The Pennsylvania Criminal Code provides for penalties for providing false
information to a municipal employee in the carrying out of his/her duties.)
         (b)   Upon violation of any condition lawfully imposed by the Zoning
Hearing Board upon a special exception use or variance or imposed by City
Council upon a conditional use.
         (c)   Any work being accomplished or use of land or structures in such
a way that does not comply with this chapter or an approved site plan or
approved permit application.
         (d)   If the applicant has used the premises for felony criminal
activity.
         (e)   If the Zoning Administrator becomes aware that a zoning permit
was mistakenly issued in violation of this chapter. 4
      (2)   Prior to the effective date of a revocation of a permit or
approval, an enforcement notice shall be first provided to the applicant, and
the applicant shall be notified that they have a right of appeal to the Zoning
Hearing Board.
      (3)   The Zoning Administrator shall also have the authority to withhold
or suspend a zoning permit or other approval under this chapter if one of the
conditions exist that are listed in Subsection B(1) above until such time as
the applicant shows they have resolved a violation or inaccuracy.
4.   Editor's Note: Original Subsection 2(A)(6), which immediately followed
this subsection, was repealed 2-14-2011 by Ord. No. 8-2011.
§ 600-305. Continuance of existing permits.
The enactment of this chapter or amendment shall not require a change in plans,
construction or designated uses for which a zoning permit has been issued prior
to this enactment or amendment if construction has commenced within six months,
construction is diligently continued, and the entire building or use shall have
been completed within the life of the permit or authorized renewals thereof. In
the event that construction has not begun within six months or is not
diligently prosecuted or is not completed within the life of the permit or any
authorized renewal, the permit shall lapse and the construction shall be
subject to the zoning regulations existing at the time of said lapse, unless
otherwise provided under state law.
§ 600-306. Records.
It shall be the duty of the Zoning Administrator to keep a record of all
applications for zoning permits, and records of all known registered
nonconforming uses. The Zoning Administrator shall file and safely keep copies
of all plans submitted which shall form a part of the records of his or her
office. All records and permits issued shall be available for public inspection
at reasonable times.
§ 600-307. Certificate of nonconforming use or structure.
   A.   The owner of a premises occupied by a lawful nonconforming use or
structure may secure a certificate of nonconforming use or structure from the
Zoning Administrator, after providing evidence that it is a lawful
nonconformity.
   B.   Such certificate shall be authorized by the Zoning Administrator and
shall certify to the owner his or her right to continue such nonconforming use
or structure, within the applicable limits of City ordinances and statutory and
Pennsylvania case law.
   C.   Copies of certificates shall be maintained by the Zoning Administrator
in accordance with the provisions of §
600-306 hereof.
§ 600-308. Report.
The Zoning Administrator should prepare an annual report by March 31 for City
Council summarizing all zoning transactions, all complaints of alleged
violations, and any action taken regarding violations.
Part 4
Zoning Hearing Board
§ 600-401. Continuation.
The Zoning Hearing Board ("Board") created and existing at the time of adoption
of this chapter shall continue under and in accordance with the provisions of
this section. Matters pending before the Board at the time this chapter becomes
effective shall continue, and be completed under the Zoning Ordinance in effect
at the time the Board took jurisdiction of said matters.
§ 600-402. Membership and filling of vacancies.
The members of the Board shall consist of five members who are residents of the
City appointed by the City Council. Their terms of office shall be five years
and shall be so fixed that the term of office of no more than one member shall
expire each year. The Board shall promptly notify the City Council of any
vacancies that occur. Appointments to fill vacancies shall be only for the
unexpired portion of the term. Members and alternate members of the Board shall
hold no other elected or appointed office in the City and shall not be an
employee of the City. The Zoning Administrator or designee shall serve as the
nonvoting Secretary to the Board. Newly appointed Board members should attend a
minimum of four hours of zoning training within the first year of appointment.
All Board members should participate in at least one zoning class or seminar
during each two-year period.
§ 600-403. Alternate members.
City Council may appoint by resolution at least one, but not more than three,
residents of the City to serve as alternate members of the Board. The term of
office of an alternate member shall be three years. When seated pursuant to the
provisions of this section, an alternate shall be entitled to participate in
all proceedings and discussions of the Board to the same extent as provided by
law for Board members, including specifically the right to cast a vote as a
voting member during the proceedings, and shall have all the powers and duties
set forth in this chapter and as otherwise provided by law. Alternates shall
hold no other office in the City. Any alternate may participate in any
proceeding or discussion of the Board but shall not be entitled to vote as a
member of the Board unless designated as a voting alternate member pursuant to
§
600-405C hereof. On the resignation of a voting member of the Board, an
alternate member shall automatically become a voting member, in order of his or
her appointment, to the unexpired term of the member who resigned.
§ 600-404. Removal of members.
Any member or alternate member may be removed for malfeasance, misfeasance or
nonfeasance in office or for other just cause by a majority vote of City
Council taken after the member has received 15 days' advanced written notice of
the intent to take such vote. A public hearing shall be held in connection with
the vote if the member shall request the same in writing.
§ 600-405. Organization.
   A.   The Board shall elect officers from its own membership. Officers shall
serve annual terms and may succeed themselves.
   B.   For the conduct of any hearing and taking of any action, a quorum shall
be not less three voting members of the Board.
   C.   If, by reason of absence or disqualification of a member, a quorum is
not possible, the Chairman of the Board shall designate as many alternate
members of the Board to sit on the Board as may be needed to provide a quorum.
An alternative may also serve as may be otherwise allowed under the
Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq., Any
alternate member of the Board shall continue to serve on the Board in all
proceedings involving the matter or case for which the alternate was initially
appointed until the Board has made a final determination of the matter or case.
Designation of an alternate pursuant to this section shall be made on a case-
by-case basis in rotation according to declining seniority among all
alternates.
   D.   The Board may make, alter and rescind rules and forms, for its
procedure, consistent with all applicable City ordinances and laws of the
commonwealth.
   E.   The fees for all proceedings, hearings and actions by the Board shall
be paid by the applicant.
   F.   The Board may appoint a hearing officer from its own membership to
conduct any hearing on its own behalf, and the parties may waive further action
by the Board as provided in §
600-410H.
   G.   The Board shall keep full public records of its business and should
submit a report of its activities to the City Council at least once a year.
§ 600-406. Zoning Hearing Board functions.
The Zoning Hearing Board shall be responsible for the following:
   A.   Appeals from the determination of the Zoning Administrator.
      (1)   The Board shall hear and decide appeals where it is alleged by the
appellant that the Zoning Administrator has failed to follow prescribed
procedures, failed to grant or deny a permit, failed to act on an application
for a permit, failed or refused to register a nonconforming building, lot,
structure or sign, has improperly issued a cease and desist order, or has
misinterpreted or misapplied any valid provision of this chapter.
      (2)   All appeals that allege that the Zoning Administrator has made an
error shall be filed directly with the Secretary of the Board within 30 days of
the Zoning Administrator's alleged error.
      (3)   Such appeals shall be in writing, shall explain fully the facts,
parties in the case, and shall clearly state the reasons or provisions of the
Part on which the appeal is based.
   B.   Challenges to the validity of this chapter or map.
      (1)   The Board shall hear substantive challenges to the validity of any
land use ordinance, except those brought before City Council pursuant to §§
609.1 and 916.1(a)(2) of the Municipalities Planning Code, as amended, 53 P.S.
§§ 10609.1 and 10916.1(a)(2).
      (2)   The Board shall hear challenges to the validity of a land use
ordinance raising procedural questions or alleged defects in the process of
enactment or adoption, which challenges shall be raised by an appeal taken
within 30 days after the effective date of said ordinance.
      (3)   Within 45 days, the Board shall decide all contested questions and
shall make findings on all relevant issues of fact, which shall become part of
the record on appeal to the Court.
   C.   Other appeals.
      (1)   The Board shall also hear appeals from a determination by the
Department of Public Works or Zoning Administrator with reference to the
administration of Part 18, Floodplain Overlay Zone, of this chapter.
      (2)   The Board shall also hear appeals regarding the administration of
any transfers of development rights.
      (3)   The Board shall also hear appeals from the determination of the
Zoning Administrator or Department of Public Works in the administration of any
ordinance or provision thereof with reference to sedimentation and erosion
control and stormwater management insofar as the same relate to development not
involving the provisions of
Chapter 515, Subdivision and Land Development, of the Code of the City of
Reading.
      (4)   The Board shall also hear appeals from any Zoning Administrator's
determination made under § 916.2 of the Municipalities Planning Code, as
amended, 53 P.S. § 10916.2.
   D.   Variances.
      (1)   The Board may hear requests for variances where it is alleged that
the provisions of this chapter inflict unnecessary hardship upon the applicant.
      (2)   The Board may grant a variance only if all of the following
conditions, where relevant, are determined to exist:
         (a)   There are unique physical circumstances or conditions (including
irregularity, narrowness or shallowness of lot size or shape, or exceptional
topographical or other physical conditions peculiar to the particular property)
and that the unnecessary hardship is due to such conditions and not the
circumstances or conditions generally created by the provisions of this Part in
the neighborhood or district in which the property is located.
         (b)   Because of such physical circumstances or conditions there is no
possibility that the property can be developed in strict conformity with the
provisions of this chapter and that the authorization of a variance is
therefore necessary to enable the reasonable use of the property.
         (c)   Such unnecessary hardship has not been created by the appellant.
         (d)   The variance, if authorized, will not alter the essential
character of the neighborhood or district in which the property is located, nor
substantially or permanently impair the appropriate use or development of
adjacent property, nor be detrimental to the public welfare.
         (e)   The variance, if authorized, will represent the minimum variance
that will afford relief and will represent the least modification possible of
the regulation in issue.
      (3)   In granting any variance, the Board may attach such reasonable
conditions and safeguards, as it may deem necessary, to implement the purposes
of this chapter.
   E.   Special exceptions.
      (1)   The Board shall hear and decide requests for all special exceptions
filed with the Board in writing by any landowner (or any authorized agent) as
provided in this chapter and in accordance with such standards and criteria
contained in this chapter.
      (2)   In granting a special exception, the Board may attach such
reasonable conditions and safeguards, in addition to those expressed in this
chapter, as it may deem necessary to implement the purposes and intent of this
chapter.
      (3)   Special exception use standards are provided in §§
600-1201 and 600-1202.
   F.   Conduct of hearings. The Zoning Hearing Board ("the Board") shall
conduct hearings and make decisions in accordance with the provisions of §
600-410 hereof and of the Municipalities Planning Code, as amended, 53 P.S. §
10101 et seq.
   G.   Reporting requirements. The Board shall keep full public records of its
business, which is the property of the City, and shall submit an annual report
of its activities to the City Council.
   H.   Court appeals.
      (1)   In the case of an appeal from the Board to the Court of Common
Pleas, the Board shall make the return or file the certiorari required by law,
and shall promptly notify the City Solicitor of such appeal and furnish him
with a copy of the return including the transcript of testimony.
      (2)   Any decision of the Board not appealed within 30 days after notice
thereof shall be final, unless otherwise provided under state law.
§ 600-407. Expenditures for services.
Within the limitations budgeted by City Council, the Board may employ or
contract for secretaries, clerks, legal counsel, consultants and other
technical and clerical services. The members of the Board may receive
compensation for the performance of their duties as may be fixed by City
Council.
§ 600-408. Applications.
Every application for a variance, special exception or interpretation of a
ruling of the Zoning Administrator shall be made in writing on a form prepared
by the Zoning Hearing Board. Such application shall be filed with the Board,
and shall include the following:
   A.   The name, address and signature of the applicant or appellant.
   B.   The name and address of the owner of the property.
   C.   A brief description and location of the property to be affected by such
proposed change or appeal.
   D.   A statement of the present zoning classification of the property in
question and the present use thereof.
   E.   A reasonably accurate description of the new construction, additions or
changes intended to be made under this application indicating the size, height
and uses of such proposed improvements. A plot plan of the property to be
affected, indicating the location and size of the lot and the size of existing
and intended improvements, shall be attached to the description. Plot plans
shall be clear, legible and accurately drawn to scale.
   F.   Submittal of appropriate fees.
   G.   Applicants may ask the Zoning Administrator to delay or continue their
hearing before the Zoning Hearing Board no later than three days before the
date of the hearing and no more than two times if a continuance fee to be
established by the Zoning Administrator is paid when the request is made. Third
requests for a delay or a continuance must be made to and approved by the Chair
of the Zoning Hearing Board. [Added 12-16-2013 by Ord. No. 83-2013]
§ 600-409. Time limitations, persons aggrieved.
The time limitations for raising certain issues and filing certain proceedings
with the Board shall be the following:
   A.   No person shall be allowed to file any proceeding with the Board later
than 30 days after any application for development, preliminary or final, has
been approved by the appropriate City officer, agency or body pursuant to §
914.1(a) of the Municipalities Planning Code, as amended, 53 P.S. § 10914.1(a).
   B.   All appeals from determinations adverse to the landowner shall be filed
by the landowner within 30 days after notice of the determination is issued.
§ 600-410. Hearing procedures.
The Board shall conduct hearings and make decisions in accordance with the
following:
   A.   Notice of hearings. Notice of all hearings of the Board shall be given
as follows:
      (1)   Advertisement.
         (a)   Notice to the public shall be published once each week for two
successive weeks, in a newspaper of general circulation in the City.
         (b)   The first publication shall not be more than 30 days and second
publication shall not be less than seven days from the date of the hearing.
         (c)   The notice shall state the time and place of the hearing and the
particular nature of the matter to be considered.
      (2)   Posting. Written notice of such hearing shall be conspicuously
posted on the affected tract of land at least one week prior to the hearing.
      (3)   Notification requirements. The Board shall give public notice of
all matters to be heard at any given hearing and shall give written notice to
the owner, appellant, Mayor, City Council, to the governing body of any
municipality located within 500 feet of the property at issue, and to all other
interested parties who have registered their names and addresses in writing
with the City for notices on such matter.
         (a)   Notice shall also be provided to the last known primary owner of
every lot that is abutting, directly across the street or at least partially
within 100 feet of the lot in question. However, failure of such notice to be
provided shall not delay or negate the hearing and the decision and shall not
be a grounds for appeal.
         (b)   The notices herein required shall state the location of the
building or lot, the general nature of the question involved and the time and
place of the hearing.
   B.   Fees and costs. City Council may establish by ordinance a reasonable
fee schedule to be paid by the applicant.5,6
   C.   Time constraints. The first hearing shall be held before the Board or
Hearing Officer within 60 days from the date of receipt of the applicant's
complete application, unless the applicant has agreed in writing to an
extension of time. Each subsequent hearing shall be held within 45 days of the
prior hearing, unless otherwise agreed to by the applicant in writing or on the
record.
   D.   Persons entitled to present appeals before the Board. An appeal of the
decision of the Zoning Administrator must be presented before the Zoning
Hearing Board by one or more of the following persons:
      (1)   The landowner.
      (2)   A party with equitable interest in the property.
      (3)   An attorney licensed to practice in the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania.
      (4)   A person with a properly executed power of attorney.
   E.   Parties. The parties to the hearing shall be the applicant(s), the City
and any person affected by the application. The Board shall have the power to
require that all persons who wish to be considered parties enter appearances in
writing on forms provided by the Board for that purpose.
   F.   Oaths and subpoenas. The Chairman or acting Chairman of the Board
presiding shall have power to administer oaths and issue subpoenas to compel
the attendance of witnesses and the production of relevant documents and
papers, including witnesses and documents requested by the parties.
   G.   Representation by Counsel. The parties shall have the right to be
represented by counsel and shall be afforded the opportunity to respond and
present evidence and argument and cross-examine adverse witness on all relevant
issues.
   H.   Conduct of hearings. Hearings shall be conducted by the Board or the
Board may appoint any member as a Hearing Officer. The decision, or where no
decision is called for, the findings, shall be made by the Board. The parties
may, however, waive the decision or findings by the Board and accept the
decision or findings of the Hearing Officer as final.
   I.   Evidence. Formal rules of evidence shall not apply, but irrelevant,
immaterial or unduly repetitious evidence may be excluded.
   J.   Record.
      (1)   The Board or the Hearing Officer, as the case may be, shall keep a
stenographic record of the proceedings. The appearance fee for a stenographer
shall be shared equally by the applicant and the Board.
      (2)   The cost of the original transcript shall be paid by the Board if
the transcript is ordered by the Board or shall be paid by the person appealing
from the decision of the Board if such appeal is made, and in either event, the
cost of additional copies shall be paid by the person requesting such copy or
copies. In other cases, the party requesting the original transcript shall bear
the cost thereof.
   K.   Ex parte communications.
      (1)   The Board shall not communicate, directly or indirectly, with any
party or its representative in connection with any issues involved, except upon
notice and opportunity for all parties to participate.
      (2)   The Board shall not take notice of any communication, reports,
staff memoranda or other materials (except advice from its Solicitor), unless
the parties are afforded an opportunity to contest the material so noticed.
      (3)   After the commencement of hearings, the Board shall not inspect the
site or its surroundings with any party or its representative, unless all
parties are given an opportunity to be present.
   L.   Conflicts of interest. No member of the Board shall vote upon or
participate in deliberations concerning any application for which the member
has a conflict of interest. Grounds for disqualification on an individual
appeal include, but are not restricted to, the following:
      (1)   Direct or indirect financial or property interest.
      (2)   Direct business association with one of the parties involved.
      (3)   A close familial relationship with one of the parties involved.
      (4)   An overt expression or affiliation with an organization whose
ideology expresses a predisposition toward the parties or the intent of the
parties involved.
5.   Editor's Note: See
Ch. 212, Fees.
6.   Editor's Note: Amended during codification (see
Ch. 1, General Provisions, Part 2).
§ 600-411. Stay of proceedings.
   A.   Upon filing of any proceeding referred to in §
600-408 and while pending before the Board, all land development pursuant to
any challenged ordinance, order or approval of the Zoning Administrator or of
any agency or body, and all official action thereunder shall be stayed.
   B.   Action by appropriate City officials shall not be stayed if the Zoning
Administrator or any other appropriate agency or body certifies as to the Board
facts indicating that such stay would cause peril to life or property.
   C.   Notwithstanding Subsection B above, a restraining order may be granted
by the Board or by the court having jurisdiction of zoning appeals on petition
after notice to the Zoning Administrator or other appropriate agency or body.
      (1)   When an application for development, preliminary or final, has been
duly approved and proceedings designed to reverse or limit the approval are
filed with the Board by persons other than the applicant, the applicant may
petition the court having jurisdiction of zoning appeals to order such persons
to post a bond as a condition to continuing the proceedings before the Board.
      (2)   The granting of a petition presented pursuant to Subsection C(1)
and the amount of any bond related thereto shall be within the sound discretion
of the court.
§ 600-412. Decision; findings.
   A.   The Board shall render a written decision or make written findings
(when no decision is called for) on the application, within 45 days after the
last hearing before the Board. See § 908 of the Municipalities Planning Code,
53 P.S. § 10908.
   B.   Where the application is contested or denied, the decision shall be
accompanied by findings of fact and conclusions based thereon, together with
the reasons therefor.
   C.   Any conclusion based on any provision of the Municipalities Planning
Code, as amended, 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq., or of this chapter, shall contain a
reference to the provision relied on and the reasons why the conclusion is
deemed appropriate in light of the facts found.
   D.   If the hearing is conducted by a hearing officer and there has been no
stipulation that his or her decision or findings are final, the Board shall
make his or her report and recommendations available to the parties within 45
days and the parties shall be entitled to make written recommendations thereon
to the Board prior to final decision or entry of findings. The Board's decision
shall be entered no later than 30 days after the decision of the hearing
officer.
   E.   Where the Board fails to render the decision within the period required
by this subsection, or fails to hold the required hearing within 60 days from
the date of the applicant's request for a hearing, the decision shall be deemed
to have been rendered in favor of the applicant unless the applicant has agreed
in writing or on the record to an extension of time.
§ 600-413. Notice of decision.
   A.   A copy of the final decision or a copy of the findings (when no
decision is called for) shall be delivered to the applicant personally or
mailed to him or her no later than one working day following its date.
   B.   The Board shall provide (by mail or otherwise) a brief notice of the
decision or findings and a statement of the place where the full decision or
findings may be examined to all other persons who have filed their names and
addresses with the Board.
   C.   When a decision has been rendered in favor of the applicant because of
the failure of the Board to meet or render a timely decision, as required by §
600-410C or 600-412E hereof, the Board shall give public notice of said
decision within 10 days from the last day it could have met to render a
decision in the same manner as provided in §
600-410A. If the Board shall fail to provide such notice, the applicant may do
so.
§ 600-414. Effect of Board's decision. [Amended 3-10-2025 by Ord. No. 15A-2025]
   A.   If a variance is granted or the issuance of a permit is approved, or
other action by the appellant is authorized, the necessary permit shall be
secured and the authorized action begun according to the stipulations set form
in this Part as found in §
600-301E through H.
   B.   Should the appellant or applicant fail to obtain necessary permits
within a 24-month period from the date of approval, or having obtained the
permit should he or she fail to commence work thereunder within a 36-month
period, it shall be conclusively presumed that the appellant or applicant has
waived, withdrawn or abandoned its appeal or application, and all provisions,
variances and permits granted to him or her shall be deemed rescinded by the
Board without further action. The Board may grant time extensions for the
failure to obtain the necessary permits and/or commence the work thereunder
within 24 months and 36 months respectively.
   C.   Should the appellant or applicant commence construction or alteration
within said 36-month period, but should he or she fail to complete such
construction or alteration within a 60-month period, the Board may, upon 10
days' notice in writing, rescind or revoke the granted variance, or the
issuance of the permit, or the other action authorized to the appellant or
applicant. The Board may grant a time extension, if and only if, the Board
finds that a good cause appears for the failure to complete within such 60-
month period.
   D.   The Zoning Hearing Board shall include all conditions of approval that
may include any restrictions, limitations and/or any clarifications that
pertain to the case.
§ 600-415. Mediation option.
   A.   Parties to proceedings authorized in this Part may utilize mediation as
an aid in completing such proceedings. The Board shall neither initiate
mediation nor participate as a mediating party in any proceeding pending before
the Board. Mediation shall supplement, not replace, those procedures in this
chapter once said procedures have been formally initiated. Nothing in this
section shall be interpreted as expanding or limiting City police powers or as
modifying any principles of substantive law.
   B.   Participation in mediation shall be wholly voluntary. The
appropriateness of mediation shall be determined by the particulars of each
case and the willingness of the parties to negotiate. The Board shall not
initiate mediation proceedings until the City shall have assured that, in such
case, the mediating parties, assisted by the mediator as appropriate, have
developed terms and conditions for:
      (1)   Funding mediation.
      (2)   Selecting a mediator who, at a minimum, shall have a working
knowledge of municipal zoning and demonstrated skills in mediation.
      (3)   Completing mediation, including time limits for such completion.
      (4)   Suspending time limits otherwise authorized in this Part, provided
there is written consent by the mediating parties and by an applicant or City
decisionmaking body if either is not a party to the mediation.
      (5)   Identifying all parties and affording them the opportunity to
participate.
      (6)   Subject to legal restraints, determining whether some or all of the
mediation sessions shall be open or closed to the public.
      (7)   Assuring that mediation solutions are in writing and signed by the
parties, and become subject to review and approval by the appropriate
decisionmaking body pursuant to the authorized procedures set forth in the
other sections of this chapter.
   C.   No offers or statements made in the mediation sessions, excluding the
final written mediated agreement, shall be admissible as evidence in any
subsequent judicial or administrative proceedings.
§ 600-416. Appeals.
   A.   All appeals for securing review of this chapter or any decision,
determination or order of this Board or of City Council, or of any of the
City's agencies or officers issued pursuant to this chapter, shall be in
conformance with the Municipalities Planning Code, as amended, 53 P.S. § 10101
et seq.
   B.   Questions of an alleged defect in the process of enactment or adoption
of this chapter or the Zoning Map(s) associated herewith shall be raised by an
appeal taken directly from the action of City Council to the Berks County Court
of Common Pleas filed no later than 30 days from the effective date of such
ordinance or map.
   C.   No person may file a subsequent zoning application with the Zoning
Administrator if there is currently an appeal or litigation relating to the
same property pending before the Zoning Hearing Board or any of the local,
state or federal court systems requesting the same or substantially similar
relief. [Added 12-16-2013 by Ord. No. 83-2013]
Part 5
Zoning Map And Boundaries
§ 600-501. Zoning Map and boundaries.
The boundaries on the districts enumerated in §
600-701 are hereby established on a map entitled "Zoning Map of the City of
Reading," which map accompanies and is hereby declared to be a part of this
chapter. Where uncertainty exists as to the precise location of the boundaries
shown on said map, the following rules shall apply:
   A.   District boundary lines generally follow the center line of streets,
alleys and streams, and lot or property lines as they exist on plans of record
at the time of adoption of this chapter. Where a district boundary line divides
a lot, the location of said boundary, unless the same is identified by
dimensions, shall be determined by use of the scale on the map.
   B.   Where a district boundary is not fixed by dimensions and where it
approximately follows a lot line, such lot line shall be construed to be along
such lot line unless specifically shown otherwise.
   C.   In case any further uncertainty exists, the Zoning Administrator shall
interpret the intent of the map as to the location of the district boundary
lines.
§ 600-502. Overlays.
Any and all airport zones, floodplains, floodways, flood districts, and flood-
prone areas, as any other overlay zones described in this chapter, shall be
overlays to the existing districts as shown on the official "Zoning Map of the
City of Reading" or any amendatory map, and, as such, the provisions of these
overlay zones shall serve as a supplement to the underlying districts. Where
any conflict exists between the provisions of the aforementioned sections and
the underlying districts, the more restrictive provision shall be applied.
   A.   However, the RR Overlay Zone shall function in relation to the
underlying zoning district as provided in §
600-815.
Part 6
Types Of Uses
§ 600-601. Classifications of uses.
For the purposes of this Part, the following classes of uses are established:
   A.   Permitted-by-right uses.
   B.   Accessory uses.
   C.   Temporary uses.
   D.   Special exception uses.
   E.   Conditional uses.
   F.   Nonconforming uses.
§ 600-602. Permitted-by-right uses.
Permitted-by-right uses may be approved by the Zoning Administrator, provided
said use is shown as a permitted-by-right use in the applicable zoning district
and the use complies with all other provisions of this chapter.
§ 600-603. Accessory uses.
Accessory uses are uses permitted by right, provided said use is shown as an
accessory use in the zoning district schedule for the district in which the
accessory use is located or proposed and the use thereof complies with all
other provisions of this chapter, and further provided that:
   A.   The proposed accessory use, building or structure is customarily
associated with or incidental to the permitted use existing on the lot.
   B.   The extent, size and intensity of such proposed accessory use, building
or structure is in keeping with the scale, nature and characteristics of the
permitted use on the lot.
   C.   An accessory use or building shall not be allowed unless the principal
use exists on the same lot or an adjacent lot under common ownership. Off-
street parking areas serving a use allowed in that zoning district may be
permitted as an accessory use on noncontiguous lots, except as restricted
otherwise in the C-C District.
   D.   The proposed accessory use, building or structure is not contrary to
the intent of the zoning district in which the lot is situated.
§ 600-604. Temporary uses.
   A.   The Zoning Administrator may issue a permit for customarily accessory
temporary uses, such as a construction trailer while on-site construction is
actively underway.
   B.   It is hereby recognized that certain uses and activities, which might
otherwise be prohibited by this chapter, are nevertheless such that their
establishment and operation for a limited period of time would serve the public
interest. This subsection applies for temporarily uses that are not clearly
customary and incidental. For the purpose of this chapter, such uses are
declared to be temporary uses that may be approved in any district upon
application to and approval by the Zoning Hearing Board, subject to the
following:
      (1)   The proposed use is of such a nature that at the time of
application that it would not exert a detrimental effect upon the use of
neighboring properties.
      (2)   The proposed use will contribute to the general welfare and needs
of the City of Reading and the general public.
      (3)   The duration of the proposed use shall be established by the Zoning
Hearing Board to serve the intended purpose of the temporary use.
      (4)   Security shall be required by the Zoning Hearing Board in an amount
necessary to restore the property on which the temporary use was located to a
condition that complies with the requirements of the Code of the City of
Reading.
§ 600-605. Special exception uses.
It is hereby recognized that certain uses may be necessary to serve the needs
and convenience of the City, but which uses may become detrimental to the
public health, safety and general welfare if not controlled under proper
conditions and therefore require special consideration of existing and probable
future conditions and characteristics of the surrounding area. Such uses are
hereby declared to be special exception uses and may be permitted upon
application to and approval by the Zoning Hearing Board, provided said use is
shown as a special exception use in the zoning district schedule for the
district in which the use is located and subject to the considerations as set
forth in §
600-408.
§ 600-606. Conditional uses.
Conditional uses shall be allowed or denied by City Council pursuant to public
notice, public hearing, Planning Commission recommendations, and pursuant to
standards and criteria set forth in this chapter. In allowing a conditional
use, City Council may attach such reasonable conditions and safeguards, in
addition to those expressed in this chapter, as it may deem necessary to
implement the purposes of this chapter.
§ 600-607. Nonconforming uses, buildings, structures and lots.
   A.   Within the districts established by this chapter or by amendments
thereto, there exist, may exist or will exist: uses of land, structures and
lots which were lawful before this chapter was passed or amended but which
would be prohibited, to be newly established under the terms of this chapter or
future amendment. Inasmuch as these nonconformities are, by definition, alien
to the character of a district created under this chapter, it is desirable to
control these nonconformities. Over time, these nonconformities are intended to
be reduced in number by obsolescence, destruction, abandonment or similar
factors. Because nonconformities, so long as they exist, may conflict with the
objectives of this chapter, such uses are limited in their expansion and
changes.
   B.   A lawful existing use, building, structure or lot that is made
nonconforming at the time of passage of this chapter or any applicable
amendment thereto, may be continued except as otherwise set forth in this
chapter.
   C.   In accordance with §
600-201B(2), the Zoning Administrator may identify and register nonconforming
uses, buildings and structures. The owner of the premises of a nonconforming
structure or owner of a lawful nonconforming use may, upon providing sufficient
evidence, secure a certificate of nonconformance from the Zoning Administrator.
Other sections of this chapter may require a certificate of nonconformance for
certain uses (such as §
600-1203K for student homes). The certificate of nonconformance, for the
purpose of this chapter, shall be considered the zoning permit. Such
certificate shall be authorized by the Zoning Administrator and shall be for
the purpose of ensuring to the owner the right to continue such nonconforming
use or structure.
   D.   Existing nonconforming uses, buildings, structures, or lots shall not
be enlarged, reconstructed, substituted or moved so as to extend or increase
the nonconformity other than as specified in Subsection D(1); nor shall they be
extended or enlarged after passage of this chapter by attachment to a building
or premises or by the addition of other uses of a nature which would be
prohibited generally in the district involved. Nonconforming uses are further
subject to the following:
      (1)   Upon review by the Zoning Administrator, a nonconforming use may be
enlarged up to but not more than 20% of its floor area and land area, whichever
is more restrictive, as such existed at the time the use first became
nonconforming; provided that such enlargement shall conform to all other
regulations of the district in which it is situated. Such 20% shall be a
cumulative maximum over the lifetime of the use. Access for persons with
disabilities or fire egress may be added without being restricted by the 20%
maximum expansion. A nonconforming building or structure may be expanded,
provided the expansion conforms to this chapter.
      (2)   Normal maintenance, repairs and incidental alterations of a
building or other structure containing a nonconforming use are permitted,
provided they do not extend the area or volume of space occupied by the
nonconforming use unless Subsection A is met.
      (3)   Residential nonconforming uses may be altered in any way to improve
interior livability, provided that there is no increase the number of dwelling
units on the lot.
      (4)   A nonconforming use shall not displace or replace a conforming use.
      (5)   A nonconforming use may be changed into a conforming use at any
time. If the conforming use is equal to or less intensive than the prior
nonconforming use, off- street parking requirements will not change. A
substantial increase in use intensity for any conforming use necessitates
provision of the net number of required off-street parking space.
      (6)   A nonconforming use may be replaced by a nonconforming use that is
equally intense or less intense. The Zoning Administrator shall have the
authority to approve a change within the same type of nonconforming use, such
as from one personal service use to another personal service use, provided the
applicant agrees to comply with all of the same conditions that applied to the
previous use. This Zoning Administrator approval may be permitted by right. If
the Zoning Administrator has doubts about the comparative intensity of the new
versus previous use, special exception approval shall be required. All other
proposed changes in a nonconforming use shall need special exception approval
by the Zoning Hearing Board.
      (7)   A determination regarding the intensity of a replacement
nonconforming use shall consider the following:
         (a)   Traffic generation and congestion, including truck and passenger
car traffic.
         (b)   Nuisance characteristics such as emission of noise, odor, dust,
smoke, fumes, fire hazards, glare and vibration.
         (c)   Hours and manner of operation.
         (d)   Waste disposal and storage.
         (e)   Parking demand, considering the proposed hours of the use.
      (8)   Buildings or structures, regardless of conformity or ownership,
shall not be combined for the purpose of extending an existing nonconforming
use or for creating a different nonconforming use.
      (9)   When a new nonconforming use is proposed, the Zoning Administrator
may require that the applicant describe in writing the proposed operations to
allow a review of the intensity of the new use versus the previous use. [Added
2-14-2011 by Ord. No. 8-2011]
   E.   Replacing/restoring nonconforming use, building or structure.
      (1)   In the event that 50% or more of the existing floor area or use of
land occupied by a nonconforming use is voluntarily razed, legally condemned,
or destroyed by fire, explosion or flood, it may not be restored, reconstructed
or used as before except in strict compliance with the zoning regulations of
the zoning district in which it is situated, unless special exception approval
is granted for such use or activity.
      (2)   In the event that less than 50% of the existing floor area or use
of land occupied by a nonconforming use is voluntarily razed, legally
condemned, or destroyed by fire, explosion, flood or other phenomenon, it may
not be restored, reconstructed or used as before unless such restoration,
reconstruction or use commences within one year from the date of the damage.
      (3)   In any case, an existing lawful one-family dwelling (such as a one-
family attached dwelling) may be reconstructed or replaced with a new one-
family dwelling as a permitted-by-right use, provided the new dwelling is not
more nonconforming in any measure than the existing dwelling. In such case, the
construction shall be started within 12 months after the existing dwelling was
damaged, destroyed or demolished.
   F.   Termination and abandonment of nonconforming uses, buildings or
structures shall be subject to the following:
      (1)   Any nonconforming use, building or structure that is replaced by a
conforming use, building or structure shall be deemed immediately abandoned and
cannot thereafter be revived.
      (2)   A nonconforming use, building or structure discontinued for a
period of 12 consecutive months shall be presumed abandoned and shall not
thereafter be revived without proof, satisfactory to the Zoning Administrator,
that the owner did not intend its abandonment through disuse. In making its
determination, the Zoning Administrator shall take into account the owner's
compliance (or noncompliance) with the provisions of this subsection and shall
consider the impact the use will have on the character of the neighborhood.
      (3)   One or more of the following shall be deemed evidence of intent to
discontinue and abandon a nonconforming use, building or structure:
         (a)   Failure to properly secure windows, walls and/or doors of the
property.
         (b)   Use of the property for a conforming use.
         (c)   Demolition of the structure.
         (d)   Failure to apply for any licenses and/or permits that may be
required to continue such nonconforming use.
         (e)   Failure to market a vacant property for sale or lease, during
periods when the property is not actively under renovation.
         (f)   Failure to appeal the denial of a permit to continue the use.
         (g)   Failure to file letters of intent as per Subsection G.
      (4)   A nonconforming use, building or structure shall not be deemed
abandoned under the following circumstances:
         (a)   The consequent restrictions imposed upon the use by a
governmental authority during wartime.
         (b)   Destruction of the property by natural disaster (other than
fire, flood or explosion).
         (c)   Cessation of business during any permitted repair to a structure
or to the property.
      (5)   If a zoning permit or zoning approval is revoked by the City for
good cause, and if the applicant does not bring the property and use into
compliance with this Part within 120 days, then the City may consider a
nonconforming use to have been abandoned.
[Added 2-14-2011 by Ord. No. 8-2011]
   G.   Any use that has been discontinued for a period of 12 continuous months
shall be deemed abandoned, unless the owner or the owner's authorized agent
submits to the Zoning Administrator, at the end of 12 months and every six
months thereafter, a letter of intent which clearly indicates that attempts to
secure a buyer or tenant for the use are ongoing. In order to claim that a
nonconforming use that has been discontinued for more than 12 months has not
been abandoned, a valid zoning permit shall have had been issued for the
previous use, unless the applicant shows that a lawful use was on the premises
that predated a requirement for a zoning permit. [Amended 2-14-2011 by Ord. No.
8-2011]
§ 600-608. Prohibited uses, general.
The following uses are expressly prohibited:
   A.   Those uses that are not listed in a zoning district schedule shall be
prohibited in that zoning district.
   B.   Any purpose that is or may become obnoxious or offensive by reason of
odor, dust, smoke, gas, vibration, illumination or noise or that is detrimental
or injurious to the public health, safety or welfare or used for any purpose
that constitutes unusual public hazard due to fire, explosion or any other
similar cause.
   C.   The open dumping or burning of trash, garbage, rubbish or other waste
products.
   D.   The housing and/or breeding of any animal, domesticated, feral or wild,
not normally considered a family pet. See
Chapter 141, Animals, of the Code of the City of Reading.
   E.   Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, no use may be made
of any land or water within any zoning district that adversely affects the
activity at the Reading Regional Airport.
§ 600-609. Similar uses.
The Zoning Hearing Board may, by special exception, determine that a proposed
use is sufficiently similar in character and impact to that of a listed use and
that the proposed use may be treated the same as the listed use. The applicant
shall have the burden of proof to show that the proposed use would not be a
threat to public health and safety and would not generate significant nuisances
to adjacent residential areas. This provision shall only apply to a use that is
not listed as being prohibited in the applicable district.
Part 7
Zoning Districts
§ 600-701. Districts.
The City of Reading is hereby divided into the following zoning districts and
overlay zones:
   A.   Residential Districts.
      (1)   R-1A Residential.
      (2)   R-1 Residential.
      (3)   R-2 Residential.
      (4)   R-3 Residential.
      (5)   R-PO Residential-Professional Office.
   B.   Commercial Districts.
      (1)   C-C Commercial Core.
      (2)   C-R Commercial Residential.
      (3)   C-N Commercial Neighborhood.
      (4)   C-H Commercial Highway.
   C.   Manufacturing Districts.
      (1)   M-C Manufacturing Commercial.
      (2)   H-M Heavy Manufacturing.
   D.   P Preservation Zoning District.
   E.   FP Floodplain Overlay Zone.
   F.   Airport Overlay Zone.
   G.   RR Riverfront Redevelopment Overlay Zone.
   H.   Municipal Use District (MU).
   I.   P-S Penn Square Corridor Overlay Zone.
   J.   INS Institutional Overlay Zone.
   K.   Riparian Buffer Overlay District. [Added 10-26-2015 by Ord. No. 57-
2015]
§ 600-702. Intent of districts.
The intended objectives of the various zoning districts are described as
follows and shall be relied upon for interpretation and administration of this
Part:
   A.   The Residential Districts are intended to provide sufficient area in
appropriate locations for residential uses and development in an effort to meet
the housing needs of the City without sacrificing desirable established
residential patterns.
      (1)   The R-1A, R-1, R-2 and R-3 Residential Districts allow for varying
residential densities. The R-1A and R-1 Districts preserve and enhance low-
density areas composed of one-family detached dwellings on relatively large
lots. The R-2 Medium Density District provides a variety of one-family
detached, semidetached and attached dwellings. The R-3 District allows the
highest residential densities and permits multifamily apartments.
      (2)   The Residential-Professional Office District provides for the
controlled growth of professional offices along Kenhorst Boulevard between
Lancaster Avenue and Pershing Boulevard, where similar uses are already in
existence. The professional nature of the services provided shall have minimum
impact on the neighboring residential districts.
   B.   The Commercial Districts are intended to provide sufficient area in
appropriate locations for various forms and types of business uses and
development; to satisfy the needs of modern business development by providing
off-street parking, loading and unloading areas, safe and efficient means of
vehicle ingress and egress, and compatible forms of business development; to
encourage the development of attractive, functional and economic forms of
commercial buildings under proper standards; to encourage the enhancement and
beautification of commercial areas; and to minimize any negative effects of
commercial areas on adjoining residential areas. Recognizing the mixed-use
character of the City of Reading, it is intended that existing residential uses
be permitted in commercial class districts in accordance with standards
established for specified residential districts.
      (1)   The C-C Commercial Core District is the downtown center for
government services, offices, shopping, hotels, entertainment and cultural
activity.
      (2)   The C-R Commercial Residential District provides for multifamily
dwellings as well as offices, business services, consumer services and smaller
retail stores that relate to the commercial core.
      (3)   The C-N Commercial Neighborhood District allows the continuation of
pedestrian- oriented business establishments that feature convenience shopping
and personal services for a smaller local residential market.
      (4)   The C-H Commercial Highway District includes locations along major
roadways and are designed to allow for automobile-oriented businesses as well
as high-intensity linear retail development.
   C.   The Manufacturing Districts are intended to provide suitable space for
industrial and commercial types of business and development not ordinarily
found nor desirable in commercial or neighborhood districts, to satisfy the
needs for this type of development by providing for off-street parking and
loading and unloading areas in the course of the development of attractive
functional and economic forms of commercial and offices as well as industrial
development; and to minimize any negative effects of industrial commercial
areas on the adjoining residential areas. Recognizing the opportunity for
adaptive reuse of existing manufacturing buildings and for reuse of vacant
industrial lands for other purposes, it is the intent of this chapter that the
Manufacturing-Commercial District permit such adaptive reuse of industrial
buildings for commercial enterprises and offices where existing buildings are
appropriate for these uses. The manufacturing class districts are not intended
to contain residences. In the event that there is an existing single-family
detached or semidetached dwelling in a manufacturing class district, the
expansion of said building for the establishment of accessory uses for said
dwellings may be permitted, provided the proposal is in compliance with the
minimum standards of any of the residential districts.
      (1)   The M-C Manufacturing Commercial District provides for light
manufacturing and retail and wholesale sales and services.
      (2)   The H-M Heavy Manufacturing District provides for heavy
manufacturing, warehousing, transportation and other commercial uses that are
incompatible with less-intensive nonresidential uses.
   D.   The P Preservation District is designed to conserve the natural quality
of land at, adjacent to, or near streams, ponds, lakes, watercourses or similar
geologic features, including those geologic features that contain water only
during times of extreme flooding. The Preservation District protects the
habitat of wildlife in areas of little human intrusion, protects areas that
environmentally are fragile because of soil structure, slope or type of
vegetation or wildlife habitation, and protects places having unique natural,
architectural or historic interest or value; to protect public buildings and
public grounds. Development within the Preservation District shall prevent the
blockage of stream valleys, minimize erosion, prevent the diversion of natural
watercourses, and minimize flood-related damage in and around floodplain areas.
   E.   The FP Floodplain Overlay Zone is intended to reduce the loss of
property and life, to minimize health and safety hazards, the disruption of
commerce and governmental services, the extraordinary and unnecessary
expenditure of public funds for flood protection and relief, and the impairment
of the tax base by regulating uses, activities and development which, acting
alone or in combination with other existing or future uses, activities and
development, will cause increases in flood heights, velocities and frequencies;
restricting or prohibiting certain uses, activities and development from
locating within areas subject to flooding; requiring all those uses, activities
and developments that do occur in flood-prone areas to be protected and/or
floodproofed against flooding and flood damage; and protecting individuals from
buying lands and structures that are susceptible to flood hazards.
   F.   The Airport Overlay Zone is designed to insure and promote the health,
safety and welfare of the general public and property in and about the Reading
Regional Airport, to protect the users, facilities and services of the airport,
to prevent hazardous conditions to the users, facilities or services of the
airport and to eliminate, remove, mitigate, mark or light any existing hazard
which cannot be completely abated.
   G.   RR Riverfront Redevelopment Overlay Zone. This district recognizes an
area of Reading that is uniquely situated compared to other areas of the City.
This district allows optional types of future development and adaptive reuses
consistent with such uniqueness. This area is also unique in terms of its size
because it potentially includes over 20 acres of redevelopment land. This RR
Overlay Zone is intended to:
      (1)   Promote redevelopment that enhances the Schuylkill Riverfront, in
recognition of its value to the City, while making better use of underutilized
lands.
      (2)   Promote appropriate mixtures of compatible uses that provide for a
variety of employment opportunities and housing types, including mixtures of
business and residential uses in the same building.
      (3)   Improve the public's access to the river and maximize the
visibility of the riverfront.
      (4)   Allow persons to live, shop and work on the same tract of land, in
order to reduce total vehicle traffic in the City and reducing commuting
distances while promoting use of public transit.
      (5)   Carry out the purposes of the traditional neighborhood development
(TND) and the purposes of the planned residential development (PRD) provisions
of the State Municipalities Planning Code, 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq., which are
hereby included by reference.
      (6)   Encourage new development to occur in a compact neighborhood-
oriented manner that will be consistent with traditional patterns and scale of
development, and that creates a sense of place.
      (7)   Promote housing that serves various types of households.
      (8)   Allow modification of certain requirements through the PRD process
by the Planning Commission.
      (9)   Promote a pedestrian-orientation through the development that
includes a mix of commercial and residential uses.
   H.   Municipal Use District (MU) is intended as a relatively isolated area,
reserved for those uses and services traditionally provided by local
governments, but whose associated nuisances, and/or security concerns warrant a
separation, to the extent practical, from publicly accessible and occupied
areas. Permitted-by-right uses within the Municipal Use District are those
operated by the City of Reading, alone or in partnership with other government
entities.
   I.   The P-S Penn Square Corridor Overlay Zone is intended to maintain the
historic and pedestrian-friendly environment and promote retail and service
businesses along key blocks of Penn Street in Center City Reading.
   J.   The INS Institutional Overlay Zone is intended to provide for the main
campuses of colleges, universities, health-care facilities and certain other
institutional uses. The intent is to allow greater flexibility and permitted by
right approvals within the core campuses of institutions.
Part 8
Districts
§ 600-801. R-1A Residential District.
   A.   Dimensional requirements.
 
                   Maximum  Maximum            Minimum Minimum Minimum Minimum
Uses      Minimum  Building Impervious Maximum Lot     Front   Rear    Side
          Lot Size Coverage Coverage   Height  Width   Yard    Yard    Yard
                                                       Setback Setback Setback
Allowed
use,      20,000                                                       10 ft.
unless    sq, ft.  15%      25%        38 ft.  65 ft.  25 ft.  30 ft.  per side
otherwise
stated
 
   B.   Allowed uses.
      (1)   Permitted-by-right uses.
         (a)   Gardens, crop farming and forestry.
         (b)   One-family detached dwelling.
         (c)   Public parks, nature preserves and nonmotorized recreation
trails.
         (d)   Small Wireless Communications Facilities, pursuant to Part 21 of
this Chapter. [Added 4-24-2023 by Ord. No. 41-2023]
      (2)   Accessory uses. In compliance with Part 10, unless otherwise noted.
         (a)   Animal shelters: maximum 25 square feet. No commercial use.
         (b)   Garages/carports: maximum 600 square feet floor area unless it
meets principal building setbacks. [Amended 2-14-2011 by Ord. No. 8-2011]
         (c)   Greenhouses: maximum 280 square feet. No commercial use.
         (d)   Home occupations, minor: in compliance with §
600-1006.
         (e)   Storage sheds: maximum 280 square feet.
         (f)   Swimming pools, accessory: see also
Chapter 180 , Construction Codes, and §
600-1001. [Amended 8-26-2013 by Ord. No. 35-2013] 
         (g)   Geothermal heat pumps. [Added 10-26-2015 by Ord. No. 58-2015] 
         (h)   Solar energy systems. [Added 10-26-2015 by Ord. No. 58-2015]
         (i)   Water-powered energy systems. [Added 10-26-2015 by Ord. No. 58-
2015]
         (j)   Non-tower based WCFs, pursuant to Part 21 of this Chapter.
[Added 3- 27-2017 by Ord. No. 21-2017; amended 4-24-2023 by Ord. No. 41-2023]
      (3)   Special exception uses. In compliance with §
600-1202.
          (a)   Home occupations, major: in compliance with §
600-1006.
         (b)   Bed-and-breakfast inns. [Added 8-26-2013 by Ord. No. 35-2013]
         (c)   Adaptive reuse in accordance with the provisions specified by §
600-1202.A. [Added 3-10-2025 by Ord. No. 16A-2025]
       (4)   Conditional use. In compliance with §
600-1203.
         (a)   Student home, which shall only be allowed in an existing lawful
apartment dwelling.
   C.   Additional requirements.
      (1)   No development in this district requiring the removal of trees
shall occur unless and until appropriate assurances are provided by the
developer, backed by security acceptable to the City Solicitor, that all trees
exceeding 10 feet in height, with trunks exceeding two inches in diameter,
measured at four feet from ground level, will be replaced with trees of like
type with a minimum height of six feet and minimum trunk diameter of two
inches, measured six feet from ground level.
      (2)   A new principal building shall not be allowed if it will require
the regrading of more than 3,000 square feet of land area that has a natural
slope of greater than 25%.
§ 600-802. R-1 Residential District.
   A.   Dimensional requirements.
 
                   Maximum  Maximum            Minimum Minimum Minimum Minimum
Uses      Minimum  Building Impervious Maximum Lot     Front   Rear    Side
          Lot Size Coverage Coverage   Height  Width   Yard    Yard    Yard
                                                       Setback Setback Setback
Allowed
use,      6,600                                                        7 ft.
unless    sq, ft.  30%      40%        35 ft.  60 ft.  25 ft.  30 ft.  per side
otherwise
stated
 
   B.   Allowed uses.
      (1)   Permitted-by-right uses.
         (a)   Gardens, crop farming and forestry.
         (b)   One-family detached dwelling.
         (c)   Public parks, nature preserves and nonmotorized recreation
trails.
         (d)   Small Wireless Communications Facilities, pursuant to Part 21 of
this Chapter. [Added 4-24-2023 by Ord. No. 41-2023]
      (2)   Accessory uses. In compliance with Part 10, unless otherwise noted.
         (a)   Animal shelters: maximum 25 square feet. No commercial use.
         (b)   Garages/carports: maximum 600 square feet. [Amended 2-14-2011 by
Ord. No. 8-2011]
         (c)   Greenhouses: maximum 280 square feet. No commercial use.
         (d)   Home occupation, minor: in compliance with §
600-1006.
         (e)   Storage sheds: maximum 280 square feet.
         (f)   Swimming pools, accessory: see also
Chapter 180, Construction Codes, and §
600-1001. [Amended 8-26-2013 by Ord. No. 35-2013]
         (g)   Geothermal heat pumps. [Added 10-26-2015 by Ord. No. 58-2015]
         (h)   Solar energy systems. [Added 10-26-2015 by Ord. No. 58-2015]
         (i)   Water-powered energy systems. [Added 10-26-2015 by Ord. No. 58-
2015]
         (j)   Non-tower based WCFs, pursuant to Part 21 of this Chapter.
[Added 3- 27-2017 by Ord. No. 21-2017; amended 4-24-2023 by Ord. No. 41-2023]
      (3)   Special exception uses. In compliance with §
600-1202.
         (a)   Bed-and-breakfast inn.
         (b)   Home occupations, major: in compliance with §
600-1006.
      (4)   Conditional use. In compliance with §
600-1203.
         (a)   Student home, which shall only be allowed in an existing lawful
apartment dwelling.
   C.   Additional requirements. [Added 2-14-2011 by Ord. No. 8-2011]
      (1)   Each newly built or placed dwelling unit shall have:
         (a)   A minimum dwelling unit width and length of 18 feet; and
         (b)   A permanent foundation or an enclosure around the base of the
dwelling that has the appearance of a permanent foundation.
         (c)   Adaptive reuse in accordance with the provisions specified by §
600-1202.A. [Added 3-10-2025 by Ord. No. 16A-2025]
      (2)   If a lot is to be served by a mound on-lot septic system that is a
raised above the ground level, it shall be located outside of the required
front and side yard setbacks, unless the applicant proves to the satisfaction
of the Zoning Officer and Sewage Enforcement Officer that such placement is
infeasible.
§ 600-803. R-2 Residential District.
   A.   Dimensional requirements.
     Minimum  Maximum  Maximum                      Minimum Minimum   Minimum
Uses Lot Size Building Impervious Maximum Minimum   Front   Rear Yard Side Yard
     (square  Coverage Coverage   Height  Lot Width Yard    Setback   Setback
     feet)                                          Setback           (each)
               Minimum                                     Minimum Minimum Minimum
               Lot     Maximum  Maximum    Maximum Minimum Front   Rear    Side
Uses           Size    Building Impervious Height  Lot     Yard    Yard    Yard
               (square Coverage Coverage           Width   Setback Setback Setback
               feet)                                                       (each)
Place of
worship,
cemetery or    25,000  50%      70%        50      125     15      40      15
public or
private school
One-family
detached       3,000   40%      50%        35      30      15      25      4
dwelling
One-family
semidetached   2,500   35%      55%        35      25      15      25      4
dwelling (per
dwelling unit)
One-family
attached
dwelling       1,800   60%      75%        35      18      15      20      4
(townhouse)
per dwelling
unit)
College or
university     5,500   40%1     70%1       35      40      15      25      15
nonresidential
uses
College or
university     50,000  40%1     70%1       35      80      15      253     154
residential
uses2
Other allowed
use, unless    5,500   40%      50%        35      60      15      25      8
otherwise
stated
 
NOTES:
1   For abutting lots in common ownership, the maximum building and impervious
coverage may apply to all such lots combined.
2   Not including preexisting dwelling units which are owned by a college or
university and which are regulated as individual dwelling units and meet the
definition of occupancy by one family or which meet the requirements for a
student home.
3   For a new or expanded building housing students, a forty-foot minimum
building setback shall apply from the lot line of every dwelling that is not
owned by the college or university.
4   A side yard setback is not required where a new building is replacing a
building that was previously attached to another building along that lot line.
New dwelling units that are allowed to be attached to each other do not need a
side yard setback between the new dwellings.
   B.   Allowed uses.
      (1)   Permitted-by-right uses.
         (a)   Gardens, crop farming and forestry.
         (b)   One-family detached dwelling.
         (c)   One-family semidetached dwelling.
         (d)   One-family attached dwelling.
         (e)   Public parks and nonmotorized recreation trails.
         (f)   Small Wireless Communications Facilities, pursuant to Part 21 of
this Chapter. [Added 4-24-2023 by Ord. No. 41-2023]
      (2)   Accessory uses. In compliance with Part 10, unless otherwise noted.
         (a)   Animal shelters: maximum 25 square feet. No commercial use
allowed.
         (b)   Private garages/carports: maximum 600 square feet. See §
600-1002. [Amended 2-14-2011 by Ord. No. 8-2011]
         (c)   Greenhouses: maximum 280 square feet. No commercial use allowed.
See §
600-1003.
         (d)   Home occupations: minor. See §
600-1006.
         (e)   Storage sheds: maximum 280 square feet. See §
600-1003.
         (f)   Swimming pools, accessory: see also
Chapter 180, Construction Codes, and §
600-1001. [Amended 8--26-2013 by Ord. No. 35-2013]
         (g)   Geothermal heat pumps. [Added 10-26-2015 by Ord. No. 58-2015]
         (h)   Solar energy systems. [Added 10-26-2015 by Ord. No. 58-2015]
         (i)   Water-powered energy systems. [Added 10-26-2015 by Ord. No. 58-
2015]
         (j)   Non-tower WCFWCFs, pursuant to Part 21 of this Chapter. [Added
3- 27-2017 by Ord. 21-2017; amended 4-24-2023 by Ord. No. 41-2023]
      (3)   Special exception uses. In compliance with §
600-1202.
         (a)   Adaptive reuse in accordance with the provisions specified by §
600-1202A. [Amended 3-10-2025 by Ord. No. 16A-2025]
         (b)   Bed-and-breakfast inn.
         (c)   Cemeteries.
         (d)   College or university, which may include dormitories,
fraternities, sororities and other student and/or staff residential uses,
provided each residential use is: owned and/or operated by the college or
university; and such residential uses are on lots of 50,000 square feet or
greater. See also §
600-817, which includes alternative provisions within the INS Overlay Zone.
         (e)   Family child care home or adult care home as an accessory use:
see §
600-1202. [Amended 3-10-2025 by Ord. No. 15A-2025]
         (f)   Home occupations, major: see §
600-1006.
         (g)   Life care retirement facility.
         (h)   Nursing home.
         (i)   Personal-care center.
         (j)   Places of worship.
         (k)   Municipal buildings.
         (l)   Public or private schools, not including dormitories.
         (m)   Swimming pool, as a principal use.
      (4)   Conditional uses. In compliance with §
600-1203.
         (a)   Group care home.
         (b)   Student home, which shall only be allowed in an existing lawful
apartment dwelling.
   C.   The conversion of an existing one-family detached dwelling, one-family
attached dwelling or one-family semidetached dwelling into two or more dwelling
units shall be prohibited.
   D.   A maximum of 60% of the land area between the front of each residential
use and the street right-of-way line shall be used for vehicle parking and
driveways. See also §
600-1602B regarding parking locations. [Added 2-14-2011 by Ord. No. 8-2011]
§ 600-804. R-3 Residential District.
   A.   Dimensional requirements.
     Minimum  Maximum  Maximum                      Minimum Minimum   Minimum
Uses Lot Size Building Impervious Maximum Minimum   Front   Rear Yard Side Yard
     (square  Coverage Coverage   Height  Lot Width Yard    Setback   Setback
     feet)                                          Setback           (each)
               Minimum                                     Minimum Minimum Minimum
               Lot     Maximum  Maximum    Maximum Minimum Front   Rear    Side
Uses           Size    Building Impervious Height  Lot     Yard    Yard    Yard
               (square Coverage Coverage           Width   Setback Setback Setback
               feet)                                                       (each)
Place of
worship,
cemeteries and 20,000  50%      75%        60      125     5       30      10
private or
public schools
One-family
detached       2,000   60%      75%        35      20      5       20      32
dwelling
One-family
semidetached   1,800   60%      75%        35      18      5       20      32
dwelling (per
dwelling unit)
One-family
attached       1,800   60%      75%        35      18      5       20      32
dwelling (per
dwelling unit)
Two-family
detached       3,000   60%      75%        35      30      5       20      52
dwelling (per
building)
Low-rise       3,000   60%      75%        35      30      5       20      5
apartments
College or
university     5,500   40%3     70%3       35      40      15      25      15
nonresidential
uses
College or
university     50,000  40%5     70%5       35      80      15      25      156
residential
uses4
Mid-rise       7,200   30%      55%        60      60      10      30      30
apartments
Other allowed
use, unless    5,500   60%      80%        35      30      5       20      6
otherwise
stated
 
NOTES: 
1   See §
600-909, which may require a certain front yard setback.
2   A side yard setback is not required along a lot line where: (a) principal
buildings were previously attached; or (b) as part of dwellings built as part
of the same subdivision or land development, provided the requirements of
Chapter 180, Construction Codes, are met for separation from an existing window
or door. See applicable fire ratings. A side yard setback is also not required
for new dwelling units that are allowed to be attached to other new dwelling
units.
3   For abutting lots in common ownership, the maximum building and impervious
coverage may apply to all such lots combined.
4   Not including preexisting dwelling units which are owned by a college or
university and which are regulated as individual dwelling units and meet the
definition of occupancy by one family or which meet the requirements for a
student home.
5   For abutting lots in common ownership, the maximum building and impervious
coverage may apply to all such lots combined.
6   For a new or expanded building housing students, a forty-foot minimum
building setback shall apply from the lot line of every dwelling that is not
owned by the college or university.
   B.   Allowed uses.
      (1)   Permitted-by-right uses.
         (a)   Gardens, crop farming and forestry.
         (b)   One-family detached dwelling.
         (c)   One-family semidetached dwelling.
         (d)   One-family attached dwelling (townhouse).
         (e)   Low-rise apartments, with a maximum density of 1,500 square feet
of lot area per dwelling unit, but not including a "conversion" which is
addressed in Subsection B(3) below.
         (f)   Public parks and nonmotorized recreation trails.
         (g)   Surface parking area as a principal or accessory use, provided
it serves a use allowed in the R-3 District and does not serve the general
public. See also §
600-1008.
      (h)   Small Wireless Communications Facilities. pursuant to Part 21 of
this Chapter. [Added 4-24-2023 by Ord. No. 41-2023]
         Note: in the R-3 District, student homes shall be allowed in any
lawful dwelling without needing to meet the additional requirements of §
600-1203.
      (2)   Accessory uses. See Part 10 unless otherwise noted.
         (a)   Animal shelters: maximum 25 square feet. No commercial use
allowed.
         (b)   Private garages/carports: maximum 600 square feet. [Amended 2-
14-2011 by Ord. No. 8-2011]
         (c)   Greenhouses: maximum 280 square feet. No commercial use allowed.
         (d)   Home occupations, minor: see §
600-1006.
         (e)   Storage sheds: maximum 280 square feet.
         (f)   Swimming pools, accessory: see also Chapter 180, Construction
Codes. [Amended 8-26-2013 by Ord. No. 35-2013]
         (g)   Geothermal heat pumps. [Added 10-26-2015 by Ord. No. 58-2015]
         (h)   Solar energy systems. [Added 10-26-2015 by Ord. No. 58-2015]
         (i)   Water-powered energy systems. [Added 10-26-2015 by Ord. No. 58-
2015]
         (j)   Non-tower WCFs, pursuant to Part 21 of this Chapter. [Added 3-
27-2017 by Ord. 21-2017; amended 4-24-2023 by Ord. No. 41-2023]
      (3)   Conditional uses. In compliance with §
600-1203.
         (a)   Conversions: shall also meet Subsection C(4) below.
         (b)   Group-care home.
         (c)   Public utilities.
      (4)   Special exception uses. In compliance with §
600-1202.
         (a)   Adaptive reuse in accordance with the provisions specified by §
600- 1202.A. [Amended 3-10-2025 by Ord. No. 16A-2025]
         (b)   Bed-and-breakfast inn.
         (c)   Cemeteries.
         (d)   College or university, which may include dormitories,
fraternities, sororities, and other full-time student and/or staff residential
uses, provided that each residential use is: owned and/or operated by the
college or university; and such residential uses are on a lot of 50,000 square
feet or greater. See also §
600-817, which includes alternative provisions within the INS Overlay Zone.7
         (e)   Care facilities. [Amended 3-10-2025 by Ord. No. 15A-2025]
         (f)   Home occupations, major: in compliance with §
600-1006.
         (g)   Life care retirement facility.
         (h)   Mid-rise apartments, with a maximum density of 1,500 square feet
of lot area per dwelling unit, which may be decreased to 1,000 square feet if
all units (other than a manager) are limited to occupancy by persons age 62 or
older and the physically disabled.
         (i)   Municipal buildings.
         (j)   Nursing homes.
         (k)   Personal-care centers.
         (l)   Places of worship.
         (m)   Public or private schools, not including dormitories swimming
pool, as a principal use.
         (n)   Parking garage to serve a use allowed in the R-3 District.
         (o)   Short-term rentals by special exception as an accessory use for
residential occupancy as per provisions specified within §
600-1108. [Added 10-13-2025 by Ord. No. 58- 2025]
   C.   Additional requirements in the R-3 District.
      (1)   If an existing rear or side alley is available or could be feasibly
extended, it shall be used for access to off-street parking spaces and/or
garage door(s) for the lot instead of a front yard driveway and/or a front
garage door(s).
      (2)   This subsection is mainly designed to address situations where use
of a rear or side alley is not feasible. If two or more side-by-side off-street
parking spaces are located in the front yard of a single-family attached
dwelling (townhouse) or if garage door(s) for two or more vehicles face onto
the street in the front of the single-family attached dwelling (townhouse),
then the minimum building width per dwelling along such street shall be a
minimum of 24 feet.
      (3)   A maximum of 60% of the land area between the front of each
residential use and the street right-of-way line shall be used for vehicle
parking and driveways. See also §
600-1602B regarding parking locations. [Amended 2-14-2011 by Ord. No. 8-2011]
      (4)   The conversion of an existing one-family detached dwelling, one-
family attached dwelling or one-family semidetached dwelling into two or more
dwelling units shall be prohibited.
7.   Editor's Note: For a new or expanded building housing students, a 40 feet
minimum building setback shall apply from the lot line of every dwelling that
is not owned by the college or university.
§ 600-805. (Reserved)
§ 600-806. R-PO Residential/Professional Office District.
   A.   Dimensional requirements.
 
            Minimum                                     Minimum Minimum Minimum
            Lot     Maximum  Maximum    Maximum Minimum Front   Rear    Side
Uses        Size    Building Impervious Height  Lot     Yard    Yard    Yard
            (square Coverage Coverage           Width   Setback Setback Setback
            feet)                                                       (each)
Allowed
residential    Shall meet regulations of the R-2 District
uses
Place of    20,000  50%      75%        35      60      25      30      7
worship
Other
allowed
use, unless 5,500   40%      70%        35      50      20      30      7
otherwise
stated
 
   B.   Allowed uses.
      (1)   Permitted-by-right uses.
         (a)   Residential uses: the same uses shall be allowed as are allowed
in the R-2 District.
         (b)   Gardens, crop farming and forestry.
         (c)   Offices 8   (such as but not limited to the following: health
care professionals, physicians, dentist, oral surgeon, orthodontist,
periodontist, osteopath, chiropractor, physical therapist, psychologist,
podiatrist, optometrist, lawyer, accountant, real estate broker, financial
consultant, mortgage/financial businesses).
         (d)   Fire and ambulance station.
         (e)   Home occupations, minor, in accordance with §
600-1006.
         (f)   Public parks and nonmotorized recreation trails.
         (g)   Small Wireless Communications Facilities, pursuant to Part 21 of
this Chapter. [Added 4-24-2023 by Ord. No. 41-2023]
      (2)   Accessory uses.
         (a)   See Part 10 unless otherwise noted.
            [1]   Garages/carports: maximum 600 square feet. [Amended 2-14-2011
by Ord. No. 8-2011]
            [2]   Storage sheds: maximum 280 square feet.
         (b)   The following uses shall be permitted only on properties
primarily used for residential purposes:
            [1]   Animal shelters: maximum 25 square feet and with no
commercial use allowed. [Amended 8-26-2013 by Ord. No. 35-2013]
            [2]   Greenhouses: maximum 280 square feet and with no commercial
use allowed.
            [3]   Swimming pools, accessory: see Chapter 180, Construction
Codes. [Amended 8-26-2013 by Ord. No. 35-2013]
         (c)   Geothermal heat pumps. [Added 10-26-2015 by Ord. No. 58-2015]
         (d)   Solar energy systems. [Added 10-26-2015 by Ord. No. 58-2015]
         (e)   Water-powered energy systems. [Added 10-26-2015 by Ord. No. 58-
2015]
         (f)   Roof-mounted wind turbines. [Added 10-26-2015 by Ord. No. 58-
2015]
         (g)   Non-Tower WCFs, pursuant to Part 21 of this Chapter. [Added 4-
24-2023 by Ord. No. 41-2023]
      (3)   Special exception uses. Pursuant to §
600-1202.
      (a)   Care facilities. [Amended 3-10-2025 by Ord. No. 15A-2025]
      (b)   Home occupations, major: see §
600-1006.
      (c)   Place of worship.
      (d)   Adaptive reuse in accordance with the provisions specified by §
600- 1202.A. [Added 3-10-2025 by Ord. No. 16A-2025]
8.   NOTE: With on-street parking permitted for up to three employees. Should
there be four or more employees, the following off-street parking requirement
shall apply: one space per each 150 square feet of floor area.
§ 600-807. C-C Commercial Core District.
   A.   Dimensional requirements.
 
           Minimum                                     Minimum Minimum Minimum
           Lot     Maximum  Maximum    Maximum Minimum Front   Rear    Side
Uses       Size    Building Impervious Height  Lot     Yard    Yard    Yard
           (square Coverage Coverage           Width   Setback Setback Setback
           feet)                                                       (each)
Apartments
of six or  25,000  70%      90%        1002    72      0       25      15
more
stories
Apartments
of six or  25,000  70%      90%        1002    72      0       25      15
more
stories
Other
uses,
unless     2,500   80%      95%        1002    20      0       0       0
otherwise
stated
 
NOTES:
1   See §
600-909, which may require a certain front yard setback.
2   See additional height requirement in §
600-807C.
   B.   Allowed uses.
      (1)   Permitted-by-right uses: [Amended 8-26-2013 by Ord. No. 35-2013; 4-
24-2023 by Ord. No. 41-2023]
         (a)   High-rise apartments1
         (b)   Movie theaters and performing arts facilities
         (c)   Low-rise or mid-rise apartments1
         (d)   One-family attached dwellings (townhouses) or one-family
semidetached dwellings meet the regulations of the R-3 District gardens crop
farming and forestry
         (e)   Amusement arcade
         (f)   Municipal building
         (g)   Passenger bus or train terminal
         (h)   Public parking garages and parking lots that are owned/or
operated by a City-authorized parking authority or another governmental entity.
A new parking garage with a street frontage of more than 100 feet shall include
at least one street-level commercial use.
         (i)   Nonpublic parking garages and parking lots that serve a use
located within the C-C District as opposed to being available to the general
public. If such parking involves 10 or more new parking spaces then special
exception approval shall be required. As a criteria of special exception
approval the applicant shall show that the parking: (a) will not cause a loss
of a significant historic building; (b) will not create a serious traffic
congestion or a traffic hazard for pedestrians; and (c) will include suitable
landscaping between the parking and a public sidewalk. See also Subsection C
below. A new parking garage with a street frontage of more than 100 feet shall
include at least one street-level commercial use.
         (j)   Bakeries (limited to 2000 square feet production floor area) and
retail sale of baked goods
         (k)   Bank and other financial institutions which may include drive-
through facilities
         (l)   Business and printing services
         (m)   Civic/convention center and sports arena
         (n)   College or university other than residential uses
         (o)   Conversion of existing building space into one or more dwelling
units which shall meet the requirements listed for “conversions” in § 600-1203D
even though the use is not a conditional use. Such conversion shall only be
allowed if the lot includes at least one street level principal business
establishment.
         (p)   Creation and retail sales of art and crafts items which may
include multiple vendors
         (q)   Dry cleaners (limited to 2000 square feet of service/production
area)
         (r)   Fire and ambulance station
         (s)   Fitness centers/exercise clubs
         (t)   Funeral homes
         (u)   Hotels motels and bed-and-breakfast inns
         (v)   Offices
         (w)   Personal services such as barber or beauty shop (see § 600-1103)
tailors nail salons (see § 600-1103) and certified massage therapy (see § 600-
1103) and not including a massage parlor
         (x)   Photo-finishing services
         (y)   Radio and television stations
         (z)   Recreational facilities public parks and nonmotorized recreation
trails
         (aa)   Restaurants (eat-in or takeout) which may include entertainment
but shall not include drive- through service. This use shall not allow outdoor
sale of ready-to-eat heated food on a regular basis on a lot that is not
operated from a building on the lot.
         (bb)   Retail stores
         (cc)   Small appliance sales repair and service stores
         (dd)   Small Wireless Communications Facilities, pursuant to Part 21
of this Chapter.
         (ee)   Social clubs and associations (non-PLCB licensed) which shall
not be allowed fronting on Penn Street between 2nd Street and 6th Street and
which shall not operate between 12:00 midnight and 11:00 a.m. For any use that
also meets the definition of a BYOB Chapter 127 Part 3 (§§ 127-301 to 127-308)
and § 127-202 shall also be met.
         (ff)   Trade vocational and hobby schools not including residential
uses
NOTE:
1   The street-level floor shall include at least one principal business
establishment.
      (2)   Accessory uses. See Part 10 unless otherwise noted.
         (a)   Amusement devices: pursuant to §
600-1010 of this chapter.
         (b)   Entertainment: pursuant to §
600-1005.
         (c)   Home occupations, major or minor: see §
600-1006.
         (d)   Storage as an accessory use to a use located within the C-
C District.
         (e)   Roof-mounted wind turbines. [Added 10-26-2015 by Ord. No. 58-
2015]
         (f)   Geothermal heat pumps. [Added 10-26-2015 by Ord. No. 58-2015]
         (g)   Solar energy systems. [Added 10-26-2015 by Ord. No. 58-2015]
         (h)   Water-powered energy systems. [Added 10-26-2015 by Ord. No. 58-
2015]
         (i)   Non-tower WCFs, pursuant to Part 21 of this Chapter. [Added 3-
27-2017 by Ord. 21-2017; amended 4-24-2023 by Ord. No. 41-2023]
         (j)   Short-term rentals by right as an accessory use for residential
occupancy as per provisions specified within §
600-1108. [Added 10-13-2025 by Ord. No. 58-2025]
      (3)   Conditional uses. See §
600-1203.
         (a)   Banquet hall.
         (b)   Gaming facility.
         (c)   Taverns and nightclubs.
      (4)   Special exception uses. Pursuant to §
600-1202 of this chapter.
         (a)   Care facilities. [Amended 3-10-2025 by Ord. No. 15A-2025]
         (b)   Dormitories owned and operated by a college or university,
provided that the street-level floor shall include at least one principal
business establishment. [Amended 3-23-2020 by Ord. No. 33-2020]
      (c)   Place of worship.
      (e)   Adaptive reuse in accordance with the provisions specified by §
600- 1202.A. [Added 1-13-2020 by Ord. No. 4-2020; amended 3-10-2025 by Ord. No.
16A-2025]
   C.   Additional requirements in the C-C District.
      (1)   Retail uses shall not extend into the public right-of-way, except
as may be specifically approved under another City ordinance.
      (2)   Drive-through services shall only be permitted as accessory to
financial institutions. A drive-through facility shall not have an entrance or
exit onto Penn Street.
      (3)   Height requirements.
         (a)   Structures may be increased in height up to 175 feet by special
exception, provided the applicant provides an analysis to show that the
additional height will allow sunlight to reach the street during midday hours,
considering any proposed setbacks and an analysis of how the building will be
set back from windows of existing adjacent buildings to provide compatibility.
      (4)   See parking requirements in §
600-1603.
      (5)   A building shall not have a street-level building wall longer than
50 feet unless such wall is interspersed with a window or door at least every
50 feet, artistic displays, changes in building setback or rooflines of more
than three feet variation, and/or architectural features.
      (6)   (Reserved)9
      (7)   A principal or accessory parking lot or parking garage shall not be
allowed that is open to the general public, unless the structure is owned and/
or operated by the City, Berks County, another governmental entity, or a City-
authorized parking authority.
9.   Editor's Note: Former Subsection C(6), regarding wind turbines, was
repealed 10-26-2015 by Ord. No. 58-2015.
§ 600-808. C-R Commercial Residential District.
   A.   Dimensional requirements.
 
            Minimum                                     Minimum Minimum Minimum
            Lot     Maximum  Maximum    Maximum Minimum Front   Rear    Side
Uses        Size    Building Impervious Height  Lot     Yard    Yard    Yard
            (square Coverage Coverage           Width   Setback Setback Setback
            feet)                                       1               (each)
Allowed
residential    Allowed under the provisions of the R-3 District regulations
uses
High-rise   25,000  70%      80%        100     72      10      25      15
apartments
Life-care
retirement
facility,
personal    2,500   75%      85%        40      40      10      20      8
care home,
or nursing
home
All other
allowed     2,500   75%      90%        50      25      0       102     0*
uses
 
NOTES:
1   See §
600-909, which may require a certain front yard setback.
2   Except twenty-foot rear setback and five-foot side yard setback shall apply
for any use adjacent to an existing principally residential use, unless: (a) a
new building is replacing a building that was previously attached along that
lot line; or (b) unless the buildings are built as part of the same subdivision
or land development. See requirements of
Chapter 180, Construction Codes, including separation from windows and doors.
New dwelling units that are allowed to be attached to each other do not need a
side yard setback between the new dwellings.
   B.   Allowed uses.
      (1)   Permitted-by-right uses.
         (a)   The same residential uses shall be allowed as are allowed in the
R-3 District.
         (b)   High-rise apartments, provided at least one principal business
establishment required to be located on the street level.
         (c)   Bakeries (limited to 2,000 square feet production floor area)
and retail sale of baked goods.
         (d)   Drive-through services shall only be permitted as accessory to a
financial institution or a pharmacy.
         (e)   College or university, provided that any residential uses shall
meet the requirements for that type of residential use.
         (f)   Conversion of existing building space into one or more dwelling
units, which shall meet the requirements listed for "conversions" in §
600-1203D, even though the use is not a conditional use. Such conversion shall
only be allowed if the lot includes at least one street-level principal
business establishment.
         (g)   Exercise clubs and fitness centers.
         (h)   Fire and ambulance station.
         (i)   Funeral homes.
         (j)   Gardens, crop farming and forestry.
         (k)   Movie theaters/performing arts facilities.
         (l)   Municipal buildings.
         (m)   Nursing homes or personal-care centers.
         (n)   Offices, clinics and laboratories.
         (o)   Parking garages and lots. See also §
600-1008 for off-premises parking.
         (p)   Personal services, such as barber or beauty shop (see §
600-1103), tailors, nail salons (see §
600-1103) and certified massage therapy (see §
600-1103), and not including a massage parlor.
         (q)   Radio and television stations.
         (r)   Recreational facilities, public parks and nonmotorized
recreation trails.
         (s)   Restaurants (eat-in or takeout) without entertainment and
without drive-through service. This use shall not allow outdoor sale of ready-
to-eat heated food on a regular basis on a lot that is not operated from a
building on the lot.
         (t)   Retail stores, with drive-through facilities limited to a
pharmacy, and with vehicle fuel sales and vehicle sales being prohibited.
         (u)   Small appliance sales, repair and service shops.
         (v)   Small Wireless Communications Facilities, pursuant to Part 21 of
this Chapter. [Added 4-24-2023 by Ord. No. 41-2023]
         (w)   Social clubs and associations (non-PLCB licensed), provided such
use shall not be open between 12:00 midnight and 11:00 a.m. For any use that
also meets the definition of a BYOB, Chapter 127, Part 3 (§§ 127-301 to 127-
308), and § 127-202 shall also be met, and provided there is a 5,000 square
feet minimum lot area. [Amended 2-14-2011 by Ord. No. 8-2011]
         (x)   Trade, vocational and hobby schools, not including residential
uses, and provided there is not exterior use of heavy equipment or heavy
machinery in connection therewith.
      (2)   Accessory uses. See Part 10, unless otherwise noted.
         (a)   Amusement devices pursuant to §
600-1010 of this chapter.
         (b)   Entertainment pursuant to §
600-1005 of this chapter.
         (c)   Home occupations, major or minor, see §
600-1006.
         (d)   Geothermal heat pumps. [Added 10-26-2015 by Ord. No. 58-2015]
         (e)   Solar energy systems. [Added 10-26-2015 by Ord. No. 58-2015]
         (f)   Water-powered energy systems. [Added 10-26-2015 by Ord. No. 58-
2015]
         (g)   Non-Tower WCFs, pursuant to Part 21 of this Chapter. [Added 3-
27- 2017 by Ord. No. 21-2017; amended 4-24-2023 by Ord. No. 41-2023]
         (h)   Short-term rentals by right as an accessory use for residential
occupancy as per provisions specified within §
600-1108. [Added 10-13-2025 by Ord. No. 58-2025]
      (3)   Conditional uses. All uses listed below shall be pursuant to §
600-1203 of this chapter.
         (a)   Banquet hall.
         (b)   Boarding houses.
         (c)   Group-care facility.
         (d)   Public utilities.
         (e)   Taverns and nightclubs.
         (f)   Temporary shelter.
         (g)   Group-care facility.
      (4)   Special exception uses. All uses listed below shall be pursuant to
§
600-1202 of this chapter.
         (a)   Adaptive reuse in accordance with the provisions specified by §
600- 1202.A. [Amended 3-10-2025 by Ord. No. 16A-2025]
         (b)   Amusement arcade.
         (c)   Care facilities. [Amended 3-10-2025 by Ord. No. 15A-2025]
         (d)   Primary or secondary school, public or private.
         (e)   Hospital.
         (f)   Places of worship.
         (g)   Tower-based WCF, including poles that are located within 500
feet of a residential property or within a setback area, subject to Part 21 of
this chapter. [Added 3-27-2017 by Ord. No. 21-2017]
   C.   Additional requirement in the C-R District.
      (1)   A drive-through facility shall not have an entrance or exit onto
Penn Street.
§ 600-809. C-N Commercial Neighborhood District.
   A.   Dimensional requirements.
 
            Minimum                                     Minimum Minimum Minimum
            Lot     Maximum  Maximum    Maximum Minimum Front   Rear    Side
Uses        Size    Building Impervious Height  Lot     Yard    Yard    Yard
            (square Coverage Coverage           Width   Setback Setback Setback
            feet)                                       1               (each)
Allowed
residential    Shall meet the provisions of the R-3 District
uses
All other
allowed     1,800   70%      90%        60      202     0       103     03
uses
 
NOTES:
1   See §
600-909, which may require a certain front yard setback.
2   An existing principally residential building shall not be converted to a
principal commercial use unless this lot width requirement is met, unless the
building is not adjacent to any existing dwellings.
3   Except twenty-foot rear setback and six-foot side setback shall apply
adjacent to an existing principally residential use.
   B.   Allowed uses.
      (1)   Permitted-by-right uses:
         (a)   Residential uses: the same residential uses shall be allowed as
are allowed in the R-3 District.
         (b)   Bakery.
         (c)   Banking and financial institutions, which may include drive-
through service.
         (d)   Convenience stores, with fuel sales only allowed as a
conditional use.
         (e)   Family child home or adult care home, provided that a maximum of
four persons shall be cared for (in addition to sons or daughters of the
caregiver) on a residential lot of less than 2,500 square feet. If a family
child care home or adult care home is proposed on a residential lot, it shall
also meet the provisions of §
600-1202D(1). [Amended 2-14-2011 by Ord. No. 8-2011 ; amended 3-10-2025 by Ord.
No. 15A-2025]
         (f)   Drugstores, which may include drive-through service.
         (g)   Dry cleaners, self-service laundries (limited to 2,000 square
feet of service/production area).
         (h)   Exercise clubs.
         (i)   Fire and ambulance station.
         (j)   Funeral home.
         (k)   Gardens, crop farming and forestry.
         (l)   Home occupations, major or minor: see §
600-1006.
         (m)   Municipal buildings.
         (n)   Offices.
         (o)   Nursing homes or personal-care centers.
         (p)   Parking lots other than parking areas that primarily serve
tractor-trailer trucks.
         (q)   Personal services, such as barber or beauty shop (see §
600-1103), tailors, nail salons (see §
600-1103) and certified massage therapy (see §
600-1103), and not including a massage parlor.
         (r)   Recreation facilities, public parks and nonmotorized recreation
trails.
         (s)   Restaurants (eat-in and takeout), but not including drive-
through service, provided that such uses shall not be developed in a building
is attached to a principally residential building on another lot that is not in
common ownership. This use shall not allow outdoor sale of ready-to-eat food on
a regular basis on a lot that is not operated from a building on the lot.
         (t)   Retail stores without drive-through service, provided that such
uses shall not be developed in a building is attached to a principally
residential building on another lot that is not in common ownership.
         (u)   Self-storage facilities.
         (v)   Small appliance sales, service and repair shops.
         (w)   Small Wireless Communications Facilities, pursuant to Part 21 of
this Chapter. [Added 4-24-2023 by Ord. No. 41-2023]
         (x)   Storage or warehousing as a principal or accessory use.
         (y)   Wholesale sales.
      (2)   Accessory uses. In compliance with Part 10, unless otherwise noted.
[Added 10-26-2015 by Ord. No. 58-201510]
         (a)   Geothermal heat pumps.
         (b)   Solar energy systems.
         (c)   Water-powered energy systems.
         (d)   Non-Tower WCFs, pursuant to Part 21 of this Chapter. [Added 3-
27- 2017 by Ord. No. 21-2017; amended 4-24-2023 by Ord. No. 41-2023]
         (e)   Short-term rentals by right as an accessory use for residential
occupancy as per provisions specified within §
600-1108. [Added 10-13-2025 by Ord. No. 58-2025]
      (3)   Conditional uses: pursuant to §
600-1203.
         (a)   Banquet hall.
         (b)   Taverns and nightclubs, provided that such uses shall not be
developed in a building that abuts a principally residential lot unless the
lots are in common ownership.
         (c)   Vehicle fuel sales, which shall only be allowed if the applicant
proves the use will be designed to avoid conflicts with pedestrian travel and
to provide compatibility with adjacent uses, and provided the use is not
adjacent to a principally residential lot.
      (4)   Special exception uses:
         (a)   Care facilities, other than family child care homes or adult
care homes. [Amended 3-10-2025 by Ord. No. 15A-2025]
         (b)   Adaptive reuse in accordance with the provisions specified by §
600-1202.A. [Amended 3-10-2025 by Ord. No. 16A-2025]
         (c)   Amusement arcade.
         (d)   Primary or secondary school. [Added 1-13-2020 by Ord. No. 3-
2020]
10.   Editor's Note: This ordinance also redesignated former Subsection C(2)
and (3) as Subsection C(3) and (4), respectively.
§ 600-810. C-H Commercial Highway District.
   A.   Dimensional requirements.
 
              Minimum                                     Minimum Minimum Minimum
              Lot     Maximum  Maximum    Maximum Minimum Front   Rear    Side
Uses          Size    Building Impervious Height  Lot     Yard    Yard    Yard
              (square Coverage Coverage           Width   Setback Setback Setback
              feet)                                                       (each)
Manufactured/ 20,000  40%      80%        35      100     30      30      30
mobile home
   Parks, with a maximum average density of five dwelling units per acre and a
25-foot separation between dwellings
   (other than unenclosed attached structures)
Allowed
residential      Shall meet the regulations of the R-3 District
uses
All other     7,500   50%      90         50      50      10      101     51
allowed uses
 
NOTES:
1   Except twenty-foot rear setback and a ten-foot side setback shall apply
adjacent to an existing principally residential use.
   B.   Allowed uses.
      (1)   Permitted-by-right uses: [Amended 2-14-2011 by Ord. No. 8-2011; 8-
26-2013 by Ord. No. 35-2013; 4-24-2023 by Ord. No. 41-2023]
         (a)   Banks and financial institutions including drive-through
         (b)   Beverage distributors beer and soft drinks
         (c)   Car wash
         (d)   College or university not including residential uses unless such
dwellings meet the requirements for a dwelling occupied by a “family”
         (e)   Convenience stores with or without auto fuel sales
         (f)   Emergency health-care facility/office
         (g)   Exercise clubs
         (h)   Fire and ambulance station
         (i)   Funeral homes
         (j)   Gardens crop farming and forestry
         (k)   Home and garden supply centers
         (l)   Laundromats
         (m)   Miniature golf course
         (n)   Motels and hotels
         (o)   Municipal uses
         (p)   Nursing homes or personal-care centers
         (q)   Offices
         (r)   Parking lots and structures
         (s)   Passenger terminal facilities
         (t)   Personal service businesses
         (u)   Radio and television stations
         (v)   Recreational facilities public parks and nonmotorized recreation
trails
         (w)   Residential uses: the same residential uses shall be allowed as
are allowed in the R-3 District
         (x)   Restaurants including eat-in takeout drive-through service. This
use shall not allow outdoor sale of ready-to-eat heated food on a regular basis
on a lot that is not operated from a building on the lot.
         (y)   Retail stores which may include drive-through facilities
         (z)   Small Wireless Communications Facilities, pursuant to Part 21 of
this Chapter.
         (aa)   Social clubs and associations PLCB and non-PLCB licensed. Such
use shall not be open between the hours of 12:00 midnight and 11:00 a.m. For
any use that also meets the definition of a BYOB Chapter 127 Part 3 (§§ 127-301
to 127-308) and § 127-202 shall also be met.
         (bb)   Taxi headquarters
         (cc)   Temporary employment agencies and service
         (dd)   Vehicle sales or rental
         (ee)   Veterinary hospitals
         (ff)   Wholesale sales and services
      (2)   Accessory uses. See Part 10 unless otherwise noted.
         (a)   Amusement devices: pursuant to §
600-1010 of this chapter.
         (b)   Drive-through services: pursuant to §
600-1004 of this chapter.
         (c)   Entertainment: pursuant to §
600-1005.
         (d)   Home occupations, major or minor: see §
600-1006.
         (e)   Off-site parking areas: pursuant to §
600-1008.
         (f)   Non-tower WCFs, pursuant to Part 21 of this Chapter. [Added 3-
27- 2017 by Ord. No. 21-2017; amended 4-24-2023 by Ord. No. 41-2023]
         (g)   Geothermal heat pumps. [Added 10-26-2015 by Ord. No. 58-2015]
         (h)   Solar energy systems. [Added 10-26-2015 by Ord. No. 58-2015]
         (i)   Water-powered energy systems. [Added 10-26-2015 by Ord. No. 58-
2015]
         (j)   Roof-mounted wind turbines. [Added 10-26-2015 by Ord. No. 58-
2015]
         (k)   Short-term rentals by right as an accessory use for residential
occupancy as per provisions specified within §
600-1108. [Added 10-13-2025 by Ord. No. 58-2025]
      (3)   Conditional uses. In compliance with §
600-1203.
         (a)   Banquet hall.
         (b)   Bottle clubs.
         (c)   Group institution.
         (d)   Public utilities.
         (e)   Taverns and nightclubs.
         (f)   Tower-Based WCFs, pursuant to Part 21 of this Chapter.
         (g)   Treatment center.
      (4)   Special exception uses. In compliance with §
600-1202.
         (a)   Adaptive reuse in accordance with the provisions specified by §
600- 1202.A. [Amended 3-10-2025 by Ord. No. 16A-2025]
         (b)   Amusement arcade.
         (c)   Auto service stations or auto repair.
         (d)   Care facilities. [Amended 3-10-2025 by Ord. No. 15A-2025]
         (e)   Manufactured/mobile home park.
         (f)   Pawn shop.
         (g)   Place of worship.
         (h)   Surface parking facility.
         (i)   Vehicle fuel sales.
§ 600-811. M-C Manufacturing Commercial District.
   A.   Dimensional requirements.
 
          Minimum                                      Minimum Minimum Minimum
          Lot Size Maximum  Maximum    Maximum Minimum Front   Rear    Side
Uses      (square  Building Impervious Height  Lot     Yard    Yard    Yard
          feet)    Coverage Coverage           Width   Setback Setback Setback
                                                                       (each)
All uses,
unless    20,000   50%      90%        60      80      151     202     102
otherwise
noted
 
NOTES:
1   Required front yard may be reduced to 10 feet where a landscaped buffer
strip is provided in accordance with §
600-1401 of this chapter.
2   Except thirty-foot rear and twenty-foot side setback shall apply for an
industrial use or tractor-trailer loading dock adjacent to a lot of a
principally residential use.
   B.   Allowed uses.
      (1)   Permitted-by-right uses. [Amended 2-14-2011 by Ord. No. 8-2011; 4-
24-2023 by Ord. No. 41-2023]
         (a)   Manufacture or industrial processing within an enclosed building
involving the following: (as listed on the North American Industrial
Classification System, as applicable)
         (b)   Assembly and packaging
         (c)   Electronic and electrical equipment
         (d)   Fabricated metals products
         (e)   Food and beverage products
         (f)   Leather and leather products (not including curing, tanning and
finishing of hides)
         (g)   Machinery
         (h)   Medical and scientific equipment and related products
         (i)   Motor freight transportation and warehousing
         (j)   Non-PUC telecommunications facilities
         (k)   Paper and allied products (other than raw paper pulp)
         (l)   Petroleum and coal products, other than asphalt manufacture or
petroleum refining
         (m)   Pottery and ceramics
         (n)   Primary metals industries
         (o)   Railroad transportation
         (p)   Research and development facilities
         (q)   Rubber, synthetic rubber, resins and miscellaneous products
         (r)   Sporting goods, toys, jewelry
         (s)   Stone, clay and glass products
         (t)   Textiles and apparel
         (u)   Tobacco products
         (v)   Transportation equipment
         (w)   Transportation and public utilities
         (x)   Wood products and furniture
         (y)   Banks and financial institutions
         (z)   Auto repair and car washes, in compliance with §
600-1105
         (aa)   College or university, not including residential uses
         (bb)   Convenience stores with fuel sales
         (cc)   Employee agencies and services
         (dd)   Exercise club
         (ee)   Fire and ambulance stations
         (ff)   Flex space buildings that include one or more permitted-by-
right business uses
         (gg)   Gardens, crop farming and forestry
         (hh)   Lumber and building material supply center, retail or wholesale
         (ii)   Municipal uses
         (jj)   Offices and medical laboratories
         (kk)   Radio and television stations
         (ll)   Recreation facilities, public parks and nonmotorized recreation
trails
         (mm)   Restaurants, which may not include drive-through service. This
use shall not allow outdoor sale of ready-to-eat heated food on a regular basis
on a lot that is not operated from a building on the lot.
         (nn)   Retail and wholesale sales and services
         (oo)   Self-storage facilities
         (pp)   Swimming pool as principal use
         (qq)   Taxi headquarters
         (rr)   Non-tower based WCF if co-located on a municipal facility or a
tower-based WCF that existed prior to the approval of this part and pursuant to
Part 21 of this chapter and those that are not within 500 feet of a residential
property or located within a setback area. See §
600-2106. [Added 3-27-2017 by Ord. No. 21-2017]
         (ss)   Facilities may be placed on a leased area.
         (tt)   Small Wireless Communications Facilities, pursuant to Part 21
of this Chapter.
         (uu)   Trade, vocational and hobby schools, not including residential
uses
         (vv)   Vehicle sales or rental
         (ww)   Warehouse, distribution and storage facilities
      (2)   Accessory uses. See Part 10, unless otherwise noted.
         (a)   Drive-through services for allowed principal uses: pursuant to §
600-1004 of this chapter.
         (b)   Entertainment: pursuant to §
600-1005 of this chapter.
         (c)   Swimming pools, accessory.
         (d)   Non-Tower WCFs, pursuant to Part 21 of this Chapter. [Amended 3-
27- 2017 by Ord. No. 21-2017; 4-24-2023 by Ord. No. 41-2023]
         (e)   Wind turbine as an accessory use in compliance with §
600-1012.
         (f)   Geothermal heat pumps. [Added 10-26-2015 by Ord. No. 58-2015]
         (g)   Solar energy systems. [Added 10-26-2015 by Ord. No. 58-2015]
         (h)   Water-powered energy systems. [Added 10-26-2015 by Ord. No. 58-
2015]
         (i)   Freestanding or roof-mounted wind turbines. [Added 10-26-2015 by
Ord. No. 58-2015]
      (3)   Conditional uses. In compliance with §
600-1203.
         (a)   Banquet hall.
         (b)   Public utilities, other than City-owned or City-operated uses
and other than utility lines.
         (c)   Taverns and nightclubs.
         (d)   Tower-Based WCFs, pursuant to Part 21 of this Chapter. [Added 4-
24- 2023 by Ord. No. 41-2023]
      (4)   Special exception uses. In compliance with §
600-1202.
         (a)   Care facilities. [Amended 3-10-2025 by Ord. No. 15A-2025]
         (b)   Kennels.
         (c)   Manufacture or industrial processing of chemicals and allied
products.
         (d)   Manufacture of plastics and polymers.
         (e)   Adaptive reuse in accordance with the provisions specified by §
600-1202.A. [Added 3-10-2025 by Ord. No. 16A-2025]
   C.   Additional requirements.
      (1)   A minimum of 10% of the lot shall be devoted to areas landscaped
with trees and shrubs and vegetative ground cover. This area shall not be used
for any other purpose.
      (2)   All activities shall take place indoors; all outdoor storage shall
be screened from public streets and adjacent off-street parking areas by
fencing, landscaping or other appropriate measures.
      (3)   Landscaped buffer strips, meeting Part 14 with a minimum of 10 feet
wide in M-C Zones and 25 feet wide in H-M Zones, and plant screening shall be
provided in every case where an industrial use abuts a principally residential
use. In addition, where a residential district is located across a street or
alley from a new or expanded industrial use, a ten-foot wide landscaped buffer
strip shall be provided alongside such street or alley along such adjacent
front, side or rear lot line.
      (4)   Truck loading and unloading areas shall be provided in an amount
sufficient to permit the transfer of goods in other than a public street or
front yard setback areas.
      (5)   Entrance and exit to permitted uses shall be clearly marked.
      (6)   Any glare, vibration or noise resulting from the use shall not be
evident beyond the boundaries of the zoning district.
      (7)   The operation shall not result in the dissemination of smoke, dust,
chemicals or odors into the air to such a degree as to be detrimental to the
health, safety and welfare of any adjacent residents.
      (8)   (Reserved)11
      (9)   A minimum seventy-five-foot setback shall apply from the average
water level of the Schuylkill River for any new or expanded vehicle parking,
outdoor storage area or building. This requirement shall not apply for
recreational uses open for free for use by the general public.
11.   Editor's Note: Former Subsection C(8), regarding wind turbines, was
repealed 10-26-2015 by Ord. No. 58-2015.
§ 600-812. H-M Heavy Manufacturing District.
   A.   Dimensional requirements.
 
          Minimum                                      Minimum Minimum Minimum
          Lot Size Maximum  Maximum    Maximum Minimum Front   Rear    Side
Uses      (square  Building Impervious Height  Lot     Yard    Yard    Yard
          feet)    Coverage Coverage           Width   Setback Setback Setback
                                                                       (each)
All uses
allowed,
unless    40,000   50%      80%        70      100     201     202     202
otherwise
noted
 
NOTES:
1   Required front yard may be reduced to 10 feet where a landscaped buffer
strip is provided in accordance with §
600-1401 of this chapter. See §
600-1107 regarding additional requirements and performance standards.
2   Except thirty-foot rear and twenty-foot side setback shall apply for an
industrial use or tractor-trailer loading dock adjacent to a lot of a
principally residential use.
   B.   Allowed uses.
      (1)   Permitted-by-right uses:
         (a)   Manufacturing or industrial processing involving the following:
(as listed in the North American Industrial Classification System, where
applicable)
            [1]   Assembly and packaging.
            [2]   Electronic and electrical equipment.
            [3]   Fabricated metals products.
            [4]   Food and beverage products.
            [5]   Instruments and related products.
            [6]   Leather and leather products.
            [7]   Machinery.
            [8]   Paper and allied products.
            [9]   Petroleum and coal products, other than asphalt.
            [10]   Primary metals industries.
            [11]   Railroad transportation.
            [12]   Rubber, synthetic rubber, resins and miscellaneous products.
            [13]   Stone, clay and glass products.
            [14]   Textile and apparel products.
            [15]   Tobacco products.
            [16]   Transportation equipment.
            [17]   Transportation and public utilities.
            [18]   Wood products and furniture.
         (b)   Banks and financial institutions.
         (c)   College or university, not including residential uses.
         (d)   Exercise clubs.
         (e)   Fire and ambulance station.
         (f)   Flex space buildings, including two or more permitted business
uses.
         (g)   Gardens, crop farming and forestry.
         (h)   Landing area for a helicopter, provided it meets requirements of
State and Federal Aviation Agencies.
         (i)   Municipal uses.
         (j)   Offices.
         (k)   Radio and television stations.
         (l)   Recreation facilities, public parks and nonmotorized recreation
trails.
         (m)   Research and development facilities.
         (n)   Self-storage facilities.
         (o)   Non-tower based WCF if co-located on a municipal facility or a
tower-based WCF that existed prior to the approval of this part and pursuant to
Part 21 of this chapter that are not located within 500 feet of a residential
property or located within a setback area. See §
600-2106. [Amended 3-27-2017 by Ord. No. 21-2017]
         (p)   Small Wireless Communications Facilities, pursuant to Part 21 of
this Chapter. [Added 4-24-2023 by Ord. No. 41-2023]
         (q)   Trade, vocational and hobby schools, not including residential
uses.
         (r)   Warehousing, storage, distribution, trucking or intermodal
transfer facilities.12
      (2)   Conditional uses. See §
600-1203.
         (a)   Group institution.
         (b)   Junkyard.
         (c)   Manufactured home parks.
         (d)   Massage parlor (not including "massage therapy"), which shall
meet the same regulations as a sexually oriented business, in addition to the
City of Reading Code requirements.
         (e)   Sexually oriented business: pursuant to §
600-1203.
         (f)   Temporary shelter.
         (g)   Treatment center.
      (3)   Special exception uses:
         (a)   Manufacture of plastics and polymers.
         (b)   Manufacture and industrial processing of chemicals and allied
products.
         (c)   Manufacture of asphalt.
         (d)   Solid waste transfer facility.
         (e)   Such other manufacturing and industrial uses as the applicant
proves to the satisfaction of the Zoning Hearing Board will be similar to
allowed uses and will not create hazards to public health and safety.
         (f)   Auto service station or auto repair. [Added 3-10-2025 by Ord.
No. 15A-2025]
         (g)   Adaptive reuse in accordance with the provisions specified by §
600-1202.A. [Added 3-10-2025 by Ord. No. 16A-2025]
      (4)   Accessory uses. See Part 10, unless otherwise noted. [Added 10-26-
2015 by Ord. No. 58-2015]
         (a)   Freestanding or roof-mounted wind turbines. [Added 10-26-2015 by
Ord. No. 58-2015]
         (b)   Geothermal heat pumps. [Added 10-26-2015 by Ord. No. 58-2015]
         (c)   Solar energy systems. [Added 10-26-2015 by Ord. No. 58-2015]
         (d)   Water-powered energy systems. [Added 10-26-2015 by Ord. No. 58-
2015]
         (e)   Non-Tower WCFs, pursuant to Part 21 of this Chapter. [Added 3-
27-2017 by Ord. No. 21-2017; amended 4-24-2023 by Ord. No. 41-2023]
   C.   Additional requirements. Section 600-811C shall also apply to the H-
M District.
12.   Editor's Note: Former Subsection B(1)(s), regarding wind turbines, which
immediately followed this subsection, was repealed 10-26-2015 by Ord. No. 58-
2015.
§ 600-813. P Preservation District.
   A.   Dimensional requirements.
 
          Minimum                                      Minimum Minimum Minimum
          Lot Size Maximum  Maximum    Maximum Minimum Front   Rear    Side
Uses      (square  Building Impervious Height  Lot     Yard    Yard    Yard
          feet)    Coverage Coverage           Width   Setback Setback Setback
                                                                       (each)
Allowed
uses
unless    30,000   10%      20%        35      50      10      20      10
stated
otherwise
 
   B.   Allowed uses.
      (1)   Permitted-by-right uses:
         (a)   Bicycle and/or watercraft rentals, and boat-launching
facilities.
         (b)   Gardens, crop farming and forestry.
         (c)   Nature preserves, nonmotorized recreation trails or similar
recreation facilities, provided that a setback shall not apply for a
nonmotorized recreation trail or related fencing.
         (d)   Offices, cultural centers, visitors centers, arts exhibition
areas or museums within a building that existed prior to the adoption of this
chapter.
         (e)   Public parks and playgrounds and public recreation buildings.
         (f)   Public water and sewage treatment facilities.
         (g)   Public water and sewer drainage facilities.
         (h)   Small Wireless Communications Facilities, pursuant to Part 21 of
this Chapter. [Added 4-24-2023 by Ord. No. 41-2023]
      (2)   Accessory uses. See Part 10, unless otherwise noted.
         (a)   Greenhouses: maximum 280 square feet with no commercial use.
         (b)   Parking facilities that are accessory to the principal use
located on the same lot, provided the parking lot shall be screened by
vegetation to filter views from beyond the lot, except through required means
of access.
         (c)   Storage sheds or pavilions: maximum 280 square feet of floor
area.
         (d)   Geothermal heat pumps. [Added 10-26-2015 by Ord. No. 58-2015]
         (e)   Solar energy systems. [Added 10-26-2015 by Ord. No. 58-2015]
         (f)   Water-powered energy systems. [Added 10-26-2015 by Ord. No. 58-
2015]
         (g)   Non-Tower WCFs, pursuant to Part 21 of this Chapter. [Added 4-
24-2023 by Ord. No. 41-2023]
§ 600-814. P-S Penn Square Corridor Overlay Zone.
Within the P-S Overlay Zone, the same regulations shall apply as apply within
the C-C District, except for the following:
   A.   The street-level floor area abutting Penn Street for a depth from the
front of the building of at least 60 feet shall not be occupied by any of the
following uses:
      (1)   Care facilities. [Amended 3-10-2025 by Ord. No. 15A-2025]
      (2)   Dwelling units, dormitories or other residential uses.
      (3)   Storage.
      (4)   Places of worship.
      (5)   Pawn shops.
      (6)   Surface off-street parking spaces or off-street truck loading
spaces or docks.
      (7)   Social clubs, private clubs, bottle clubs and bring-your-own-
beverage clubs.
   B.   No new vehicle entrances or exits shall be allowed directly onto the
200, 300, 400 or 500 blocks of Penn Street, except that the City may approve
the relocation of an existing entrance or exit.
   C.   The P-S Overlay Zone shall apply to lots that abut Penn Street between
Second Street and Sixth Street.
§ 600-815. RR Riverfront Redevelopment Overlay Zone.
   A.   Boundary. The RR District is hereby established, which shall include
the geographic area shown on Exhibit A, 13  which is considered to be part of
the Zoning Map.
   B.   Applicability and phasing.
      (1)   The RR Overlay Zone is an optional zoning district that overlays
the underlying zoning district. An applicant shall have the option of
developing property under the RR District or under the underlying district.
Once a final planned residential development (PRD) plan is approved under the
RR District, such land shall be developed under the RR District provisions and
not the underlying zoning district, unless the Planning Commission approves a
zoning application to abandon the PRD approval, after the applicant has
provided notice in writing to the Zoning Officer and the Planning Office.
         (a)   Until such time as development is underway within a phase of
development that was granted final PRD approval, uses shall be allowed under
the regulations of the underlying zoning district. Once a final PRD plan has
been approved for a phase, then within the land area of that phase, only uses
that are allowed in the RR Overlay Zone shall be allowed, provided that other
lawful preexisting uses may be continued as nonconforming uses.
      (2)   Development in the RR Overlay Zone shall first require tentative
and then final approval as a planned residential development (PRD). The PRD
approval process replaces the conventional subdivision and land development
approval process. Once a PRD has been granted final approval by the City
Planning Commission, then individual uses allowed in the RR Overlay Zone shall
be permitted by right, provided they are consistent with the approved PRD plan.
If uses or development are proposed that are inconsistent with the approved PRD
plan, then the proposed PRD plan revisions shall first be approved by the
Planning Commission.
      (3)   The provisions of this RR Overlay Zone shall only be available to
be utilized if the "total area of the tract" is greater than 10 acres in common
ownership or common equitable ownership at the time of tentative PRD plan
submission. For the purposes of the RR Overlay Zone, a tract may include lots
that are separated from each other by a street, a railroad, a park, or an
alley.
         (a)   Once a final PRD plan has been approved, then individual
buildings may be undertaken by various entities, provided there is overall
compliance with the final PRD approval and provided there is compliance with
the City-approved phasing plan and a development agreement that have been
approved by the City.
         (b)   See additional phasing provisions in Subsection F below.
   C.   Use regulations. Within the RR Overlay Zone, land and/or structures may
be used for any of the following permitted-by-right uses listed below and be
combined together in one or more buildings, provided final PRD approval has
been previously granted.
      (1)   Single-family detached dwellings.
      (2)   One-family semidetached dwellings or duplex dwelling.
      (3)   Apartment/multifamily dwellings, which may include mid-rise or
high-rise apartments, provided the height requirement is met.
      (4)   One-family attached dwellings (townhouses).
      (5)   Adaptive reuse of a building to convert building space into
dwelling units and/or to increase the number of dwelling units, provided the
density requirements of this section are met.
      (6)   Amusement arcade.
      (7)   Bed-and-breakfast inn.
      (8)   Surface, underground or structured parking areas as an accessory or
principal use, provided that the area of surface parking lots shall not
comprise more than 50% of the total area of all lots within the tract, and
provided that underground parking shall not be allowed within the one-hundred-
year floodplain.
      (9)   Business services, which may include but is not limited to
photocopying and custom printing.
      (10)   Catering, preparation of food for.
      (11)   Telecommunications tower/antenna that are attached to a building
and that extend less than 25 feet above a principal building.
      (12)   Custom crafts, manufacture and sale of (such as jewelry and
handicrafts), or artisan's studio, or retail craft shops such as, but not
limited to, artisan shops, glass blower shops, ceramic tile maker shops.
      (13)   Exercise club or fitness facility.
      (14)   Financial institution (which includes a bank but which does not
include a check- cashing establishment or pawn shop, each of which shall be
considered a retail store).
      (15)   Hotel or motel, which may include a restaurant and conference
center.
      (16)   Massage therapy by a trained person certified by a recognized
professional organization, not including a sexually oriented business.
      (17)   Newspaper publishing and printing.
      (18)   Offices of business, institution, profession, medical, or similar
entity (see also "home occupation").
      (19)   Personal services [such as barber and beauty shops (see §
600-1103), nail salons (see §
600-1103), laundry and dry cleaning pickup and delivery, and closely similar
uses].
      (20)   Recreation, commercial, indoor or outdoor, other than an outdoor
motor vehicle race track.
      (21)   Restaurant, which may include entertainment, provided that drive-
through service shall be prohibited.
      (22)   Municipal buildings and uses and other governmental facilities,
but not including prisons, other correctional facilities and solid waste
facilities.
      (23)   Retail store(s), which may include but is not limited to a
supermarket or a farmers market, but not including an adult business.
      (24)   Tavern or nightclub, which may include a brew pub that
manufactures alcoholic beverages for on-site and off-site sale.
      (25)   Theaters (not including a "sexually oriented business"),
performing arts facilities, civic and/or cultural facility, arena, museum,
canal, amusement park, water park, aquarium, sports stadium, gymnasium or
auditorium.
      (26)   Trade school or similar educational institution.
      (27)   Veterinarians, other than kennel.
      (28)   Research and development, engineering or testing facility or
laboratory.
      (29)   Adult care center. [Amended 3-10-2025 by Ord. No. 15A-2025]
      (30)   Child care facilities, which may also include nursery school,
preschool or “head start” program center. [Amended 3-10-2025 by Ord. No. 15A-
2025]
      (31)   College or university, which may include dormitories or residence
halls for full-time students and staff.
      (32)   Museum or visitor's center, and which include accessory retail
sales.
      (33)   Nursing home or personal-care/assisted-living home or congregate
care housing retirement community.
      (34)   Community center or resident/employee recreation center,
nonprofit.
      (35)   Social club meeting facilities.
      (36)   Public park, playground or other publicly owned or publicly
operated recreation facilities or noncommercial outdoor recreation areas, or
nonmotorized recreation trails.
      (37)   Boat dock, wharf or marina.
      (38)   Swimming pools, public or private.
      (39)   Bus stops, bus passenger shelters and taxi waiting areas.
      (40)   Indoor vending and amusement machines, not including gambling
machines.
      (41)   Public utilities meeting §
600-1203, including, but not limited to, electric substations and sanitary
sewage facilities, but not including vehicle garages, warehouses, storage yards
or freestanding commercial communications towers.
      (42)   Accessory use and/or structure on the same lot and customarily
incidental to a lawful principal use.
      (43)   Community special event facilities, which may include tents,
awnings and displays.
      (44)   Family child care home. [Amended 3-10-2025 by Ord. No. 15A-2025]
      (45)   Group child care home or child care center as a principal use.
[Amended 3-10-2025 by Ord. No. 15A-2025] 
      (46)   (Reserved)
      (47)   Minor home occupations meeting §
600-1006. If a dwelling unit is designated on the final PRD plan as being a
"live/work unit," then the requirement that the home occupation area is limited
to 25% of the dwelling unit floor area may be increased to 50%.
      (48)   Sales or rental office, which may include model units, provided
that any temporary modular sales/rental building shall be limited to use during
the first year of construction.
      (49)   Warehousing as an accessory use to the permitted principal use of
the lot, provided the warehousing does not occupy more than 25% of the floor
area of the building.
      (50)   Places of worship.
      (51)   Private or public primary or secondary school.
   D.   Site layout and dimensional regulations.
      (1)   The following area, yard and building regulations shall apply for
all uses approved within a PRD, whichever is most restrictive:
         (a)   Maximum residential density: 75 dwelling units/acre. 14
         (b)   Minimum lot area: 10,000 square feet, provided that 1,600 square
feet for townhouses and for commercial uses fronting upon a pedestrian-oriented
commercial street.
         (c)   Minimum lot width: 50 feet, provided that 20 feet shall be
allowed for townhouses and commercial uses fronting upon a pedestrian-oriented
commercial street. 15
         (d)   Minimum building setback for a new building from an abutting lot
line at the perimeter of the tract: 15 feet, except a minimum of 30 feet from a
residential district boundary for a building of greater than 40 feet in height.
         (e)   Minimum front yard setback: zero feet.
         (f)   Minimum rear yard setback: zero feet.
         (g)   Minimum side yard setback: zero feet.
         (h)   Maximum building coverage: 80%. 16
         (i)   Maximum building height: 140 feet, except 200 feet for portions
of buildings that are more than 200 feet from a principally residential lot
that is outside of the PRD.
         (j)   Buffer yard required: no, except an eight-foot wide buffer yard
shall be required if a preexisting principal dwelling in a residential district
is adjacent or across a street or alley from a new principal business use and
such dwelling is not within the RR Overlay Zone.
         (k)   Site plan review by City Planning Commission: yes.
         (l)   Riverfront building setback: minimum of 50 feet from the top of
the bank of the Schuylkill River or a structural wall or improved water's edge
along the Schuylkill River, based upon conditions that will exist after the
development is completed, based upon the approved final PRD plan. Pedestrian
access may be placed within this setback.
         (m)   Each single-family detached, single-family semidetached or
single-family attached dwelling shall have a private outdoor area including a
minimum area of 300 square feet for the exclusive use of that dwelling unit.
Such outdoor area may be a rear or side yard, a porch, a balcony, a deck, an
improved rooftop recreation area with railings, or a similar feature.
      (2)   Fire access. The applicant shall prove to the satisfaction of the
Planning Commission, after a review by the City Fire Department, that all
buildings will be adequately accessible by fire apparatus. The applicant should
use a computer program to show that adequate access will be available for the
largest vehicles used by the Fire Department, including provisions for
turnarounds. The City may require that buildings be sufficiently separated to
allow firefighting access. Where streets or parking areas do not provide
adequate access to various sides of a building, the City may require that a
pedestrian pathway be constructed with sufficient paving depth and width so
that the pathway will be suitable for use by fire trucks. Where there is no
need for a pathway, the City may require other provisions for fire truck
access, such as a stabilized surface under grass.
      (3)   Minimum business uses. A minimum of 35% of the total floor area of
all enclosed buildings after completion of the development of the tract to be
occupied by business uses. Areas used for vehicle parking shall not be
considered in this calculation. [Amended 7-10-2017 by Ord. 60-2017]
      (4)   Open land. A minimum of 10% of the total lot area of the tract
shall be set aside in open land that is available for active and passive
outdoor recreational use by the residents and employees of the tract, or by the
general public. Such open land shall be maintained in existing trees or may be
planted with new trees and shrubs or improved for outdoor recreational
facilities. Such open land shall be regulated by a conservation easement or
deed restriction established by the applicant and enforceable by the City of
Reading, which prohibits the construction of buildings and the further
subdivision of the required open land.
         (a)   Outdoor recreational facilities shall be landscaped and may
include pathways, pedestrian outdoor courtyards and structures typically
included in active and passive recreational areas. Areas within a street right-
of-way and areas used for buildings or vehicle parking shall not count towards
the open land requirement, except rooftop active recreation facilities that are
available to all residents of the building and/or tract may count towards up to
50% of the required open land areas. Required open land areas may be designed
to be under a roof during inclement weather or under an awning or similar
feature.
         (b)   Unless dedicated to and accepted by the City of Reading as part
of a final PRD plan, such open land shall be owned and maintained by a legally
binding association of property owners on the tract. The form of the property
owners legal documents shall be subject to review by the City Department of
Law. If there is mutual written agreement between the applicant and the City,
part or all of the open land may be maintained as a public park.
         (c)   The open land shall be focused on taking advantage of the
riverfront by providing for substantial public access along the banks of the
river. Some of the open land may also serve the purpose of buffering residences
from high traffic roads.
         (d)   The Planning Commission may approve a portion of the open land
requirement being met by the applicant making recreation improvements to
existing adjacent City-owned parkland, provided the extent of the improvements
are specified and provided that the City Council approves a list of such
improvements. The City Council may approve a lease of parkland for the purposes
of allowing an applicant to make improvements to City parkland.
      (5)   Riverfront access. The RR Overlay Zone offers great flexibility to
the developer as an optional form of development. In return for such
flexibility, a developer shall only be eligible to use this RR Overlay Zone if
the developer commits to providing public access to and along all portions of
the Schuylkill Riverfront that are under the control of the applicant or that
are under the ownership of any agency to such public access being provided by
the applicant. The tract shall be designed to provide continuous public
pedestrian and bicycle access from sunrise to sundown, at a minimum, from
public streets to the riverfront, and then along the length of the riverfront
along the entire tract. Such public access shall be provided upon completion of
each phase for land in that phase adjacent to the riverfront. Complete public
access along the entire riverfront shall be provided upon completion of the
development, including provisions for future extension of public pathways from
the edges of the tract. The Planning Commission may approve alternative access
through the tract if public access at a particular part of the riverfront is
not feasible. [Amended 7-10-2017 by Ord. 60-2017]
         (a)   Such public access shall include a pedestrian pathway with a
minimum hard- surfaced width of 10 feet and a public pedestrian access easement
with a minimum width of 14 feet. Such pathway may also be open to maintenance
vehicles and bicycles. Such pathway may be gated and may be closed to the
public between 10:00 p.m. and sunrise on land that is privately controlled.
Access to land that is controlled by a public agency shall be governed by that
public agency. Such riverfront pathway shall be illuminated and landscaped and
shall connect with any existing or planned public trail adjacent to the tract.
         (b)   The applicant shall describe how parking will be made available
for members of the public who wish to use the riverfront recreation trail and
any recreation facilities open to the public. This may include on-street
parking with time limits, but does not necessarily need to involve free parking
provided by the applicant.
         (c)   Pedestrian public access points to the riverfront trail shall be
available a maximum of 1,000 feet apart from each other, with each access point
connecting to a street open to the public. Sufficient access shall also be
available to the riverfront trail for maintenance vehicles. Except for police,
motorized wheelchair and maintenance access, no motorized vehicles shall be
allowed along the riverfront trail.
      (6)   Surface parking location. If a new principal building is
constructed that will be occupied primarily by retail uses, no new vehicle
surface parking spaces shall be located in the area between the front wall of
such building and the curbline of the nearest public street. If such lot is
adjacent to two or more streets, this restriction shall only apply to one
street. This provision shall not restrict parking that is located to the side
or rear of such building.
   E.   Site and building layouts. The following provisions shall be applied to
the tract to the satisfaction of the Planning Commission:
      (1)   The tract shall include at least one pedestrian-oriented commercial
street, with pedestrian entrances and pedestrian amenities along that street
and with no off- street surface outdoor parking spaces located between such
pedestrian-oriented street and the front of abutting principal buildings,
except for loading/unloading spaces. Commercial establishments shall be placed
along at least a portion of the street level building space along such
pedestrian-oriented commercial street.
      (2)   Along this pedestrian-oriented commercial street, a minimum of 50%
of the front wall of each principal building shall not have a setback of
greater than 40 feet from the curbline. The Planning Commission may approve a
wider setback where appropriate to provide room for pedestrian amenities or an
outdoor cafe.
      (3)   The final PRD plan shall specify locations for garbage collection,
business truck unloading areas and similar building services. Such locations
shall be subject to approval by the Planning Commission to minimize conflicts
with the pedestrian- oriented commercial street and dwellings.
      (4)   The PRD shall have at least one central focal point for each 2,000
feet of length of the development. Examples of such a focal point include a
landscaped central green space and/or a pedestrian-friendly street that
includes commercial uses.
      (5)   Feasibility of addressing site issues. As part of a tentative PRD
application, the applicant shall provide written material describing methods
that will be used to provide compatibility with any adjacent sanitary sewage
facilities and to address safety with any underlying natural gas
infrastructure.
   F.   Approval process and phasing. Development under the RR Overlay Zone
shall require approval by the Planning Commission as a planned residential
development (PRD). The requirements and procedures for a PRD of the
Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq., are hereby
included by reference.
      (1)   A tentative plan submittal shall be made that includes the entire
tract. The tentative plan submittal shall state the following for the entire
development and for each tentative phase: proposed number of dwelling units,
the floor area of nonresidential uses, the amount and locations of open land,
the proposed locations and heights of buildings, the proposed locations of off-
street parking areas, the locations of loading areas, and sufficient other
information to show the feasibility of the proposed development. A map shall
show the tentative phasing plan.
         (a)   
The tentative plan submittal shall meet all of the requirements that would
apply to a preliminary plan under
Chapter 515, Subdivision and Land Development, of the Code of the City of
Reading, except that tentative plans do not need to be drawn at a scale larger
than one inch equals 100 feet, and except that the following submission
requirements shall be deferred from the tentative plan to the final plan stage.
Such deferral shall only occur if the applicant: shows the general feasibility
of such features; and commits to not construct improvements that will be
dedicated to the City prior to receiving final PRD plan approval for the area
that includes such improvements. Such deferral may include the following:
            [1]   Stormwater calculations.
            [2]   Detailed grading and erosion and sedimentation control plans.
            [3]   Proposed monuments.
            [4]   Exact locations and species of plantings for landscaping
plans.
            [5]   Utility and street profiles.
            [6]   Designs of culverts, manholes, catch-basins and similar
construction details.
            [7]   Locations of proposed electric, telephone and cable
television lines and water and sewage laterals.
      (2)   After review by the City Planning Office, City Engineer and Law
Department, or their designees, and after the tentative plan has been offered
for review by the County Planning Commission, the tentative plan shall be
approved, approved with conditions or denied by the Planning Commission within
the maximum time limits provided by the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning
Code, 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq., unless the applicant provides a written time
extension.
         (a)   The tentative plan may include a range of allowed uses in
various areas, as opposed to identifying each specific use. The tentative plan
shall show the preliminary layout of proposed streets, alleys, cartway widths,
lots, public trails, recreation areas, major pedestrian and bicycle pathways,
heights and uses of buildings, parking areas, major detention basins and
proposed types of housing and nonresidential uses.
         (b)   The tentative plan is intended to show the interrelationships
and compatibility of various elements of the PRD. The tentative plan shall be
to scale and be designed to show how the PRD will comply with this chapter.
      (3)   After a tentative plan has been approved, a final plan shall be
submitted, with any phasing occurring in logical self-sufficient phases. The
final plan shall meet all of the same requirements that would apply to a final
plan under
Chapter 515, Subdivision and Land Development. The final plan shall need
approval by the Planning Commission.
         (a)   No sale of lots or construction of buildings (other than one
temporary modular sales/rental building) shall occur until after all of the
following requirements are met:
            [1]   An approved final PRD plan for that phase has been approved
by the Planning Commission and has been recorded;
            [2]   The applicant has proven they have met any conditions upon
approval; and
            [3]   Acceptable financial guarantees for improvements have been
established.
      (4)   A final plan submittal shall be accompanied by an updated plan of
the entire PRD at a tentative plan level of detail, which shall show portions
previously approved, portions that have been built, the locations affected by
the current final plan submittal, and the remaining phases of development. This
overall plan shall also show compliance with density and open space land
requirements.
      (5)   Phasing. As each phase of development is approved, the applicant
shall provide evidence that the requirements of this RR Overlay Zone will be
met at the conclusion of that phase, even if later phases of development would
not be completed. This shall include, but not be limited to, providing evidence
of compliance with the density, bulk, and open land requirements. The City
Planning Commission may permit variations in specific requirements of these
provisions for an individual phase, provided there will be compliance after the
completion of the next phase. Each phase of development shall be developed in
full coordination with prior and future phases, to ensure that proper traffic
circulation and utility services will be provided, and to ensure general
compliance with the tentative plan. For each phase, the applicant shall prove
that the PRD will be able to properly function and will include suitable
vehicle and pedestrian access and utilities even if later phases of the PRD are
not built.
         (a)   A tentative phasing plan shall be submitted as part of the
tentative plan and be updated as part of any final plan and should be updated
at least once a year afterwards. The phasing plan shall show the geographic
area of each phase and the anticipated order of the various phases and an
approximate timeline for start and completion of construction. The applicant
shall prove to the City Planning Commission that any changes to the phasing
plan comply with this chapter.
         (b)   After final plan approval, the developer shall be required to
enter into a development agreement with the City to ensure the timely
completion of required improvements, in coordination with the phasing plan.
         (c)   If new dwellings are proposed adjacent to an existing industrial
use, then the Planning Commission shall have authority to require provisions
for transitional buffering and setbacks between those dwellings and any
adjacent industrially zoned land. Such buffering and setbacks are intended to
make sure that there will be a compatible border between dwellings and
industrial uses, in case later phases are not developed.
            [1]   The Planning Commission may require that financial guarantees
be provided by the developer to fund buffer plantings if adjacent phases are
not built.
            [2]   The Planning Commission may require that a building setback
be provided for dwellings from the edge of a future phase.
            [3]   If such future adjacent phase is completed in conformance
with the tentative PRD plan, then such buffer and setback requirement is
eliminated.
         (d)   If a particular final plan is not generally consistent with the
approved tentative plan, then the applicant shall submit a revised tentative
plan for acceptance by the City Planning Commission. However, the approved
tentative plan is not required to be revised for matters addressed in the final
plan that do not affect Zoning Ordinance compliance, such as adjustments in
street alignments or changes in building shapes to reflect more detailed
design.
   G.   Additional requirements for a PRD.
      (1)   Other requirements. A PRD shall meet all of the requirements of
this chapter and
Chapter 515, Subdivision and Land Development, that are not specifically
modified by this section or by the provisions of the Pennsylvania
Municipalities Planning Code, 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq., that govern PRDs.
      (2)   Architecture. To carry out the intent of traditional neighborhood
development, as part of the final PRD submittal, the applicant shall submit a
set of preliminary architectural sketches and the substance of draft
architectural covenants to the Zoning Officer, the Planning Office, the City
Department of Law and the City Planning Commission for review and comment. The
applicant shall also submit a Manual of Written and Graphic Design Guidelines.
Such provisions shall be prepared with the involvement of a registered
architect. The applicant shall establish a set of architectural covenants as a
condition of final plan approval, prior to the recording of such plan.
         (a)   No new principal building shall have a front facade that is
primarily constructed using vinyl siding.
         (b)   New streetlights within the PRD shall have a decorative design
with a maximum total height of 22 feet using a design preapproved by the City.
         (c)   The applicant should describe any environmentally friendly and
energy-efficient measures that are intended to be incorporated into the
construction, such as use of rooftop gardens or green roofs.
      (3)   Covenants. The City may also require covenants or conditions upon
the plan to address setbacks, landscaping, pedestrian access, fire access,
street improvements, utility improvements, access by the public to certain
recreation areas, park improvements and other matters necessary to carry out
the intent of this Overlay Zone.
      (4)   Public access. The tentative plan and final plan shall each
describe the locations and extent of public access to the Schuylkill
Riverfront.
      (5)   Traffic study and improvements. As part of the tentative plan
submittal, the applicant shall submit a traffic impact study to the City. Such
study shall assess current traffic conditions, the amount of traffic expected
to be generated by the total development during peak hours, the impacts of the
development upon traffic in the surrounding area, any resulting reductions in
levels of service below a level of "C" at intersections and highway ramps, and
measures that the applicant proposes to complete or fund to mitigate the
impacts, such as street improvements and/or assistance in funding transit
services. Such traffic impact study shall be updated as needed as each phase is
submitted. If diagonal parking is proposed along a street, the traffic impact
study shall assess the safety of such parking in that location.
         (a)   The traffic impact study shall analyze issues involving truck
traffic, particularly to avoid conflicts between new dwellings and late-night
truck traffic, while also addressing peak-hour congestion.
         (b)   The traffic impact study shall be prepared under the direction
of a professional with substantial experience in preparing traffic impact
studies. The qualifications of such person shall be included in the report.
      (6)   For lots within an Historic District that are regulated by
Chapter 295, Historic Districts, the applicant shall also comply with such
chapter.
   H.   PRD modifications. As authorized by the TND and PRD provisions of the
Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq., specific
zoning and subdivision and land development regulations that apply to a PRD
application may be modified by the Planning Commission after receiving a
written request from the applicant. Such modifications shall be allowed where
the applicant proves that an alternative standard would meet the same public
objective and would serve the purposes for a PRD and/or TND as provided in
state law. Such modifications shall be limited to street standards, setback
requirements, sidewalk and curb standards, improvement requirements, and
technical engineering requirements. The Planning Commission shall consider
recommendations of the City Engineer or designee before approving any
modifications to street, improvement and rights-of-way requirements.
      (1)   As another option, the applicant shall also have the additional
option of submitting an application for a zoning variance to the Zoning Hearing
Board, in the same manner as would apply to other sections of this chapter.
      (2)   Such modification may include, but is not limited to, the following
street rights-of- way and cartway widths.
         (a)   A collector street with two-way traffic may be constructed with
two travel lanes of 11 feet each, eight-foot wide parallel parking lanes, a
four-foot wide planting strip with street trees on each side of the street
(which may utilize tree wells), pedestrian sidewalks on each side of the street
that are a minimum of five feet in width, except eight feet in width in front
of principal commercial uses, and a right-of-way width that includes the width
of the required sidewalk.
         (b)   A local street with two-way traffic may be constructed with two
travel lanes of 10 feet each, eight-foot wide parallel parking, a four-foot
wide planting strip (which may utilize tree wells) with street trees on each
side of the street, pedestrian sidewalks on each side of the street that are a
minimum of five feet and a minimum right-or-way width that includes the
required width of the sidewalk.
         (c)   An alley serving two-way traffic may be constructed with a
sixteen-foot wide cartway and a five-foot wide minimum setback between the
travel lane and any rear garage, provided that parking is prohibited within the
cartway. Along any side of an alley along which parallel parking is allowed, an
additional eight feet of paved width shall be required.
         (d)   The Planning Commission may require wider cartway widths as
needed, considering the results of the traffic impact study.
      (3)   Any street within the RR Overlay Zone, whether public or private,
shall meet the same minimum construction material requirements as any new
street intended to be dedicated to the City under City ordinances, or as
otherwise approved by the City.
         (a)   Pedestrian sidewalks with a minimum width of five feet and
street trees meeting requirements of the City shall be required on each side of
every street, unless the applicant proves to the Planning Commission that an
alternative pathway open to the public will provide the same level of
pedestrian access. The minimum width of sidewalks shall be increased to eight
feet in front of principal commercial uses. Tree grates or similar measures may
be used and permitted outdoor cafes may intrude into the sidewalk, provided a
four-foot continuous pedestrian and wheelchair-accessible pathway is provided
along the sidewalk. A minimum average of one street tree shall be required for
each 40 feet of street length, unless existing trees will be preserved to serve
the same purpose.
   I.   Off-street parking and loading regulations. The requirements of Part 16
of this chapter shall apply, except for the following modifications:
      (1)   Off-street parking may be shared by various uses and lots within
the RR Overlay Zone, provided that the developer shall demonstrate to the
Planning Commission that sufficient parking is provided on the tract that is
within 500 feet of walking distance from the pedestrian entrance of the use
that is served by the parking. The applicant shall prove that shared parking
will continue to be available to all of the uses that are served by the parking
during the life of those uses.
      (2)   The amount of off-street loading requirements shall be determined
by the Planning Commission upon review of the proposed uses of each phase of
the tentative PRD plan.
      (3)   Under the authority to modify requirements as part of a PRD, the
Planning Commission may reduce the required amount of off-street parking by up
to 30% based upon:
         (a)   The applicant's traffic study and parking study, provided the
parking study analyzes current and anticipated on-street and off-street parking
demand and supply within the PRD and at least one block in each direction.
         (b)   The ability of various uses to share parking, particularly if
those uses have different period time periods of peak parking demand.
         (c)   Commitments by the applicant to fund or provide transit services
for residents, customers and patrons, such as connections to an off-site
parking area.
         (d)   The availability of public transit and/or any shuttle or trolley
service that may be provided during periods of peak parking demand.
      (4)   For development under the RR Overlay Zone, new off-street vehicle
parking spaces shall not be located within 100 feet from the top of the bank of
the Schuylkill River or a structural wall along the Schuylkill River, based
upon conditions that will exist after the development is completed, based upon
the approved final PRD plan.
      (5)   An applicant may meet a maximum of 25% of the off-street parking
space requirements for each use by counting new on-street spaces adjacent to
the curb along a street adjacent to the use.
   J.   Preserved open land. The method of ownership and maintenance of the
preserved open land shall be approved by the Planning Commission as part of the
PRD approval. Any later changes to the preserved open land ownership or use
that was not part of the PRD approval shall need Planning Commission approval.
      (1)   Required preserved open land shall be preserved through a permanent
conservation easement that is enforceable by the City. The legal form of the
documents concerning the preserved open land shall be approved by the City
Department of Law or designee.
      (2)   The preserved open land shall be improved so that it is suitable
for its intended use, including the planting of trees and shrubs where existing
trees and shrubs will not be maintained.
      (3)   Methods for ownership of the preserved open land shall utilize one
of the following:
         (a)   Dedication to the City for public recreation if the City agrees
in advance to accept it;
         (b)   Dedication to a property owners' association, with each owner of
property within the PRD legally required to annually fund their share of the
maintenance of the open land;
         (c)   Retention by the owner of a rental housing development; or
         (d)   Another suitable method that is specifically approved by the
Planning Commission.
13.   Editor's Note: Exhibit A is on file in the City office.
14. NOTE: The maximum residential density shall be based upon the total area of
the tract, before the deletion of rights-of- way of proposed streets and before
the deletion of open space. Dwelling units may be located within the same
building as allowed nonresidential uses, provided such mixture of uses is
consistent with the tentative PRD plan.
15. NOTE: Individual uses or buildings may be owned in a condominium
arrangement, without each condominium unit needing to meet the minimum
dimensional requirements (such as lot width and yards), provided that the
applicant shows that the development would have been able to meet the
dimensional requirements if individual lot lines had been established.
16. NOTE: The maximum building coverage shall be based upon the ground level
footprint of all buildings on the tract divided by the total area of the tract.
Individual lots may have a higher building coverage, provided that the maximum
is not exceeded for the tract. Underground parking that is covered by
vegetation or a pedestrian plaza shall not count as building area for the
purposes of this section. The City may require that certain lots include a deed
restriction limiting their maximum coverage to ensure that the maximum overall
coverage requirement is met across the tract over time. For each 1,000 square
feet of building floor area that achieves certification or a higher level under
the Leadership in Energy and Environmental Design (LEED) Green Building Rating
System, an additional 300 square feet of building coverage shall be allowed
above the maximum.
§ 600-816. MU Municipal District.
   A.   Dimensional requirements.
 
          Minimum                                      Minimum Minimum Minimum
          Lot Size Maximum  Maximum    Maximum Minimum Front   Rear    Side
Uses      (square  Building Impervious Height  Lot     Yard    Yard    Yard
          feet)    Coverage Coverage           Width   Setback Setback Setback
                                                                       (each)
Allowed
uses
unless    43,560   40%      80%        80 feet         40 feet 40 feet 40 feet
stated
otherwise
 
   B.   Allowed uses.
      (1)   Permitted-by-right uses:
         (a)   Wastewater treatment operations.
         (b)   Law enforcement operations.
         (c)   Firefighting and rescue service operations.
         (d)   Recycling operations.
         (e)   Multiple principal uses and occupancies on single parcels within
the Municipal Use District are expressly authorized; where common (City)
ownership makes subdivision otherwise unnecessary; "area and bulk" standards
shall apply to the property as a whole. The adequacy of separations between
uses shall be established by agreement between the City's representative and a
qualified design professional, and to the satisfaction of the incumbent tenants
and their continuing operations. Municipal use parcels are not required to
front on a public street, though sufficient (driveway) access must nonetheless
be provided.
         (f)   Governmental offices and public works facilities.
         (g)   Public recreation facilities.
         (h)   Nonmotorized recreation trails.
         (i)   Small WCFs, pursuant to Part 21 of this Chapter. [Added 4-24-
2023 by Ord. No. 41-2023]
      (2)   Accessory uses. In compliance with Part 10, unless otherwise noted.
[Added 10-26-2015 by Ord. No. 58-2015]
         (a)   Geothermal heat pumps.
         (b)   Solar energy systems.
         (c)   Water-powered energy systems.
         (d)   Freestanding or roof-mounted wind turbines.
         (e)   Non-tower based WCFs, pursuant to Part 21 of this Chapter.
[Added 3-27-2017 by Ord. No. 21-2017; amended 4-24-2023 by Ord. No. 41-2023]
§ 600-817. INS Institutional Overlay Zone.
   A.   Applicability. The INS District overlays the underlying zoning district
(s) as shown on the INS Zoning Maps. Within the INS Overlay Zone, an applicant
shall have the option of making an application under the regulations of the INS
District or the underlying zoning district regulations in Part 8. All other
provisions of this chapter shall apply.
   B.   Dimensional requirements.
 
               Minimum                                     Minimum Minimum Minimum
               Lot     Maximum  Maximum    Maximum Minimum Front   Rear    Side
Uses           Size    Building Impervious Height  Lot     Yard    Yard    Yard
               (square Coverage Coverage           Width   Setback Setback Setback
               feet)                                                       (each)
College or
university or
hospital       3,000   40%1     70%1       402     30      153     253     154
nonresidential
uses
College,
university or
hospital       3,000   40%1     70%1       402     30      153     253     154
residential
uses5
Other allowed
use, unless    10,000  40%      50%        40      50      15      25      15
otherwise
stated
 
NOTES:
1   For abutting lots in common ownership, the maximum building and impervious
coverage may apply to all such lots combined.
2   Except a maximum height of 60 feet shall be allowed for portions of a
building that are a minimum of 100 feet from the lot line of every dwelling
that is not owned by the college or university.
3   Where a college or university building would be across a street or an alley
or directly abutting an existing principal dwelling that is not owned by the
college or university, a minimum forty-foot wide yard shall be required. Where
such situation exists along a street or alley, the forty-foot yard shall be
measured from the right-of-way.
4   A side yard setback is not required where a new building is replacing a
building that was previously attached to another building along that lot line.
New dwelling units that are allowed to be attached to each other do not need a
side yard setback between the new dwellings.
5   Not including preexisting dwelling units which are owned by a college or
university and which are regulated as individual dwelling units under the
regulations of the underlying district and which shall meet the definition of
occupancy by one family.
Note: The term “college or university” shall be interpreted to include similar
accredited institutions of higher education, such as nursing schools, and other
professional health-care educational facilities.
   C.   Allowed uses.
      (1)   Permitted-by-right uses:
         (a)   Cemeteries, not including a crematorium.
         (b)   College or university offices, education, dining, recreational,
athletic, and maintenance uses and their customarily accessory uses.
         (c)   Museums.
         (d)   Nursing home or personal-care center.
         (e)   Offices or clinics of a hospital or similar health care
organization.
         (f)   Police, fire and ambulance stations and related training
facilities.
         (g)   Residential facilities owned and/or operated by a college,
university or hospital for their staff and/or enrolled students, which may
include dormitories, sororities, fraternities, dwelling units and other
residence halls. Sororities, fraternities, dormitories and boarding houses that
are not owned and/or operated by a college, university or nursing school shall
be prohibited.
      (2)   Conditional uses. In compliance with §
600-1203.
         (a)   Temporary shelter.
§ 600-818. Riparian Buffer Overlay District. [Added 10-26-2015 by Ord. No. 57-
2015]
   A.   Applicability. This section is intended to modify the location of
certain development in relation to watercourses and impoundments but not to
modify the overall density of such development. The regulatory provisions apply
to development and redevelopment of property located within the riparian buffer
setback, and make recommendations for the maintenance of any other properties
within the riparian buffer setback, to protect both water resources and
property from stormwater damage, flash flooding, erosion and sedimentation, and
pollution.
   B.   Creation of riparian buffer setbacks.
      (1)   A riparian buffer setback is an area extending alongside and
adjacent to watercourses and impoundments which must be designed, managed and
maintained as a riparian buffer to protect stability of banks and edges,
improve water quality, reduce the effects of erosion, flash flooding and
contaminated runoff, and to act as a transitional zone between upland and
aquatic habitat.
      (2)   The following riparian buffer setbacks are required within the
following zoning districts:
         (a)   R-1: 35 feet.
         (b)   R-1 A: 35 feet.
         (c)   R-2: 25 feet.
         (d)   R-3: 15 feet.
         (e)   R-PO: 25 feet.
         (f)   C-C: 15 feet.
         (g)   C-R: 15 feet.
         (h)   C-H: 25 feet.
         (i)   M-C: 35 feet.
         (j)   H-M: 35 feet.
         (k)   P: 35 feet.
   C.   Regulations that apply to areas that contain riparian buffer setbacks.
      (1)   The regulations in this section shall apply to all lots, regardless
of size, that include watercourses and impoundments. In lots which qualify for
development in the Riverfront Redevelopment Overlay District, those optional
regulations shall take precedence.
      (2)   Areas within the riparian buffer setback along watercourses and
impoundments must be used as a riparian buffer; they must be properly graded
and stabilized, and managed as open space with permanent vegetation consisting
of at least 20% shrub or tree cover.
      (3)   Development. Development shall be designed to preserve the
integrity and function of any existing riparian buffer. All areas within the
riparian buffer setback shall be designed and managed as a riparian buffer,
except as specifically provided in this section. In an application for
development, the applicant shall design the development without encroaching
upon the riparian buffer setback, in accordance with the following limitations:
         (a)   The principal building and use shall not be located on the area
of the lot within the riparian buffer setback;
         (b)   Other structures, accessory uses and equipment shall also, to
the extent feasible, not be located on or extend into the riparian buffer
setback;
         (c)   Other impervious coverage shall not extend into the riparian
buffer setback, unless the City Engineer finds that:
            [1]   Constraints unique to the property prevent the reasonable
development of the property without encroaching upon the riparian buffer
setback; and
            [2]   The development plan minimizes the encroachment and provides
compensating mitigation to reduce the impacts of the encroachment into the
riparian buffer setback.
      (4)   Redevelopment. For the purposes of this section, "redevelopment"
shall mean any physical improvement that involves earthmoving, removal, or
addition of impervious surfaces to a lot which contains preexisting development
within the overlay district. In an application for development of property, the
applicant shall design the land development plan in a manner that maintains and
restores riparian buffer functions to areas in the riparian buffer setback to
the extent feasible, including the following:
         (a)   No new buildings or structures shall be added in the portion of
the lot located within the riparian buffer setback;
         (b)   Restoration and improvement of existing buildings and structures
located within the riparian buffer setback shall not be expanded beyond their
existing footprint;
         (c)   Accessory uses and equipment should be located or relocated, to
the extent feasible, so as not to encroach upon the riparian buffer setback;
         (d)   Impervious coverage shall not be added in the riparian buffer
setback, and, except for access roads and necessary parking areas,
redevelopment plans shall, to the extent feasible, remove existing impervious
surfaces from the riparian buffer setback and grade and revegetate the riparian
buffer setback area as a riparian buffer.
      (5)   Application information. In order to determine compliance with the
applicable riparian buffer setback requirements, an application for land
development shall include the following information with respect to the portion
of the lot within a riparian buffer setback:
         (a)   Maps and schematic plans identifying the location of
watercourses and impoundments on and adjacent to the property under
development;
         (b)   Location, dimensions and footprint of any proposed or existing
building or structure, equipment and impervious coverage;
         (c)   Slopes and grading plan;
         (d)   A planting plan that includes plant species, locations and
coverage of shrubs and trees;
         (e)   A riparian buffer maintenance plan providing for the maintenance
of permanent vegetation, stable slopes and grading, and integrity of the
riparian buffer.
   D.   Permitted land disturbances in riparian buffer setback.
      (1)   The area within the riparian buffer setback established in this
section for each zoning district shall be managed as a riparian buffer.
      (2)   The following land disturbances shall be permitted without
limitation when located within a riparian buffer setback:
         (a)   Implementation of an approved riparian buffer maintenance plan,
which may include vegetation and open space management and which provides for
the maintenance of permanent vegetation, watercourse and impoundment banks,
edges and water quality.
         (b)   Activities regulated by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, such
as permitted stream or wetland crossings or other obstructions and
encroachments, in accordance with a valid permit.
         (c)   Installation of pervious-surfaced trails along or providing
access to a watercourse or impoundment, or an impervious-surfaced trail
providing access when required or authorized by federal, state or local
regulations.
         (d)   Gardening and exterior yard maintenance, not including mowing or
tilling, unless done in accordance with an approved riparian buffer maintenance
plan.
   E.   Maintenance and protection of riparian setback areas. All owners of
property that includes a riparian buffer setback are encouraged to develop and
implement a riparian buffer maintenance plan and are encouraged to use best
management practices within the riparian buffer setback area to maximize the
functions and benefits for their property and downstream properties to restore
the functions of the riparian buffer area over time. Such practices include,
without limitation:
      (1)   Proper grading to reduce erosion of banks.
      (2)   Mulching of exposed soils.
      (3)   Establishing permanent vegetative cover including shrubs and trees.
      (4)   The use of native plants adapted to the edge of waterway habitat.
      (5)   Removal of invasive plants.
      (6)   Limiting mowing and restoring the natural habitat.
      (7)   Protection and stabilization of banks and impoundment edges.
      (8)   Water quality protection, including regular cleanup and spill
prevention.
      (9)   Reduction of runoff volumes and velocity to prevent downstream
damages and flooding.
         (a)   Installation of rain barrels and other rain water harvesting.
         (b)   Encouraging rain water infiltration with rain gardens or
terraces.
      (10)   Voluntary removal of obstructions, unused equipment, and accessory
uses.
      (11)   Removal of impervious surface cover.
      (12)   Use of porous paving materials.
      (13)   Responsible storage of fuels and chemicals and other potential
pollutants.
   F.   Boundary determination. The applicant is responsible for the
measurement of the applicable riparian buffer setback established in §
600-818B along any watercourses or impoundments located on the lot, and
delineation of such riparian buffer setbacks on any plans for land development.
Measurement is from the edge of bank at the time of a permit application. The
Zoning Administrator, in consultation with the City Engineer, shall be
responsible for reviewing the location of the riparian buffer setback, as
applicable to any specific permit or approval. An applicant shall provide all
plans, maps, and other information that may be necessary to make such a
determination.
   G.   Violations and penalties. Any person who or partnership or corporation
that has violated or permitted the violation of the provisions of this section
shall be subject to zoning enforcement remedies as described in §
600-201.
§ 600-819. Steep Slope Overlay District.
[Added 7-10-2017 by Ord. No. 59-2017]
   A.   Applicability.
      (1)   Any property where at least 10% of the total lot area contains
slopes of 15% or greater shall be part of the Steep Slope Overlay District.
Please refer to the Steep Slope Map included in the Comprehensive Plan. If you
believe the property that you are improving falls in or near an area of steep
slope, professional assistance is required to assess applicability of these
regulations to the property.
      (2)   The Steep Slope Overlay District is intended to guide development
on steep slopes in order to promote public safety and minimize potential
adverse impacts from developing on steep slopes that can pose serious threats
to public safety, property, and the environment. Such impacts include increased
runoff and pollution, soil erosion, slope instability, fire risk, septic system
failure, and structural failure on such slopes.
      (3)   The regulatory provisions apply to development of property located
within the Steep Slope Overlay District and make recommendations for
maintenance of any other properties within the Steep Slope Overlay District.
For the purposes of this section:
         (a)   New development means development of lots with 25% or less
impervious cover prior to the proposed development for which a permit is
requested.
         (b)   Redevelopment means development of lots with greater than 25%
impervious cover prior to the proposed development for which a permit is
requested.
      (4)   Accessory uses and equipment shall, to the extent feasible, not be
located on or extend into the Steep Slope. Any accessory uses 500 square feet
or greater shall require review by the Planning Commission during the plan
review process. Changes to existing accessory uses shall not expand beyond the
existing footprint.
      (5)   All uses permitted by the underlying zoning district are permitted
under the Steep Slope Overlay District unless they conflict with the rules and
regulations set forth in this Part. When there is a conflict between the
regulations of the Steep Slope Overlay District and the underlying district,
the regulations of the Steep Slope Overlay District shall take precedence.
      (6)   Public utilities are permitted within the Steep Slope Overlay
District.
      (7)   It is the applicant's burden to delineate the boundaries of steep
slopes on the applicant's property. The applicant's delineation should be
supported by engineering and/or surveying data or mapping, testimony of a soil
scientist, or other acceptable evidence enabling a reviewer to verify the
applicant's determination of the slopes on the property.
      (8)   Exemptions. Decks and patios that are less than 500 square feet and
allowable accessory uses listed in individual zoning district descriptions
unless 500 square feet or larger.
   B.   Creation of steep slope designations. Slopes in the Steep Slope Overlay
District shall be separated into two different categories depending on their
steepness. Different regulations shall apply to lots depending on the types of
slopes found within. When steep slopes cover at least 10% of the total lot area
each, the regulations that apply to the steepest slopes shall take precedence
when a conflict arises. The two types of slopes are as follows:
      (1)   Moderately steep slopes: Slopes that have a grade of at least 15%
but less than 25%.
      (2)   Very steep slopes: Slopes that have a grade of 25% or greater.
   C.   Regulations that apply to areas that contain steep slopes. The
regulations in this section shall apply to all lots, regardless of size, that
include steep slopes.
      (1)   New development. New development shall be designed to preserve the
integrity of the slopes and local landscape. In an application for a zoning
permit, the applicant shall design the development with respect to the steep
slopes in accordance with the following general limitations and the regulations
in the standards sections below relating to development on moderately steep and
very steep slopes:
         (a)   Any proposed new principal building and use shall not be located
on the area of the lot within the steep slope;
         (b)   Restorations and improvements to existing structures and
buildings located within steep slope areas shall not be expanded beyond their
existing footprint;
         (c)   Identify strategies for avoidance and minimization of impacts
and risks, including erosion and sediment control measures, cut and fill
calculations, vegetation plan and other relevant factors in support of the
permit and per request of the City Engineer or his/her designee.
      (2)   Redevelopment. In an application for redevelopment of property, the
applicant shall design the development plan in the application in a manner that
does not increase slope related hazards, seeks to maintain and restore slope
integrity to the extent feasible, and meets current regulations.
         (a)   If redevelopment within the Steep Slope Overlay District exceeds
steep slope regulations at the time of the passage of Ordinance No. 59-2017 and
is damaged or destroyed in the future, the owner of the property may rebuild it
to its original dimensions and footprint.
         (b)   Restorations and improvements to existing structures and
buildings located within Steep Slope areas shall not be expanded beyond their
existing footprint, unless it is not feasible to avoid Steep Slope areas and
the Zoning Officer or City Planner and City Engineer find the development plan
includes engineering and storm water management practices to reduce slope
related hazards.
         (c)   Additional measures to improve the structural and environmental
integrity of the existing structures are encouraged.
         (d)   The development plan in the application should include
consideration of slope stability and erosion and sediment control measures to
reduce the risk of slope instability impacts from existing and proposed
redevelopment.
      (3)   Exemptions.
         (a)   Decks and patios that are less than 500 square feet.
         (b)   Accessory uses as listed in individual zoning district
descriptions unless 500 square feet or larger.
   D.   General application information.
      (1)   In order to determine compliance with the applicable Steep Slope
Overlay requirements, an application for development shall include the
following information with respect to the portion of the lot within the Steep
Slope Overlay:
         (a)   Maps and schematic plans, prepared by a qualified individual
(i.e. licensed surveyor, engineer, landscape architect, etc., identifying the
location and natural grades of topography of steep slopes and proposed
modifications, using two-foot contours.
            [1]    Location, dimensions, and footprint of any proposed or
existing building or structure, equipment and impervious coverage and proposed
modifications.
            [2]   Identifying the cut and fill areas and final grades of the
land development.
            [3]   Identifying the location of erosion and sediment control
measures to include but not limited to silt fence, stormwater outflows, silt
socks, temporary soil stockpiles, etc.
         (b)   A planting plan that includes plant species, locations, and
coverage of shrubs and trees.
         (c)   A plan providing for the maintenance of permanent vegetation,
stable slopes, grading, and integrity of the area.
      (2)   Specific application requirements for steep slopes. When applying
for a zoning permit that involves construction on slopes that are either
moderately steep or very steep, the applicant shall provide the following
information to the Zoning Administrator or City Planner, in addition to the
requirements laid out in §
600-301, D:
         (a)   A plan by a registered professional engineer or surveyor which
accurately locates the proposed use with respect to the Steep Slope Overlay
District boundaries, with all pertinent information describing the proposal,
and a topographical survey with contour elevations using two-foot contours.
         (b)   A plan of proposed development or use of the site, conforming to
the preliminary plan requirements of the Subdivision and Land Development
Ordinance, with two-foot contours throughout the steep slope areas proposed for
development or use. Contours shall be accurately drawn from on-site survey or
aerial photographic sources acceptable to the City Engineer or his/her
designee.
         (c)   Proposed modifications to the existing topography and vegetative
cover, as well as the means of accommodating storm water runoff.
         (d)   Specifications for building construction and materials,
including cutting, filling, grading, storage of materials, and the location of
water supply and sewerage facilities.
         (e)   Documentation of any additional engineering and/or conservation
techniques designed to alleviate environmental problems that may be created by
the proposed activities, in compliance with municipal sedimentation and erosion
control regulations.
         (f)   Written confirmation from the City of Reading Fire Department
that emergency access is satisfactory to provide adequate fire protection.
   E.   Standards for moderately steep slopes. The following regulations apply
to new development, and, to the extent feasible, to redevelopment, in areas
that contain moderately steep slopes:
      (1)   The regulations in this section shall apply to all lots, regardless
of size, where at least 10% of the land contains slopes that are at least 15%
but less than 25%.
      (2)   The maximum disturbance area of the land that has been exclusively
identified as moderately steep slopes shall be limited to 40% of the total area
of the steep slopes on the lot or property being developed.
      (3)   The maximum impervious coverage for the proposed use specified by
the underlying zoning district shall be reduced by 15%.
      (4)   The principal building shall not be located on the area of the lot
that contains moderately steep slopes. If the entire area contains such slopes,
the applicant must provide the information required in the specific application
requirements for steep slopes to the Zoning Administrator or City Planner
before construction may begin.
      (5)   Accessory uses and driveways may be located on or traverse through
moderately steep slopes, with the following limitations:
         (a)   The maximum grade of a road or driveway may not exceed 10%.
         (b)   Driveways shall follow the natural topography of the land if
possible.
         (c)   Unless exempted under Subsection C.(3)(b) above, if accessory
uses involve any disturbance of the land, the applicant shall provide the
information outlined in the Specific application requirements for steep slopes
to the Zoning Administrator or City Planner before any construction may begin.
      (6)   The maximum building coverage for the proposed use specified by the
underlying zoning district shall be reduced by 15%.
      (7)   Uses permitted in the preservation zone may be permitted on
moderately steep slopes.
      (8)   No trees with a diameter at breast height (DBH) of eight inches or
more shall be removed from moderately steep slope areas, except in accordance
with a plan for the property developed in accordance with sustainable forestry
management practices submitted by the applicant.
      (9)   On-lot sewage disposal systems shall be permitted when approved by
the City of Reading Sewage Enforcement Officer and/or the Pennsylvania
Department of Environmental Protection.
      (10)   Finished slopes shall not exceed 25%, unless the applicant can
demonstrate that steeper slopes can be stabilized and maintained adequately to
the satisfaction of the Zoning Administrator or City Planner in consultation
with the City Engineer.
      (11)   All cuts shall be supported by retaining walls or other
appropriate retaining structures when, depending upon the nature of the soil
characteristics, such structures are approved by the Zoning Administrator or
City Planner, in consultation with the City Engineer, in order to prevent
erosion.
      (12)   Any fill placed on the lot shall be properly stabilized and, when
found necessary depending upon existing slopes and soil types, supported by
retaining walls or other appropriate structures as approved by the Zoning
Administrator or City Planner, in consultation with the City Engineer.
      (13)   Disturbance of moderately steep slopes shall be completed within
one construction season. Slopes shall not be left bare during winter and spring
thaw seasons.
      (14)   Permanent vegetative cover must be planted on moderately steep
slopes within three days of finishing construction or grading. If permanent
vegetative cover is not established to cover 100% of the steep slope area it
must be replanted until such permanent cover is established.
   F.   Standards for very steep slopes. The following regulations apply to new
development, and, to the extent feasible, to redevelopment, in areas that
contain very steep slopes:
      (1)   The regulations in this section shall apply to all lots, regardless
of size, where at least 10% of the land contains slopes that have a grade of
25% or higher.
      (2)   The maximum disturbance area of the land that has been exclusively
identified as very steep slopes shall be limited to 10% of the total area of
the very steep slopes on the lot or property being developed.
      (3)   The maximum impervious coverage for the proposed use specified by
the underlying zoning district shall be reduced by 20%.
      (4)   Buildings or principal uses shall not be located on a very steep
slopes.
      (5)   In addition to the above restrictions, all accessory uses and
driveways shall not be located on very steep slopes if there is the possibility
of placing them in less steep areas:
         (a)   If the applicant has no alternative but to place those accessory
uses and driveways on or through very steep slopes, these uses may be permitted
by the Planning Commission during the plan review process.
         (b)   The applicant shall provide the information required in the
specific application requirements for steep slopes to the Zoning Administrator
or City Planner as part of the process of obtaining a zoning permit before any
construction may take place on such slopes.
         (c)   The maximum grade of a road or driveway may not exceed 10%.
         (d)   Driveways shall follow the natural topography of the land if
possible.
      (6)   Uses permitted in the preservation zone may be permitted on very
steep slopes, provided that they shall not include any structures, impervious
roads, driveways, or parking areas.
      (7)   No trees with a diameter at breast height (DBH) of eight inches or
more shall be removed from very steep slope areas, except in accordance with a
plan for the property developed in accordance with sustainable forestry
management practices submitted by the applicant.
      (8)   The use of on-lot sewage disposal systems on very steep slopes
shall not be permitted.
      (9)   Finished slopes shall not exceed 33% unless the applicant can
demonstrate that steeper slopes can be stabilized and maintained adequately to
the satisfaction of the Zoning Administrator or City Planner in consultation
with the City Engineer.
      (10)   All cuts shall be supported by retaining walls or other
appropriate retaining structures when, depending upon the nature of the soil
characteristics, such structures are approved by the Zoning Administrator or
City Planner, in consultation with the City Engineer, in order to prevent
erosion.
      (11)   Any fill placed on the lot shall be properly stabilized based upon
slopes and soil types, which may include compaction and other construction
methods and retaining walls and other appropriate structures as required and
approved by the Zoning Administrator or City Planner, in consultation with the
City Engineer.
      (12)   Disturbance of very steep slopes shall be completed within one
construction season. Slopes shall not be left bare during winter and spring
thaw seasons.
      (13)   Permanent vegetative cover must be planted on very steep slopes
within three days of finishing construction or grading. If permanent vegetative
cover is not established to cover 100% of the steep slope area it must be
replanted until such permanent cover is established.
   G.    Best practices and maintenance of property in Steep Slope Overlay
District. Landowners of lots within the Steep Slope Overlay District are
encouraged to identify areas of their lots which may be subject to the
regulations in this section in the event that new construction or redevelopment
is planned. The regulations serve to clarify expectations for all landowners in
the Steep Slope Overlay District, and model best practices such as preservation
of permanent vegetation, especially shrubs and trees, minimization of
impervious surfaces, and maintenance of storm water control features to reduce
risks to people, property and the environment from loss of slope integrity.
   H.   Enforcement. Enforcement of this provision shall be carried out by the
Zoning Administrator in accordance with §
600-204, §
600-205, and §
600-206 of the City of Reading Zoning Ordinance.
   I.   Limitation of municipal liability. The degree of steep slope protection
sought by the provisions of these regulations is considered reasonable for
regulatory purposes. These regulations do not imply that areas outside the
Steep Slope Overlay District or permitted uses within the zoning district will
be free from erosion or slope instability. These regulations shall not create
liability on the part of the City of Reading or any officer or employee thereof
for any damages that result from reliance on these regulations or any
administrative decision lawfully made hereunder.
   J.   Validity and severability. See §
600-106 of the City of Reading Zoning Ordinance for details.
Part 9
General Provisions
§ 600-901. Application to all zoning districts.
This Part 9 shall be applicable to all buildings, structures, uses and lots,
regardless of zoning district.
§ 600-902. Limit of one principal use per lot; limit on dwellings per lot;
limit on dwelling occupancy; alley frontage.
   A.   No more than one principal use shall be permitted on a lot in a
residential district, unless specifically permitted by this chapter. Where more
than one principal use is allowed on a lot, the most restrictive requirement
shall apply.
   B.   Off-street parking shall be required for the total of all uses on the
lot, unless provided otherwise in this chapter.
   C.   A lot shall only be occupied by one dwelling unit unless the provisions
of this chapter specifically allow two or more dwelling units. This provision
shall not limit condominium ownership where the dwellings would be able to meet
all of the same dimensional requirements as if fee simple lot lines would be
drawn for non-condominium ownership.
   D.   An accessory building shall not be converted into a dwelling unit
unless specifically allowed by this chapter.
   E.   A new principal building shall not be allowed if the lot only abuts an
alley and not a street, unless the applicant proves to the Zoning Hearing Board
as a special exception that no other reasonable use of the property is
feasible.
   F.   Unless otherwise stated, each dwelling unit shall be limited to
occupancy by one household, which shall meet the definition of one "family" in
§
600-2202.
§ 600-903. Multiple occupancy.
   A.   Occupancy of a principal commercial or industrial building or lot by
more than one use is specifically allowed, provided that all other requirements
of this chapter are satisfied. Each use within a multiple use building shall be
required to apply for separate zoning permits. The parking requirements shall
be met for each use, and the dimensional requirements for the most restricted
use shall apply. This provision by itself shall not be used to allow outdoor
vending.
   B.   If a building includes multiple indoor retail sales businesses, each
retail sales business shall have its own pedestrian access onto a street,
sidewalk or hallway, and shall be separated from other retail sales businesses
by a wall, unless the use is specifically approved as a kiosk, farmer's market,
flea market or antique mall. [Added 2-14-2011 by Ord. No. 8-2011]
§ 600-904. Side yard setback in R-3 and C-R Districts.
See also Note 3 in the table of dimensional requirements for the R-3 District
(§
600-804A) and Note 1 in the table of dimensional requirements for the C-
R District (§
600-808A).
§ 600-905. Proposed right-of-way.
When a lot has frontage on a public street which is or will be subject to a
widening of the right- of-way, all required dimensional requirements,
restrictions and limitations shall be measured from the edge of the public or
established ultimate right-of-way as specified on official County Geographic
Information System records, or where not available in such source, in the City
Topographical Survey or the City's adopted Official Map.
§ 600-906. Emergency access.
Emergency access shall be provided by way of paved streets, alleys, hard
surface and/or marked stabilized turf driveways along at least three of four
sides of all buildings that have a width or length exceeding 250 feet. No
emergency access shall be located more than 200 feet from the building it
services. If emergency access requirements are satisfied by constructing a
sidewalk, such sidewalk shall be at least 10 feet wide and shall have a minimum
radius of 50 feet at turns and intersections and be able to support an
emergency vehicle.
§ 600-907. Frontage along a street.
A new lot shall be only be allowed if it will abut a public street, or a
private street or parking court that the City approves as meeting such purpose
after a review by the City Law Department and Department of Public Works. A new
apartment building or commercial or industrial building shall not be
constructed unless it is on a lot that is adjacent to such a street or approved
parking court. An alley with a cartway width of less than 16 feet or a right-
of-way width of less than 20 feet shall not, by itself, be used to meet the
requirements of this section.
§ 600-908. Front yards.
All areas fronting a public street shall be considered as front yards, with all
uses, buildings or structures regulated accordingly. For corner lots, the rear
yard will be considered the yard opposite the street address on the maps in the
Department of Public Works office.
§ 600-909. Front yard exception.
   A.   By administrative review of the Zoning Administrator, the front yard of
a proposed building may be decreased in depth to the average alignment of a
majority of existing buildings on the same block frontage (same side) located
within 100 feet of the proposed building.
   B.   This subsection applies in place of the standard front yard setback
requirements in certain cases in the R-3, C-C, C-N and C-R districts so that
the front yard building setback is consistent with the average existing
setback. This section shall only apply if more than 75% of the lots within the
block frontage are occupied by a principal building. The required front yard
building setback shall apply from a public street right-of-way for a new
principal building. A majority of the front building wall and/or the front
porch of such new building shall meet such required building setback. An area
used for outdoor seating of a restaurant shall be considered the same as a
front porch.
      (1)   The required front yard building setback shall be based upon the
average setback of all existing principal buildings that are on the same side
of the same block frontage of the street. The required front yard building
setback shall not vary from the average setback by more than five feet to the
front or to the back of the average setback.
         (a)   For example, if two lots on one side have existing five-foot
setbacks, and two lots on the second side have existing fifteen-foot setbacks,
the average shall be 10 feet. Therefore, if the average setback is 10 feet, the
minimum front yard building setback for a new building shall be five feet and
the maximum front yard building setback shall be 15 feet.
      (2)   If one existing building on another lot has a front setback that is
more than 25 feet different in setback from the average of the other buildings,
it shall not be considered in the average. A lot that is not occupied by a
principal building shall not be considered in the average.
      (3)   If a lot includes more than one principal building, this provision
shall apply to the building that is closest to the front. For a corner lot,
this provision shall apply to the one street line that has the most principal
buildings fronting upon it, and shall not require a smaller setback that is
otherwise required along the second street line.
      (4)   If the Zoning Administrator determines that there is not an average
front yard building setback, then the minimum front yard building setback shall
apply.
      (5)   A larger setback may still be required if necessary to comply with
City sight clearance regulations at an intersection.
   C.   An unenclosed stoop or steps may intrude into the front yard setback.
   D.   The removal or enclosure of a front porch shall need special exception
approval. The Zoning Hearing Board shall consider whether the change would harm
the character of the block, considering the presence of porches on other
buildings within the block. The Board may place conditions upon the design of
an enclosure or a replacement porch to maintain consistency with other
buildings on the block. This requirement shall not apply in any of the
following cases:
      (1)   If the porch removal or enclosure will require City approval under
Chapter 295, Historic Districts;
      (2)   If the porch includes less than 20 square feet of floor area;
      (3)   If the porch covers historic architectural details of the facade
and the porch was not original to the structure; or
      (4)   If the porch was added after 1950.
§ 600-910. Projections.
   A.   Porches, decks, patios and stoops that are open on all sides (except
the side attached to a building) and which may have a roof or awning, may be
placed in a required front yard and rear yard, provided they do not extend for
a distance into more than one-third of the required front yard and/or rear yard
area. In any case, such feature may intrude up to 10 feet into a front yard
setback. A raised deck shall still meet side yard setbacks. An open or lattice-
enclosed fire escape or fire-rated outside stairway may project into any yard
not more than 50% of the distance from the building wall to the lot line.
Drive-through canopies shall conform to §
600-1004 of this chapter.
   B.   An unenclosed ramp for wheelchairs shall be allowed to intrude into a
required setback as is necessary to provide access to the building or facility.
Where access is possible using a ramp to the side or rear of a building, such
side or rear access shall be used instead of intruding into a required minimum
front yard setback.
   C.   A standard chimney connected to the heating source and connected to the
principal building may intrude up to three feet into a setback. An eave or
similar overhang of a roof may intrude up to three feet into a setback.
§ 600-911. Height exceptions.
The maximum structure height specified for each district shall not apply to:
water towers, decorative clock or bell towers, steeples and religious symbols
attached to places of worship, electrical transmission lines, elevator shafts,
skylights, chimneys, heating/ventilation/air- conditioning equipment,
industrial mechanical equipment areas that are not occupied by humans, or other
appurtenances usually required to be and customarily placed above the roof
level and not intended for human occupancy. However, all features shall still
comply with the height regulations within the Airport Approach Zones. Wind
turbines and telecommunications towers and antenna, where allowed, shall meet
the applicable height limits for such uses, as opposed to the height limit of
the district. See §
600-918 for solar collection devices.
§ 600-912. Lighting control.17
   A.   Lighting (other than streetlights and natural sources) shall be shaded,
shielded and directed to prevent the creation of glare or a light intensity
that will be nuisance to residents, pedestrians or motorists.
   B.   Spillover. Between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m., a sign or
other illumination utilized on private property shall not cause a spillover of
light of an intensity in excess of 2.0 horizontal footcandles onto another lot
that is not in common ownership. This maximum intensity shall be reduced to 1.0
horizontal footcandles between 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. on a principally
residential lot in a residential zoning district. The spillover shall be
measured at a height of five feet above grade. Overhead lighting of public
recreational facilities, beyond what is necessary for security, shall not shine
directly onto dwellings between 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m.
   C.   Streetlighting exempted. This section shall not apply to:
      (1)   Streetlighting that is owned, financed or maintained by a public
utility, the City or the state; or
      (2)   An individual porch light (not including a spot light).
   D.   Height of lights. No luminaire, spotlight or other light source that is
within 200 feet of a lot line of an existing dwelling or approved residential
lot shall be placed at a height exceeding 35 feet above the average surrounding
ground level. This limitation shall not apply to:
      (1)   Lights needed for air safety;
      (2)   Lights intended solely to illuminate an architectural feature of a
building;
      (3)   Lighting of outdoor public recreation facilities or stadiums; or
      (4)   Lighting of a wall-mounted sign that is allowed to be placed at a
taller height.
   E.   Diffused. All light sources, including signs, shall be properly
diffused as needed with a translucent or similar cover or shielded to prevent
exposed bulbs from being directly visible from streets, public sidewalks,
dwellings or adjacent lots. This provision shall not apply to LED lights or to
bulbs of 25 or less watts.
   F.   Shielding. All light sources, including signs, shall be carefully
directed and placed to prevent the lighting from creating a nuisance to
reasonable persons in adjacent dwellings, and to prevent the lighting from
shining into the eyes of passing motorists.
   G.   Flickering. Flashing, flickering or strobe lighting are prohibited,
except for nonadvertising seasonal flashing lights between October 30 and
January 10.
   H.   Gasoline sales canopies. Any canopy over gasoline pumps shall have
light fixtures recessed into the canopy or screened by an extension around the
bottom of the canopy so that lighting elements are not visible from another lot
or street.
   I.   Lighting of horizontal surfaces. For the lighting of predominantly
horizontal surfaces such as parking areas and vehicle sales areas, lighting
fixtures shall be aimed downward and shall include full-cutoff measures as
needed to properly direct the light and to meet the maximum spillover
requirements of Subsection B and to prevent glare onto streets. The City may
require that light fixtures for nonresidential uses be placed along the street
and be aimed away from the street in a manner that also minimizes light shining
onto residential lots, or that shielding and reflective devices be used with
light fixtures to aim the light away from the dwellings.
   J.   Lighting of nonhorizontal surfaces. For lighting of predominantly
nonhorizontal surfaces, such building walls and wall signs, lighting fixtures
shall be fully shielded and shall be aimed so as to not project light: towards
neighboring residences; past the object being illuminated; or skyward. Any
lighting of a flag shall use a beam no wider than necessary to illuminate the
flag. Any lighting of a new billboard should be attached to the top of the
billboard and project downward.
   K.   Upward lighting and lasers. Spotlights shall not be directed upwards
into the sky. Laser lights shall not be directed into the sky to attract
attention to a business or activity. This subsection shall not apply to
theaters, arenas or performing or visual arts centers in the C-C District, or
as part of a City-sponsored special event.
   L.   Neon and similar lighting. The use of neon, argon and similar lighting
shall be prohibited within residential districts for commercial advertising
purposes if it is visible from a dwelling on another lot.
17.   NOTE: See also sign lighting provisions in §
600-1714.
§ 600-913. Shade tree requirement.
A minimum of one shade tree per newly constructed principal residential unit
and/or business establishment shall be required, which shall meet species and
planting requirements set forth by the City Shade Tree Commission and
Chapter 515, Subdivision and Land Development. If a new principal commercial,
industrial or institutional building is constructed, a minimum of one shade
tree shall be required for each 50 feet of abutting street length. Such trees
are not required to be evenly spaced. The location of the trees shall be
subject to approval by the designated City staffperson, and do not necessarily
need to be placed within a street right-of- way. If an application will be
required by
Chapter 515, Subdivision and Land Development, to provide similar tree
planting, then the SALDO requirement shall apply in place of this chapter
requirement.
§ 600-914. Urban renewal projects.
In recognition that enabling statutes are not intended to give to
municipalities authority to control the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania or its
agents, and in recognition that the United States is supreme when it operates
within its powers, and that neither a state nor its political subdivisions may
interfere with it, the City hereby declares that this chapter shall yield to
the use, height, bulk and area controls, and other such controls contained
within this chapter, established by either the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania or
the United States of America, when such controls are lawfully established
pursuant to legislation governing urban renewal, consistent with a City-
approved urban renewal plan. The City acknowledges that the strict enforcement
of the regulations contained herein would, if those regulations were
inconsistent with lawful urban renewal controls, constitute interference with
the United States and/or the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania in the legitimate
exercise of its/their constitutional duties.
   A.   This section shall extend to a redevelopment authority, where
authorized by City Council and which is operating under authority granted to it
by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
   B.   In the event that there are no urban renewal parcel controls specified,
the zoning district standards established in this chapter shall apply.
§ 600-915. Odors and dust.
No use shall generate odors or dust that are offensive to persons of average
sensitivities beyond the boundaries of the subject lot.
§ 600-916. Garbage dumpster screening and location.
   A.   Site plans submitted to the City shall show the proposed location of
any garbage (includes refuse) dumpsters. The Zoning Administrator may require
that such proposed location be modified to provide compatibility with adjacent
uses. [Amended 2-14-2011 by Ord. No. 8-2011]
   B.   Garbage dumpsters shall be surrounded on all sides by a solid fencing,
wall, landscaping and compatible gate with a minimum height of five feet if the
dumpster would be visible from a street or a residential lot. This section is
not intended to regulate temporary dumpsters for construction or renovation
debris, while a permit for the lot is active. This section shall also not
regulate the use of a dumpster on a lot for up to 30 total days per calendar
year.
§ 600-917. Noise control.
   A.   No principal or accessory use its operations or activities shall
generate a sound level exceeding the limits established in the table below,
when measured at the specified locations:
 
Sound Level Limits by Receiving Land Use/District
                                                                                                                                                             Maximum
Land Use or Zoning District Receiving the Noise                              Hours/Days                                                                      Sound
                                                                                                                                                             Level
                                                                             1)   7:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m. other than Sundays, Christmas Day, Thanksgiving 1)   62
A.   At a lot line of a residential use in a residential district         Day, New Year's Day, Labor Day and Memorial Day                                 dBA
                                                                             2)   10:00 p.m. to 7:00 a.m., plus all of the following days: Sundays,       2)   55
                                                                             Christmas, Thanksgiving, New Year's, Easter Sunday, Labor Day and Memorial Day  dBA
                                                                             1)   Same as above                                                           1)   65
B.   Lot line of a principal residential use that is not in a residential                                                                                 dBA
district                                                                     2)   Same as above                                                           2)   62
                                                                                                                                                             dBA
C.   Any lot line other than A. or B.                                     All times and days                                                              70 dBA
 
Note: dBA means "A"-weighted decibel.
   B.   The maximum permissible sound level limits set forth in the above table
shall not apply to any of the following noise sources:
      (1)   Sound needed to alert people about an emergency.
      (2)   Repair or installation of utilities or construction of structures,
sidewalks or streets between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m., except for
clearly emergency repairs which are not restricted by time.
      (3)   Lawnmowers, snowblowers, leaf blowers, and household power tools.
      (4)   Agricultural activities, livestock and other animals.
      (5)   Public celebrations specifically authorized by City Council or a
county, state or federal government agency or body.
      (6)   Unamplified human voices.
      (7)   Routine ringing of bells and chimes by a place of worship or
municipal clock.
      (8)   Vehicles lawfully operating on a public street, railroads and
aircraft.
      (9)   Matters that are regulated by
Chapter 387, Noise.
§ 600-918. Green incentives.
   A.   Areas of a balcony or the roof over a building or parking structure
that are primarily covered by attractive vegetation and accessory walkways and
are accessible to and usable by persons, and are designed to absorb significant
runoff shall not count as impervious area for the purposes of calculating
impervious coverage under this chapter. (See the City stormwater regulations
18  to determine whether these areas would be considered impervious for the
purposes of the stormwater requirements.)
      (1)   However, in no case shall this incentive reduce the amount of
ground level vegetative area to less than 5% of a lot in a commercial or
industrial district, or 10% in an R-3 District or 25% in all other districts.
[Amended 2-14-2011 by Ord. No. 8-2011]
   B.   Areas above underground parking that are covered by attractive
vegetation and are accessible to and usable by persons, and are designed to
absorb significant runoff, shall not count as building coverage for the
purposes of calculating building coverage under this chapter.
   C.   For each 1,000 square feet of building floor area that achieves
"certification" or a higher level under the Leadership in Energy and
Environmental Design (LEED) Green Building Rating System, an additional 300
square feet of building coverage shall be allowed beyond the maximum building
coverage requirement.
      (1)   If a building is approved to be certified as a condition of an
incentive under this chapter and certification is not met after completion,
then the applicant is required to make modifications to the project until such
certification is received. The City may require that a LEED certified
professional and the building owner provide written evidence during the
construction process that the features are being installed that were part of
the proposed certification.
      (2)   However, in no case shall this incentive reduce the amount of
ground-level vegetative area to less than 5% of a lot in a commercial or
industrial district, or 10% in an R-3 District or 25% in another district.
   D.   Solar collection devices may extend a maximum of 15 feet above the
maximum height limit and are a permitted-by-right use in all districts. Solar
collection devices serving signs may extend 10 feet above the maximum height of
the sign.
   E.   If solar collection devices are installed above vehicle parking, such
structures shall not be regulated as part of building coverage.
18.   Editor's Note: See
Ch. 505, Stormwater Management.
Part 10
Accessory Uses
§ 600-1001. General requirements.
The following regulations shall apply to any and all accessory uses, buildings
and structures, wherever situated:
   A.   Buildings or structures attached to or forming an integral part of a
principal building or structure and utilized for an accessory use shall not be
considered as accessory buildings or structures and shall conform to all
requirements for a principal structure for the district in which situated.
   B.   Accessory buildings, structures or uses shall not be located between
the principal building and any public street right-of-way, except that a
detached vehicle garage of a dwelling may be allowed within the second front
yard on a corner lot, provided it is behind the dwelling.
   C.   Offices to sell dwellings in a development are permitted accessory
uses, but such uses must be removed or converted to an allowed use upon the
sale of the last on-site residential unit offered for sale. A sales office may
also be temporarily located in a permanent dwelling that is later used as a
dwelling.
   D.   All in-ground swimming pools, as defined in §
600-2202, shall conform to all requirements as a structure for the district in
which situated. The water surface of a pool shall not be less than seven feet
from the side and rear property lines. Pools shall meet the fence and gate
requirements of
Chapter 180, Construction Codes.
   E.   In-ground pools as defined and regulated in Chapter 527, Part 1,
Private Swimming Pools, of the Code of the City of Reading shall be included in
computing impervious coverage. The water surface of a swimming pool shall be
set back a minimum of 10 feet from any lot line or street right-of-way line.
   F.   Human habitation in accessory buildings is prohibited.
§ 600-1002. Private garages.
A private garage (which may include a carport) for vehicle parking and
household storage that is accessory to a dwelling is allowed within the rear
setback, provided any vehicle garage door is set back a minimum of three feet
from an alley and provided the following additional requirements are met:
   A.   The garage structure shall not exceed 25 feet in height.
   B.   The garage shall not exceed one story, except a second story may be
used for household storage.
   C.   A garage that is larger than 600 square feet in building floor area
shall meet the principal building setbacks.
§ 600-1003. Storage sheds, greenhouses and animal shelters.19
Storage sheds and greenhouses located within a required yard shall not exceed
280 square feet in floor area and 10 feet in height. Accessory animal shelters
for pets shall not exceed 25 square feet in floor area. A three-foot minimum
rear and side yard setback shall apply to such storage sheds, greenhouses and
shelters, except no setback is required if the principal buildings are attached
along the same lot line. The maximum building coverage requirement for the
district shall still be met.
19.   Editor's Note: Amended during codification (see
Ch. 1, General Provisions, Part 2).
§ 600-1004. Drive-through service lanes and canopies.
The following shall apply to drive-through lanes and canopy structures:
   A.   A drive-through lane or canopy shall not be located within a required
front yard.
   B.   No drive-through lane or canopy shall be situated less than two feet
from a lot line, other than as provided in Subsection C below.
   C.   A drive-through lane or canopy situated adjacent to a residential
property shall be no less than 10 feet from the lot line, with a buffer strip
10 feet in width and screening provided accordance with §
600-1401 of this chapter.
   D.   No canopy shall be less than eight feet six inches above grade.
   E.   All signage, except clearance or directional signs, are prohibited from
portions of canopies that are located with a minimum setback.
§ 600-1005. Entertainment (as an accessory use).
Live entertainment may be permitted as accessory to a restaurant, tavern or
nightclub use in the C-C, C-R, C-N, C-H and M-C Zoning Districts, provided that
the use meets the following requirements:
   A.   The principal use shall be a permitted, special exception, conditional
or legal nonconforming use.
   B.   All performances on a property in the C-R or C-N Districts that can be
heard at a principal residential use on another lot shall begin no earlier than
7:00 a.m. and terminate no later than 12:00 midnight and be limited to Friday
and/or Saturday.
§ 600-1006. Home occupations.
The district regulations, the "home occupation" definitions and this section
distinguish between minor home occupations, which are typically permitted by
right, and major home occupations, which typically need special exception
approval by the Zoning Hearing Board.
   A.   All home occupations shall meet the following requirements:
      (1)   The use shall only be conducted by permanent residents of the
dwelling and a maximum of one employee working on the premises at a time, or
operating a vehicle that is parked at the dwelling overnight, who do not live
within the dwelling.
      (2)   The use shall be conducted indoors, in a principal and/or accessory
building. No outdoor storage or display related to the home occupation shall be
permitted. No changes shall occur to the exterior of a building that would
reduce its residential appearance as viewed from a street.
      (3)   The use shall occupy an area that is not greater than 25% of the
total floor area of the principal dwelling unit. The use shall clearly be
secondary to the residential use.
      (4)   For a major home occupation, the Zoning Hearing Board shall require
additional off- street parking if the Board determines it is necessary for
customer parking.
      (5)   The use shall not routinely require delivery by tractor-trailer
trucks.
      (6)   No excavating equipment shall be parked outside overnight on a
residential lot or an adjacent street as part of a home occupation. See truck
parking restrictions in
Chapter 564, Vehicle Nuisances, Storage of. [Amended 8-26-2013 by Ord. No. 35-
2013]
      (7)   No equipment or machinery shall be permitted that produces noise,
noxious odor, vibration, glare, electrical or electronic interference
detectable on another property. The use shall not involve the storage or use of
hazardous, flammable or explosive substances, other than types and amounts
typically found on a residential property. The use shall not involve the
storage or use of "toxic" or "highly hazardous" substances, as each is defined
by federal regulations. [Amended 2-14-2011 by Ord. No. 8-2011]
      (8)   A home occupation shall not be conducted in a manner that is
perceptible to other residents between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 7:30 a.m.
      (9)   Any tutoring or instruction shall be limited to a maximum of four
students at a time.
      (10)   A barber or beauty shop shall be considered a major home
occupation and not include any nonresident employees. See also §
600-1103.
      (11)   The main office of a medical doctor, chiropractor or dentist shall
not be permitted as a home occupation.
      (12)   See sign requirements in §
600-1703B.
      (13)   The Zoning Hearing Board shall deny a major home occupation
application, or limit its intensity through conditions, if the Board determines
the use would be too intense for the proposed location. In making such
determination, the Board shall review the likely amounts of traffic, the types
of deliveries needed, the types of operations involved and related nuisances,
the amount of off-street and on-street parking that is available, the density
of the neighborhood, whether the use would be adjacent to another dwelling, and
setbacks from other dwellings.
      (14)   The use shall not involve manufacturing, other than of custom
crafts and sewing. The use shall not involve commercial repair of motor
vehicles.
      (15)   The use may include sales using telephone, mail order or
electronic methods. On-site retail sales shall be prohibited, except for sales
of hair care products as accessory to a barber/beauty shop.
      (16)   A zoning permit shall be required for any home occupation.
      (17)   Care facilities shall not be home occupations. [Added 3-10-2025 by
Ord. No. 15A-2025]
   B.   Both major and minor home occupations shall meet the requirements
listed in Subsection A above. A zoning permit is required for both major and
minor home occupations; however, the zoning permit for the minor home
occupation shall be issued without a fee. The following additional requirements
shall apply to a "minor home occupation": [Amended 12-16-2013 by Ord. No. 83-
2013]
      (1)   The use shall not routinely involve routine daily visits to the
home occupation by customers.
      (2)   The use shall only involve the following activities:
         (a)   Work routinely conducted within an office.
         (b)   Custom sewing and fabric and basket crafts.
         (c)   Cooking and baking for off-site sales and use.
         (d)   Creation of visual arts (such as painting or wood carving).
         (e)   Repairs to and assembly of computers and computer peripherals.
         (f)   A construction tradesperson, provided that no nonresident
employees routinely operate from the lot. 20
20.   Editor's Note: Original Subsection B(3), regarding zoning permits for
minor home occupation, which immediately followed this subsection, was repealed
2-14-2011 by Ord. No. 8-2011.
§ 600-1007. Portable home storage units.
See
Chapter 502, Part 1, Portable Home Storage Units, of the Code of the City of
Reading.
§ 600-1008. Off-premises parking areas in the R-3 and C-C Districts.
[Amended 2-14-2011 by Ord. No. 8-2011]
Off-premises off-street parking areas shall be permitted in the R-3 and C-
C Zoning Districts as accessory to lawful uses, provided the design and
construction of the parking area complies with the standards set forth in §
600-1602 of this chapter and meets the buffering requirements of this chapter.
See restrictions in the C-C District provisions in §
600-807B concerning service of the general public. Prior to the issuance of a
permit, a site plan shall be reviewed and approved by the Department of Public
Works.
§ 600-1009. Vending machines and used clothing receptacles.
   A.   No commercial vending machine(s) shall be permitted outside or inside
of any principally residential property located in any zoning district within
the City limits. However, vending machines may be located inside a multiunit
building if they are intended to only serve residents of that building. Vending
machines, which for the purpose of this chapter shall include, but not be
limited to, soft drink and snack machines, newspaper and similar periodical
boxes and pay telephones, shall not occupy more than 25% of the sidewalk width
in the public right-of-way, and shall be located to maintain a minimum of four
feet of clear wheelchair-accessible sidewalk width. Automatic transaction
machines shall not be allowed within a public street right-of-way.
   B.   Outdoor receptacles for receipt of used clothing shall only be placed
on a lot if the landowner or tenant has provided permission. Such receptacles
shall not be placed less than 50 feet from a dwelling on another lot and not
less than 30 feet from the curb of a public street.
§ 600-1010. Amusement devices.
Electronic amusement devices shall be permitted as accessory uses to a
principal commercial use, at a ratio of one amusement device per 400 square
feet of area accessible to customers within the business. This minimum ratio
shall not apply to a use that is approved as an amusement arcade. For the
purpose of this section, kitchens, storage areas, rest facilities, office areas
and passageways shall not be included in computing customer accessible area.
Each public and private restaurant or tavern, regardless of its size, shall be
permitted at least two amusement devices. No amusement device shall be audible
beyond the premises within which it is located.
§ 600-1011. Yard and garage sales.
[Amended 2-14-2011 by Ord. No. 8-2011]
Yard and garage sales shall only be allowed as accessory to a residential lot.
Customarily incidental accessory yard and garage sales are permitted, provided
the following requirements are met in residential districts:
   A.   Yard and garage sales in residential districts shall not occur more
than four times per year per lot, and each sale shall not exceed two days.
   B.   Only used items may be sold in a residential district.
   C.   Hours of operation shall be between 8:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m.
   D.   At no time shall any part of the sale activity obstruct pedestrian and
wheelchair access along a public sidewalk.
§ 600-1012. Alternative energy systems.
[Amended 10-26-2015 by Ord. No. 58-2015]
   A.   Applicability. This section of the Zoning Ordinance shall apply to all
alternative energy systems that are proposed to be constructed after the
effective date of this Zoning Ordinance. Alternative energy systems constructed
prior to the effective date of this section shall not be required to meet the
requirements specified under this section, except for the maintenance and
removal provisions found in §
600-1012J(2) through (5). Any physical modification to an existing alternative
energy system that alters the size, type or generating capacities of the
facilities shall require a permit and shall comply with the applicable
provisions specified under this section.
   B.   Permitted as accessory use. Alternative energy systems designed and
utilized as an accessory use, which may include geothermal heat pumps, solar
energy systems, wind turbines, and water-powered energy, shall be permitted as
an accessory use as described in Part 8, subject to the applicable provisions
specified under this Zoning Ordinance.
   C.   Authorized as primary or supplemental energy source. Alternative energy
systems as an accessory use may be utilized as the primary or supplemental
energy source for the principal use on the lot where it is located in
accordance with Zoning Ordinance Part 8, Districts. Surplus energy may be
exchanged, transferred and/or sold to a public utility company, provided that
such surplus energy is exchanged, transferred and/or sold in accordance with
the provisions established by the Public Utility Commission and Public Utility
Code.
   D.   General requirements. The following provisions shall apply to all types
of alternative energy systems:
      (1)   Alternative energy systems shall be permitted provided that such
facilities are located on a lot with a permitted use in accordance with the
applicable provisions of the Zoning Ordinance.
      (2)   Alternative energy systems shall be located, designed and installed
as per the manufacturer's specifications as well as all zoning, building code
and utility requirements.
      (3)   Alternative energy systems shall be set back from all property
lines a distance of not less than the normal setback requirements for accessory
buildings/structures in that zoning district. All alternative energy systems
shall comply with the building and lot coverage requirements of the zoning
district in which they are located.
      (4)   Alternative energy systems shall emit no noise, glare, odor,
vibration, electrical disturbance, electromagnetic interference, dust, smoke,
fumes, toxic gas, radiation, heat that unreasonably impacts or affects
neighboring properties or creates a nuisance. The burden of proof shall be upon
the property owner if a claim of nuisance arises.
      (5)   All alternative energy systems and/or any appurtenant structures
shall be set back from all public roads a distance of not less than 1.1 times
the alternative energy system's height, as measured from the nearest edge of
the alternative energy system and/or any appurtenant structure to the right-of-
way line of all public roads.
      (6)   No alternative energy system shall be located, modified or
constructed within the City of Reading unless a permit has been issued to the
facility owner in accordance with the provisions of this section of the Zoning
Ordinance.
      (7)   All new exterior alternative energy systems within historic and
conservation districts must receive their certificate of appropriateness from
the Historical Architectural Review Board prior to application for a permit.
      (8)   All alternative energy systems shall comply with all City of
Reading noise regulations.
   E.   Special requirements for wind turbines.
      (1)   All wind turbines shall meet the following additional requirement:
         (a)   All wind turbines shall include automatic devices to address
high-speed winds, such as mechanical brakes and over-speed controls and be
equipped with a redundant braking system, which shall include both aerodynamic
over-speed controls (including variable pitch, tip, and other similar systems)
and mechanical brakes. Mechanical brakes shall be operated in a fail-safe mode.
Stall regulation shall not be considered a sufficient braking system for over-
speed protection.
      (2)   Freestanding wind turbines will also meet these requirements:
         (a)   All freestanding wind turbines shall be set back from all lot
lines and street rights-of-way a minimum distance equal to the total maximum
height to the top of the extended blade. All wind turbine setbacks shall be
measured from the center of the base of the turbine at ground level.
         (b)   If support wires are used, and they are not within a fence, they
shall be marked near their base with reflectors, reflective tape or similar
method.
         (c)   All installations shall coordinate with the Federal Aviation
Administration and PennDOT's Bureau of Aviation regarding airport hazard
zoning.
         (d)   The maximum total height above the ground level to the tip of
the extended blade shall be 150 feet.
         (e)   New electrical wiring to the wind turbine shall be placed
underground, to the maximum extent feasible.
         (f)   Wind turbines shall not be climbable up to 12 feet above ground
surface. All access doors to wind turbines and electrical equipment may be
fenced, as appropriate. All shall be locked to prevent entry by nonauthorized
persons.
         (g)   The minimum height of a wind turbine shall be 15 feet, as
measured from the ground surface to the tip of the blade at its lowest turning
movement.
      (3)   Roof-mounted wind turbines. Roof-mounted wind turbines may extend a
maximum of 25 feet above the maximum height limit in the applicable zoning
district.
   F.   Special requirements for geothermal heat pumps.
      (1)   The owner of any geothermal system shall be responsible for all
remediation efforts and costs necessitated as a result of a release from the
system that impacts or threatens to impact groundwater or surface water. If the
owner refuses to take corrective action, the City may take corrective action in
accordance with the property maintenance code and all state and federal
regulations. All costs incurred by the municipality in doing so will be borne
by the owner.
      (2)   Closed-loop geothermal heat pump systems must meet these
requirements:
         (a)   Be self-contained having no contact with groundwater, surface
water or the water table under one-hundred-year flood conditions.
         (b)   All heat-exchanging fluids within any geothermal heat pump must
be comprised either of saline, water or other type of nonhazardous fluid, the
release of which would not pose any risk of impact to groundwater in excess of
standards set forth in all applicable state and federal regulations.
         (c)   The geothermal heat pump may not be in contact with an aquifer
or be sited within any aquifer's recharge zone.
      (3)   Open-loop geothermal heat pump systems shall be reviewed on a case-
by-case basis and the owner bears the burden of demonstrating no significant
adverse impacts upon land or water resources.
   G.   Special requirements for solar energy systems. The following provisions
shall specifically apply to solar energy systems and appurtenant structures
and/or facilities associated with their operation:
      (1)   There is no restriction regarding visibility of solar panels,
except in historic and conservation districts.
      (2)   Solar energy panels shall be designed and located to minimize glare
that could affect any occupied adjacent properties and/or any street right-of-
way.
      (3)   In accordance with §
600-918 relating to green incentives, solar installations may exceed building
height restrictions in the applicable district by 15 feet, and signs by 10
feet, and certain parking installations are exempt from building coverage
requirements.
      (4)   Surface area of ground-mounted solar energy systems shall not be
counted as impervious lot coverage.
   H.   Special requirements for water-powered energy systems. The following
provisions shall specifically apply to water-powered energy systems and
appurtenant structures and/or facilities associated with their operation:
      (1)   No water-powered energy system shall endanger or threaten native
local wildlife including fish, amphibians and reptiles.
      (2)   No water-powered energy system affecting current, cross section or
flow of a waterway shall be approved without a permit or approval of the
Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection. Installations that may
significantly alter the streambed or directional flow of a stream, such as
small dams and their upstream/ downstream races or "ponds" for in-stream
turbines and overshot/undershot wheels, may be approved if properly permitted
under state and federal law.
      (3)   All water-powered energy systems shall have safety disconnects of
their paddles, wheels or turbines in case of flood or heavy water flow beyond
the anticipated capacity of the alternative energy facility.
   I.   Application. The facility owner shall provide the following in
connection with his/her application for an alternative energy facility:
      (1)   A full description of the proposed alternative energy system.
      (2)   Architectural drawings of the system to be installed, all
appurtenant structures and/or facilities associated with operation of the
alternative energy system.
      (3)   Dimensions and locations of all affected buildings and structures
on the applicant's real property and adjacent properties and any applicable
setbacks.
      (4)   Photographs to establish baseline conditions at the time of the
application.
      (5)   A statement of the estimated output of the proposed alternative
energy system and where the energy will be utilized.
      (6)   A letter of agreement with a private energy utility provider if the
energy to be generated by the alternative energy system is to be conveyed off
the applicant's real property.
      (7)   The application for any permit for an accessory solar or wind
energy system shall include an acknowledgement that the issuing of said permit
shall not, and does not, create in the property owner, its, his, her, or their
successors and assigns in title or, create in the property itself: a) the right
to remain free of shadow and/or obstructions to solar or wind energy caused by
development of adjoining or other property or the growth of any trees or
vegetation on such property; or b) the right to prohibit the development on or
growth of any trees or vegetation on such property. Such acknowledgement shall
be signed by the property owner.
      (8)   All new exterior alternative energy systems within historic and
conservation districts must submit their certificate of appropriateness from
the Historical Architectural Review Board with their application.
      (9)   Copies of any other permits that have been obtained from agencies
with jurisdiction over the alternative energy system.
   J.   Installation, maintenance and removal requirements.
      (1)   Installation.
         (a)   No alternative energy system shall be located, modified or
constructed within the City of Reading unless a permit has been issued to the
facility owner in accordance with the provisions of this section of the Zoning
Ordinance.
         (b)   For alternative energy system categories in which installer
certification exists, a certified installer shall be required for more complex
installations, nonresidential installations, or if recommended by the
manufacturer.
      (2)   Maintenance obligations. The accessory alternative energy system
must be clean and properly maintained in good, working order, and kept free
from all hazards and unsafe conditions that are detrimental to the public
health, safety and welfare. To the extent that an accessory alternative energy
system constitutes an immediate threat to the public health, safety and
welfare, the City is authorized to take all necessary steps to mitigate such
public health, safety or welfare threat. All costs incurred by the City in
doing so will be borne by the owner.
      (3)   Best practices required. All alternative energy systems are to be
installed and maintained using best practices.
      (4)   Corrective action. In the case of a breakdown, malfunction, misuse
or other situation involving an alternative energy system, it is the obligation
of the facility owner and operator to immediately initiate corrective action.
If the facility owner and operator refuse or are incapable of doing so, the
City has the right to take corrective action at the expense of the facility
owner and operator.
      (5)   Removal.
         (a)   The facility owner or operator shall, at his/her expense,
completely remove any alternative energy system within 12 months after the end
of its useful life. The alternative energy system will be presumed to be at the
end of its useful life if no energy is generated for a continuous period of 12
months.
         (b)   If the facility owner or operator fails to complete removal
during the prescribed period of 12 months, the City may take such measures as
necessary to complete removal in accordance with this Zoning Ordinance at the
expense of the facility owner and operator.
      (6)   Existing systems. All alternative energy systems in place at the
time this section is adopted shall be kept in clean, working order and meet the
maintenance, corrective action and removal responsibilities in Subsection J(2)
through (6).
§ 600-1013. Swimming pools.
[Added 12-16-2013 by Ord. No. 83-2013]
   A.   All in-ground swimming pools, as defined in §
600-2202, shall conform to all requirements as a structure for the zone in
which it is situated, shall be included in computing the lot coverage and shall
be in conformance with
Chapter 180, Construction Codes.
   B.   All aboveground pools, as defined in §
600-2202, must be situated in rear yards so as to provide a minimum of three
feet open space area around the entire perimeter of the pool.
   C.   All pools must be enclosed with a permanent barrier or fence not less
than four feet in height, such fence having no opening with a dimension greater
than four inches on a side (or in diameter in the case of round openings).
Walls of buildings may serve as a part of the fence or barrier. Where such
pools are of the type having aboveground construction, that portion of the pool
wall extending above the ground may be included as part of the barrier or
fence. Fences shall have a gate, which shall be securely locked when not in
use. Aboveground pools shall have a ladder or stairway, which can be removed or
rendered unusable, and the entrance to the pool shall be capable of being
securely closed to a height of four feet. When draining or backwashing swimming
pools, water shall not be drained onto other properties without the owner's
consent. Hot tubs/spas and inflatable pools, in lieu of four-foot fence, must
have covers that secure to prevent access when not in use.
Part 11
Additional Requirements For Specific Uses Or Zoning Districts
§ 600-1101. Mid-rise or low-rise apartments.
[Amended 12-16-2013 by Ord. No. 83-2013]
When permitted, low-rise and mid-rise apartments shall conform to the
following:
   A.   Any dwelling unit constructed by or subsidized by an agency of the
government of the United States or of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania and
which has restrictions on occupancy by reason of age, income or other unique
condition shall meet the minimum habitable floor area standards established by
that agency, or, in the absence of such standard, shall meet the standards set
forth in Subsection D hereof. Any dwelling unit which, pursuant to this
section, is constructed with less habitable floor area than that required by
Subsection D shall not thereafter be occupied by persons not having the unique
condition upon which the special permit was based unless it is conclusively
demonstrated to the Board that the intended change in occupancy will not result
in overcrowding or cause an increase in density or traffic congestion.
   B.   Part 16 allows reduced parking for housing limited to older persons. In
addition, the Zoning Hearing Board may authorize a reduction in the number of
off-street parking spaces required, as follows:
 
Publicly or Privately Subsidized Housing Number of Dwelling Units per space
Low-income elderly                                          15
Moderate-income elderly                                     9
Low-income non-elderly                                      1
 
Units other than those described, whether located within the same building or
within a separate building, shall conform to the off-street parking
requirements relevant to their use and size, as specified in this Part.
   C.   No dwelling units shall be constructed, erected or established that are
50% below the adjacent grade.
   D.   Each dwelling unit shall:
      (1)   Contain complete kitchen, toilet, bathing and sleeping facilities;
      (2)   Contain at least one separate bathroom;
      (3)   Contain at least one separate bedroom, except that in buildings
containing at least four dwelling units, the Zoning Hearing Board may, by
special exception, approve up to one-fourth (25%) of the dwelling units to be
studio/efficiency apartments upon a finding that the number of units proposed
will not adversely affect any adjacent residential neighborhood;
      (4)   Comply with all relevant building and occupancy codes; and
      (5)   Contain a minimum habitable area of:
 
Apartment              Square Feet
Efficiency/studio      400
One bedroom            550
Two bedrooms           700
Three or more bedrooms 850
 
[Amended 1-27-2020 by Ord. No. 5-2020]
   E.   Sufficient laundry, drying, garbage pickup and other utility areas
shall be provided and screened from view according to §
600-1401 .
   F.   The facade of any building or structure shall not exceed 70 feet in
length unless making an angle turn or having an offset of at least five feet
within each 70 feet of length.
   G.   A strip of land at least five feet in width surrounding each building
shall be kept completely open except for foundation plantings and sidewalk and
driveway crossings, except within the C-C and C-R Districts. Open space
adjacent to, around or between buildings not surfaced as walkways, driveways,
parking area or utility areas, shall be graded and landscaped.
   H.   Courtyards bounded on three or more sides by the wings of a single
building or by the walls of separate buildings shall have a minimum court width
of two feet for each one foot in height of the tallest adjacent on-site
building, except within the C-C and C-R Districts.
   I.   Detached vehicle garages that are not part of a dwelling structure, but
intended for the use of the residents in addition to all other accessory
buildings, shall be located at least 25 feet from the nearest dwelling
structure, except within the C-C and C-R Districts.
   J.   Every building shall have a minimum setback of 10 feet from any and all
interior roads, driveways and parking areas and 25 feet from any other
building, except such setbacks shall not apply within the C-C and C-
R Districts.
   K.   Where feasible, a natural or physical buffer strip shall be established
within the side and rear yard of a property that is adjacent to a residential
use. The height, depth and selected materials shall be subject to the review
and approval of the Zoning Office. [Amended 3-10-2025 by Ord. No. 15A-2025]
   L.   Active or passive recreation uses may be permitted as an accessory use
within the side or rear yard of the property provided that a 5-foot setback
distance is established and maintained from the adjacent property line. The
accessory recreation use shall be subject to the review and approval of the
Zoning Office. [Amended 3-10-2025 by Ord. No. 15A-2025]
   M.   Driveways, parking areas, dwelling entrance ways and pedestrian walks
shall be provided with sufficient illumination to minimize hazards to
pedestrians and motor vehicles utilizing the same. Light sources shall be
shielded to avoid glare disturbing to occupants of apartments and of adjacent
properties.
   N.   All new on-site electric utility lines shall be installed below ground
level.
§ 600-1102. High-rise apartments.
When permitted, high-rise apartments shall conform to the following:
   A.   Section 600-1101 shall also apply to high-rise apartments, except for §
600-1101F and J.
   B.   The Zoning Hearing Board may permit an increase in the number of
stories of a high-rise apartment after review of the proposal by the Planning
Commission if it is determined that the overall density of the area, the
character of the area, traffic flow and congestion, and the welfare of the
community at large will not be adversely impacted.
   C.   (Reserved) 21
   D.   A high-rise apartment shall not be located within 30 feet of any
accessory structure or 50 feet of any building on another lot which contains
dwelling units, except within the C-C or C-R Districts.
   E.   No high-rise apartment shall be located less than 20 feet from any
interior road, driveway or parking area, except within the C-C or C-
R Districts.
   F.   Accessways shall be limited to two per development, plus one additional
accessway for each 150 feet of street frontage.
 
Notes
21  Editor’s Note: Former Subsection (C), regarding additional storage space, was
   repealed 1-27-2020 by Ord. No. 6-2020.
§ 600-1103. Barber and beauty shops; massage therapy; and nail salons.
   A.   A state-licensed barber or cosmetologist shall be on the premises
during all hours that the use is open, and proof of such license is required to
be shown to any state or City employee immediately upon request.
   B.   A massage therapy business shall have a person on the premises during
all hours that the use is open who meets the requirements to conduct such work
as provided in
Chapter 364, Massage Therapists. Proof of such certification is required to be
shown to any state or City employee immediately upon request.
   C.   A nail salon business shall have a person on the premises during all
hours that the use is open who is a state-licensed nail technician, or who
holds such successor or equivalent license. Proof of such certification is
required to be shown to any state or city employee immediately upon request.
§ 600-1104. Manufactured home parks.
Manufactured (mobile) home parks shall only be allowed as provided in Part 8
and shall conform to the following:
   A.   All manufactured home parks shall contain a minimum of two acres.
   B.   Each dwelling space in an approved manufactured home park shall contain
a minimum of 5,000 square feet.
   C.   The maximum density in each manufactured home park shall not exceed
five manufactured homes per acre.
   D.   All manufactured home parks shall provide safe and convenient vehicular
access from abutting public streets to each manufactured home space.
   E.   All interior streets in the manufactured home park shall be paved with
a paving material in accordance with City regulations, shall be of adequate
width to accommodate anticipated traffic, and shall meet the following minimum
requirements:
      (1)   All internal streets shall have a cartway width of not less than 20
feet.
      (2)   All cul-de-sac streets shall conform to the criteria set forth in
Chapter 515, Subdivision and Land Development.
   F.   All water supplied to a manufactured home park shall be obtained from
the City water system.
   G.   The sanitary sewage system serving any manufactured home park shall be
connected to the City sewage disposal system in a manner approved by the
Department of Public Works. All dwellings shall be connected to this system.
   H.   The installation of electrical, telephone and television cable service
lines shall be approved underground methods.
   I.   Each manufactured home park shall provide fire hydrants within 400 feet
of each building. These hydrants shall be at a capacity and pressure approved
by the Department of Public Works and the Reading Area Water Authority.
   J.   All manufactured home parks shall provide screening along all sides
abutting public streets or other properties. At least one shade tree (as
approved by the Shade Tree Commission) must be planted on each manufactured
home lot. Ten percent of all manufactured home parks, exclusive of rights-of-
way, shall be provided for recreational use by the residents and open space
buffer areas.
   K.   Each manufactured home lot shall be provided with a minimum of two off-
street parking spaces.
§ 600-1105. Auto service stations, auto repair and car washes.
Where allowed in Part 8, the following standards shall be met:
   A.   The site plan must indicate the number and location of fuel tanks to be
installed, the dimensions and capacity of each storage tank, the depth the
tanks will be placed below ground, the number and location of pumps to be
installed, the type of structure and accessory buildings to be constructed, and
the number of autos to be garaged.
   B.   Any repair and servicing of motor vehicles shall be performed in a
fully enclosed building and no motor vehicle parts or partially dismantled
motor vehicles shall be stored overnight outside of an enclosed building.
   C.   Where such uses abut a residential property in a zone, there shall be a
screened buffer strip not less than 10 feet in width. Buffer strips and
screening shall be in accordance with §
600-1401 of this chapter.
   D.   The entire area of the site traveled by motor vehicles shall be paved.
   E.   Off-street parking areas shall be provided exclusive of pump areas or
travel lanes. For auto service stations and auto repair, two parking spaces
shall be provided for each service bay.
   F.   Accessory goods for sale may be displayed on the pump island and the
building island only. The outdoor display of oil cans and/or antifreeze and
similar products may be displayed on the respective island if provided for in a
suitable metal stand or rack.
   G.   No auto service station or auto repair garage shall be located nearer
than 300 feet from any school, library or hospital. This is to maintain a
safety zone in order to reduce the adverse effects of such activities on the
above-mentioned institutions.
§ 600-1106. (Reserved)
§ 600-1107. Additional requirements and performance standards for permitted
uses in MU Zoning District.
[Amended 2-14-2011 by Ord. No. 8-2011]
   A.   Wastewater treatment operations. An application for a wastewater
treatment operation shall include a general explanation of the treatment
processes, including the technologies involved, noise and odor-mitigating
measures, and the receiving water body of the treated effluent. The area of
wastewater treatment equipment which is open to precipitation from above need
not be counted in the calculation of building and impervious coverage
percentages.
   B.   Law enforcement operations. An application for a firing range shall
include a description of the design of the berm/backstop, and other safety
measures. Designs shall implement the Environmental Protection Agency's Best
Management Practices (BMPs) for lead at firing ranges.
   C.   Fire and rescue service operations. An application for a live-fire
training facility shall include a description of the different training
structures/evolutions designed. Water towers, simulation buildings, and other
buildings specifically designed for their height, may exceed the building
height maximum, where such increased height is related to the instruction or
practice of firefighting and/or rescue techniques.
   D.   Recycling operations. An application for a recycling operation shall
include a description of the types and quantities of materials to be collected
and the loading areas.
§ 600-1108. Short-term rentals.
[Added 10-13-2025 by Ord. No. 58-2025]
   A.   A short-term rental unit shall be permitted by right as an accessory
use for residential occupancy within the C-C, C-R, C-N or C-H Zoning Districts
and by special exception within the R-3 Zoning District. The following base
requirements shall apply to all short-term rentals:
      (1)   A short-term rental unit may be permitted within the R-3 Zoning
District, provided that that it is contained within a conforming one-family
detached dwelling, a one-family semi-detached dwelling and/or one-family
attached dwelling (townhouse), which shall be located at least 1,000 feet from
another permitted short-term rental unit.
      (2)   A short-term rental unit may be permitted within the C-C, C-R, C-
N or C-H Zoning Districts, provided that it is contained within a conforming
one-family detached dwelling, one-family semi-detached dwelling and/or one-
family attached dwelling (townhouse), which shall be located at least 500 feet
from another permitted short-term rental unit.
      (3)   A short-term rental unit may be permitted within the R-3, C-C, C-R,
C-N or C-H Zoning Districts, provided that it is contained within one (1)
conforming residential apartment unit that is part of a group containing nine
(9) or fewer residential apartment units.
      (4)   Short-term rental unit(s) may be permitted within the R-3, C-C, C-
R, C-N or C-H Zoning Districts, provided that it is contained within a
conforming residential apartment unit that is part of a group of ten (10) or
more residential apartment units and provided that no more than twenty (20%)
percent of the total number of residential apartment units are designated as
short-term rental units.
   B.   The following general provisions shall apply to short-term rental
units:
      (1)   The record owner or designated manager, agent or management group
shall reside or occupy an office within thirty (30) miles of short-term rental
unit.
      (2)   At least one (1) person over twenty-five (25) years of age shall be
designated as the principal person or tenant of the short-term rental who shall
endorse all relevant agreements and shall assume the responsibilities for the
use and occupancy of the short-term rental.
      (3)   Overnight guests at a short-term rental shall be limited to two (2)
persons per bedroom. Unless otherwise specified by other code requirements, no
more than twelve (12) overnight guests shall be permitted in a short-term
rental.
      (4)   The maximum number of day guests allowed at anytime on the property
occupied by the short-term rental, in addition to the permitted overnight
occupants, shall be fifty (50%) percent for the maximum overnight occupancy in
the short-term rental.
      (5)   At least one (1) off-street parking space shall be provided to
accommodate overnight and day guests on the short-term rental property. In lieu
of the required off-street parking spaces, the use of public parking facilities
within seven hundred (700) feet may be considered provided that the parking
spaces are available to the short-term rental unit.
      (6)   The short-term rental occupants and/or guests shall not engage in
disorderly conduct or disturb the peace and quiet of any nearby neighborhood or
person by loud, unusual or excessive noise, by tumultuous or offensive conduct,
public indecency, threatening, traducing, quarreling, challenging to fight, or
fighting, or creating a dangerous or physically offensive condition.
      (7)   The record owner or designated manager, agent or management group
shall be responsible to assure that the occupants or guests of the short-term
rental do not create unreasonable noise or disturbances, engage in disorderly
conduct, or otherwise violate provisions of the City of Reading Code.
      (8)   Overnight occupancy of recreational vehicles, camper trailers and
tents at the property where the short-term rental is located shall be
prohibited. Outdoor overnight sleeping of occupants or guests of the short-term
rental is prohibited.
      (9)   A Short-Term Rental shall not have any outside appearance
indicating a change of use from the surrounding residential uses. A key box may
be a permitted option.
      (10)   Sub-leasing or renting space or a portion of the short-term rental
property to other persons shall be prohibited.
      (11)   A short-term rental unit or property shall not be utilized and/or
occupied as a residential apartment, bed and breakfast establishment, boarding
house, rooming house, multi-family dwelling, shelter, social quarters and/or
care facility.
      (12)   A list of house rules and regulations shall be maintained at the
short-term rental unit.
   C.   The Zoning Permit shall include: the supplemental use and occupancy
agreement; property maintenance specifications; nuisance provisions; and other
documentation required by the Zoning Office. The general enforcement actions
shall be endorsed by the record owner of the short-term rental property.
Part 12
Provisions For Special Exception And Conditional Uses
§ 600-1201. Criteria and limitations.
   A.   No conditional or special exception use shall be approved if it:
      (1)   Substantially increases traffic congestion along a street or
creates a traffic safety hazard.
      (2)   Creates an undue concentration of population.
      (3)   Impairs an adequate supply of light and air to adjacent property.
      (4)   Creates a significant threat to the public health or safety.
      (5)   Is detrimental to the appropriate use of adjacent property through
the generation of significant nuisances or hazards.
      (6)   Does not meet the requirements of this chapter.
      (7)   No conditional use or special exception use shall be permitted
unless there are adequate provisions, safeguards, plans and/or infrastructure
that will mitigate potential adverse impacts that are associated with parking,
traffic, flooding, stormwater, pollution, noise, exterior lighting and/or
similar impacts. [Added 3-10-2025 by Ord. No. 15A-2025]
   B.   Persons with disabilities. After the Zoning Administrator receives a
complete written application, the Zoning Hearing Board shall grant a special
exception allowing modifications to specific requirements of this chapter that
the applicant proves to the satisfaction of the Zoning Hearing Board are
required under applicable federal law to provide a reasonable accommodation to
serve persons who the applicant proves have "disabilities" as defined in and
protected by such laws.
      (1)   Such reasonable accommodations shall be requested in accordance
with the U.S. Fair Housing Act Amendments and/or the Americans with
Disabilities Act, as amended.
      (2)   If the applicant is requesting a reasonable accommodation under the
United States Fair Housing Amendments Act of 1988 or the Americans with
Disabilities Act, the applicant shall identify the disability which is
protected by such statutes, the extent of the modification of the provisions of
this chapter necessary for a reasonable accommodation, and the manner by which
the reasonable accommodation requested may be removed when such person(s) with
a protected disability no longer will be present on the property.
      (3)   Any modification approved under this section may be limited to the
time period during which the persons with disabilities occupy or utilize the
premises.
   C.   Expansions. An existing lawful use that is listed in the applicable
zoning district as being a special exception use may be expanded for the same
use as a by-right use if all of the following conditions are met:
      (1)   The total building floor area of the use is not expanded by more
than 25%.
      (2)   The expansion is on the same lot.
      (3)   The expansion shall be governed by the same conditions, if any,
that were previously established by the Zoning Hearing Board, as applicable.
      (4)   All other requirements of this chapter are met.
   D.   Modification. Where an application is submitted for conditional use
approval, the City Council shall also have the authority as part of the
conditional use approval to approve a modification of specific parking,
landscaping, buffer strip and/or dimensional provisions of this chapter. Such
modification shall only be approved if all requests are made in writing by the
applicant as part of the conditional use application. Such modification shall
only be allowed if the applicant proves to the satisfaction of City Council
that an alternative standard will be applied as a condition upon approval, and
that the alternative standard would be more in the public interest than the
existing requirement. [Added 2-14-2011 by Ord. No. 8-2011]
§ 600-1202. Conditions for special exception uses.
   A.   Adaptive Reuse, as defined under §
600-2202 of this Zoning Ordinance shall be permitted as a development option or
principal use(s) within certain zoning districts, subject to the following
provisions:
      (1)   R-1A, R-1 and R-2 Zoning Districts: Adaptive reuse may be
considered by special exception, subject to the following land use
requirements:
         (a)   The proposed use may include residential apartment units that
are contained within an unoccupied building that has been vacated for more than
twelve (12) months, which was previously occupied by a nonresidential use,
institutional use or a non-conforming use.
         (b)   An accessory business or office use (optional) containing a
maximum of 3,000 square feet of gross floor area may be contained on the first
floor or street level of the renovated building.
      (2)   R-3 and R-PO Zoning Districts: Adaptive reuse may be considered by
special exception, subject to the following land use requirements:
         (a)   The proposed uses may include residential apartment units and no
more than one (1) non-residential use (optional) containing a maximum of 3,000
square feet of gross floor area on the first floor or street level of the
renovated building.
         (b)   The optional non-residential use may include the following uses:
a bakery; day-care; restaurant with no drive through service; personal service,
professional office; retail store; community center; convenience store;
municipal use; and/or similar use that will directly benefit the neighborhood,
as determined by the Zoning Hearing Board.
      (3)   C-R, C-N and C-H Zoning Districts: Adaptive reuse may be considered
by special exception, subject to the following land use requirements:
         (a)   The proposed uses may include residential apartment units and no
more than three (3) non-residential uses (optional) containing a maximum of
12,000 square feet of cumulative gross floor area on the first floor and second
floor of the renovated building.
         (b)   The optional non-residential use(s) may include use(s) permitted
by right within the underlying C-R, C-N and C-H Zoning Districts.
      (4)   C-C Zoning District: Adaptive reuse ma be considered by special
exception, subject to the following land use requirements:
         (a)   The proposed uses within the renovated building may include:
commercial, municipal or institutional use(s) on the first floor or street
level (required); commercial, municipal and/or institutional uses on the upper
floors (optional); and/or residential apartment units on the upper floors.
         (b)   The principal and accessory use(s) shall be a permitted by right
within the C-C Zoning District.
         (c)   The base criteria for lot area, coverage and dimensional
requirements shall not apply to adaptive reuse applications within the C-
C Zoning District.
      (5)   M-C and H-M Zoning Districts: Adaptive reuse may be considered by
special exception, subject to the following land use requirements:
         (a)   The proposed uses within the renovated building may include: any
combination of commercial, industrial, municipal and/or institutional uses,
which are permitted by right within the underlying M-C and H-M Zoning
Districts.
         (b)   A minimum of 70 percent of the cumulative gross floor area of
the combined building(s) on the property shall be occupied by a permitted non-
residential use.
         (c)   A maximum of 30 percent of the cumulative gross floor area of
the combined building(s) on the property may be occupied by residential
apartment units.
      (6)   Lot Area and Dimensional Requirements: Unless otherwise specified,
the tract of land including the principal and accessory building(s) occupying
the site of the adaptive reuse shall comply with the required lot area,
coverage and dimensional requirements that are specified by the underlying
zoning district, as verified by the Zoning Office. The provisions for non-
conformities may be applied to adaptive reuse applications. If necessary,
zoning relief (special exception or variances) may be considered by the Zoning
Hearing Board.
      (7)   Building Area Requirements: The total building area designated for
adaptive reuse shall include the cumulative gross floor area of the existing
building(s) to be redeveloped or renovated plus an additional 25 percent for
future growth and expansion to the building(s) occupying the adaptive reuse.
The expansion area shall only be considered if the site can be developed in
accordance with the provisions specified by Chapters 505, 515 and 600 of the
Code.
      (8)   Residential Uses: The following provisions shall specifically apply
to residential uses and/or occupancy for projects involving adaptive reuse:
         (a)   The residential use for occupancy that may be considered shall
be a residential apartment unit(s), which shall be subject to the review and
approval of the Zoning Office.
         (b)   The habitable area for a residential apartment unit shall comply
with the provisions specified under §
600-1101 of the Zoning Ordinance.
         (c)   As part of the Special Exception Application, the Zoning Hearing
Board may consider a petition to reduce the habitable area of a residential
apartment unit or group of apartment units considering the following
guidelines:
            (i)   A maximum reduction of 10 percent of the required habitable
area may be permitted provided that the reduction is necessary as a result of
the internal structural or mechanical features of the existing building.
            (ii)   A maximum reduction of 10 percent of the required habitable
area may be permitted provided that shared or common facilities are
incorporated into the building design, which may include: a laundry room
(washer, dryer and folding station); entertainment room; mail room; storage
area; utility room; and/or other common areas within the building.
            (iii)   A combination may be considered, as specified under this
section, provided that the cumulative floor are of space of the reduction does
not exceed 10 percent of the habitable floor area requirements.
            (iv)   An architectural floor plan shall be required to demonstrate
compliance with the proposal for the habitable floor are or space reduction.
            The maximum cumulative reduction regardless of combinations that
may be considered shall be 10 percent of the required habitable area, as
specified under §
600-1101 of the Zoning Ordinance. All such reductions shall only be authorized
provided that the building improvements comply with the provisions specified by
the City of Reading Code and the Uniform Construction Code.
         (d)   The habitable area for each residential apartment unit shall
include a designated space or area for a kitchen, bathroom and bedroom. An
efficiency or studio option may be considered as an option. Shared or common
sanitary facilities (kitchens and bathrooms) shall be prohibited.
         (e)   No more than forty (40) percent of the residential apartment
units shall be designed as efficiency units.
         (f)   An architectural rendering, floor plan and building elevations
shall be submitted to the Zoning Office for review and consideration.
         (g)   The residential apartment units shall comply with all building
code requirements adopted by the City of Reading.
      (9)   Non-Residential Uses: The following provisions shall specifically
apply to non-residential uses and/or occupancy for projects involving adaptive
reuse:
         (a)   The non-residential uses that are permitted under the provisions
established under §
600-1202.A. shall be subject to the review and approval of the Zoning Office.
         (b)   The minimum floor area of each permitted non-residential use,
which is contained within an existing building designated for adaptive reuse,
shall be 500 square feet of gross floor area.
         (c)   The internal division of permitted non-residential uses
contained within the existing building may be permitted as part of an adaptive
reuse application provided that the internal spaces are legally divided as part
of a subdivision and land development plan.
         (d)   An architectural rendering, floor plan and building elevations
shall be submitted to the Zoning Office for review and consideration.
         (e)   The non-residential building and uses shall comply with all
building code requirements adopted by the City of Reading.
      (10)   Accessibility: The following provisions shall specifically apply
to site and/or building accessibility for projects involving adaptive reuse:
         (a)   Building Access: All principal buildings utilized for adaptive
reuse shall be designed, modified and/or improved in order to comply with the
site accessibility and emergency access requirements specified by the City of
Reading Code.
         (b)   Driveways: All existing or proposed points for vehicular ingress
and egress shall comply with the provisions specified by the City of Reading
Code.
         (c)   Parking and Loading: The proposed uses shall comply with the
minimum requirements for parking and loading as specified by the Zoning
Ordinance. A reduction of the parking and/or loading space requirements may be
considered by the Zoning Hearing Board as part of the special exception
application for adaptive reuse.
         (d)   All curbs, sidewalks and ramps along the street shall be
improved in order to facilitate pedestrian and vehicular access. The Zoning
Office in conjunction with the Public Works Department shall provide a
recommendation for the required site improvements.
      (11)   The following general requirements shall apply to all adaptive
reuse projects:
         (a)   The conversion or redevelopment of an existing non-residential
building in order to establish two (2) or more units or uses shall only be
permitted under the provisions established for adaptive reuse, as specified
under §
600-1202.A. of this Zoning Ordinance.
         (b)    All proposed uses involving adaptive reuse shall be served by
sanitary sewage disposal facilities and water supply facilities with sufficient
capacities.
         (c)   All buildings that are redesigned, revitalized and/or
reconstructed in order to accommodate adaptive reuse shall comply with all
building code and emergency response requirements.
         (d)   The front facade of the building occupying the principal uses
for the proposed adaptive reuse project shall be improved to consider the
historic character of the neighborhood. If required, the Historic Preservation
Office and/or the Historical Architectural Review Board (HARB) shall review the
Adaptive Reuse Application.
         (e)   All properties involving adaptive reuse shall consider
landscaping, streetscape and exterior lighting enhancements in order to promote
neighborhood revitalization efforts.
         (f)   A solid waste management and recycling plan shall be developed
for the site occupying the adaptive reuse project.
         (g)   The provisions established by Part 18 (Floodplain Overlay Zone)
shall be evaluated in terms of use, occupancy and habitable space.
         (h)   An architectural rendering and floor plan shall be submitted
with the special exception application in order to demonstrate compliance with
the provisions for adaptive reuse. All such plans shall demonstrate compliance
with the provisions specified by the City of Reading Code and the Uniform
Construction Code.
         (i)   The special exception application shall be subject to the review
by the internal departments authorized by the City of Reading, which may
include: the Zoning Office; the Planning Office; the Building and Trades
Office; the Public Works Department; the Fire and Rescue Department; and/or
other departments.
         (j)   A Subdivision and/or Land Development Plan may be required for
the Adaptive Reuse Application considering the following provisions:
            (i)   The Planning Office and/or Zoning Office shall prepare an
initial assessment report in order to determine if there are community
development impacts or requirements that should be resolved with the submission
of a Land Development Plan.
            (ii)   The Planning Commission shall determine if a Land
Development Plan is warranted in order to resolve any community development
impacts or requirements that are specified under Chapters 505, 515 and 600 of
the City of Reading Code.
            The requirements for a Land Development Plan shall be resolved
after the Zoning Hearing Board renders its decision on the Special Exception
Application.  [Amended 3-10-2025 by Ord. No. 16A-2025]
   B.   Bed-and-breakfast inn. A bed-and-breakfast inn may be permitted as a
special exception in the R-1A, R-1, R-2 and R-3 Residential Zones, provided
such use is within an existing residential dwelling designed to accommodate
transient overnight guests for rent. In addition to any additional stipulations
the Zoning Hearing Board may require, the following shall apply:
      (1)   No more than four persons may occupy one rental unit.
      (2)   At least one bathroom shall be provided for each two guest rooms in
addition to at least one bathroom provided for the principal residential use.
      (3)   Single-family dwellings that are converted must maintain the
appearance of a single- family dwelling with a single front entrance.
Additional entrances may be placed on the side or rear of the structure.
Exterior stairways and fire escapes shall be located on the rear wall in
preference to either side wall and in no case on a front or side wall facing a
street.
       (4)   Any existing historic architectural features visible from a public
street shall be maintained.
      (5)   There shall be no use of advertising visible from outside the
premises except a single nonilluminated sign no larger than six square feet
(writing on both sides is permitted), constructed and placed in accordance with
the requirements of §
600-1703.
      (6)   The use shall be owned or operated by a resident of the premises.
      (7)   There shall be no separate cooking facilities in any guestroom.
Restaurant facilities open to people who are not staying overnight are not
permitted in a residential zone.
    C.   Cemeteries. Cemeteries shall be allowed as provided in Part 8 and
shall meet the following standards:
      (1)   The use shall meet all dimensional standards of the zoning
district.
      (2)   Cemeteries may include mausoleums, crypts and tombs above and below
ground level.
      (3)   A ten-foot wide landscaped strip shall be provided abutting
existing dwellings.
      (4)   Any building (including a mausoleum) shall meet principal building
setback requirements.
   D.   Care facilities, where permitted, shall meet the following standards
along with any other requirements deemed necessary by the Zoning Hearing Board:
      (1)   Family child care homes or adult care homes, where allowed in Part
8 as an accessory use, shall meet the following requirements:
         (a)   There may be permitted at any one time four, five, or six
children in family child care homes, and up to six adults in adult care homes
in addition to sons or daughters of the on-site caregiver. [Amended 3-10-2025
by Ord. No. 15A-2025]
         (b)   Where Zoning Hearing Board approval is required, the Board shall
determine whether the use will be detrimental to the surrounding area and the
design of any structures erected in connection with such use shall be in
keeping with the general character of the area, and such lot shall meet the
requirements of the available zone as set forth in Part 8 of this chapter.
         (c)   A minimum of 480 square feet of habitable floor area exclusive
of halls, bathrooms, offices, kitchens, locker rooms, and related areas must be
maintained on the premises.
         (d)   In a residential district, the use shall not operate in a manner
perceptible to the neighbors between 11:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. [Added 2-14-2011
by Ord. No. 8-2011]
      (2)   Child care centers or adult care centers, as a principal use, and
group child care homes where allowed in Part 8 shall meet the following
standards:
         (a)   There may be permitted seven or more children in a child care
center, seven or more adults in an adult care center, and more than six but
fewer than 16 older school age level children, or more than six but less than
13 children of any age level in a group child care home. [Amended 3-10-2025 by
Ord. No. 15A-2025]
         (b)   Where special exception approval is required, the Zoning Hearing
Board shall determine whether such structure or use will be detrimental to the
surrounding area and such lot shall meet the requirements of the available zone
as set forth in Part 8 of this chapter.
         (c)   A minimum of 400 square feet of fenced outdoor play area shall
be provided, unless the facility is within 500 feet of a public playground that
is available for use by the children. [Added 2-14-2011 by Ord. No. 8-2011]
       (3)   The following standards are for all care facilities:
         (a)   Prior to grant of an certificate of occupancy, the applicant
shall present evidence that any required state license or certification has
been obtained.
          (b)   Off-street parking and loading spaces shall be provided for all
vehicles used directly in the operation of all care facilities, as further
specified by Parts 15 and 16 of the Zoning Ordinance. In addition, a secure
area must be provided to ensure safe transfer of all patrons to and from the
premises. [Amended 2-14-2011 by Ord. No. 8-2011; amended 3-10-2025 by Ord. No.
15A-2025]
         (c)   The Zoning Hearing Board shall consider the proximity of other
care facilities on the same block in order to review the availability and
demand of parking. In considering the suitability of the property, the Zoning
Hearing Board may also consider the total number of children who will be cared
for at one time in a dwelling. [Added 2-14-2011 by Ord. No. 8-2011; amended 3-
10-2025 by Ord. No. 15A-2025]
   E.   Colleges, universities, primary and secondary schools and trade/hobby
schools. Such uses shall be allowed as provided in the zoning district
regulations. Dormitories shall only be allowed where specifically provided in
the zoning district regulations.
       (1)   A detailed plot and complete set of architectural plans, drawn to
scale, indicating the location and untended use of existing and proposed
buildings, location of recreation areas, the relationship of the proposed use
to existing streets and adjacent properties. The application shall indicate the
grade levels of the pupils to be housed in the buildings, the planned student
capacity of such buildings and the contemplated eventual enrollment of the
school.
      (2)   No driveway shall open onto a public street within 50 feet of an
intersection of two public streets.
      (3)   Illumination for night athletic activities shall be shielded from
illuminating residential areas. See §
600-912.
    F.   Amusement arcade. The following standards shall be met:
   (1)   No amusement arcade shall be located within 300 feet of a residential
district or sexually oriented business.
      (2)   No amusement device shall be audible beyond the premises within
which it is situated.
      (3)   One off-street parking space for each 100 square feet of net floor
area.
   G.   Home occupations, major. The provisions in §
600-1006 shall apply.
   H.   Hospitals and centers for the care of children. Hospitals and centers
for the care of children may be allowed as provided the following standards are
met:
      (1)   A statement setting forth full particulars on the operation to be
conducted within the structure shall be filed by applicant with the Zoning
Administrator.
      (2)   No structure shall be erected nearer than 50 feet of any street
line nor nearer than 30 feet of any property line; and all other requirements
as set forth in this chapter for the zone in which it is to be located shall be
observed.
      (3)   Buffer strips as required by §
600-1401 shall be provided where the use abuts dwellings that are not in common
ownership.
   I.   Kennels. Kennels shall be allowed as provided in Part 8, provided that
the following conditions are met in addition to any conditions set forth by the
Zoning Hearing Board:
      (1)   No kennel shall be situated within 600 feet of a residential
building.
      (2)   A valid kennel license shall be secured from the Pennsylvania
Department of Agriculture for all facilities as applicable.
   J.   Life-care retirement facility and nursing home. Such uses shall meet
the following standards, all requirements therefor under this chapter, and any
other conditions set forth by the Zoning Hearing Board:
      (1)   A site plan and architectural plans, drawn to scale. These plans
must show the location and dimensions of off-street parking, private entrances,
walkways, the dimensions and square footage of each room and storage space and
shall indicate the intended use of each room.
      (2)   The life-care retirement facility and nursing home must meet the
standards of the City of Reading Building, Plumbing, Mechanical, Electrical and
Fire Codes (Chapter 180, Construction Codes) as required for the type of use.
The owner must verify to the Zoning Administrator on an annual basis that the
building meets all of the plumbing, electrical, heating, building, fire, and
similar standards set by the City and by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
      (3)   Every bedroom shall be at least 70 square feet of floor area and
there shall be no more than two occupants per bedroom.
      (4)   No basement or cellar shall be used as a habitable bedroom except
by special exception approval or variance.
      (5)   No life-care retirement facility and nursing home shall be located
within 500 linear feet of any other lot on which is established a life-care
retirement facility and nursing home or residential care facility, except by
variance, measured by the shortest distance between the two lots where the
proposed life care retirement facility and nursing home is located (including,
but not limited to, each existing life-care retirement facility and nursing
home or residential care facility use located in any district which is of a
different designation than the district in which the new life-care retirement
facility and nursing home use is proposed).
      (6)   See parking in Part 16.
      (7)   The use shall acquire the necessary certificate, sanction and/or
license by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
   K.   Nursing homes. See “life-care retirement facility and nursing home” in
this section.
   L.   Parks, playgrounds and public buildings. This term includes parks and
playgrounds operated by the federal, state or local government or nonprofit
organizations as well as public buildings operated by governmental agencies.
Such uses shall meet the following additional standards:
      (1)   A statement shall set forth full particulars on the operation of
the use. If applicable, evidence may be required that a nonprofit organization
is legitimate.
      (2)   The proposed use shall be operated by a governmental agency or
bona-fide nonprofit organization operated solely for public use or for the
recreation and enjoyment of members of such organization.
      (3)   Sufficient landscaping including trees, shrubs, and lawn shall be
provided to serve as a buffer between such use and adjoining properties, and to
insure an attractive appearance for the use.
      (4)   The appropriate area and number of off-street parking spaces shall
be established and met as set forth in §
600-1603. Parks, playgrounds and game courts shall be required to have one
space per 5,000 square feet of outdoor recreation area.
    M.   Pawn shops. Pawn shops shall only be allowed where provided by the
zoning district regulations, and provided that the following conditions are met
in addition to any stipulations set forth by the Zoning Hearing Board:
      (1)   All pawn shops shall provide proof of all applicable permits and
licenses.
      (2)   All pawn shops shall be registered with the City of Reading Police
Department.
      (3)   All signage shall conform to the sign requirements of that zoning
district.
      (4)   Prior to the receipt of pawned or purchased used items with a
retail value of more than $5, the operator of the pawn shop shall require that
a photo identification be shown and the pawn shop operator shall maintain a
written list of the name of such person and a description of the items. Such
list shall be available for inspection by a City Police Officer.
   N.   Places of worship. The proposed use shall be a bona fide nonprofit
religious use. Places of worship shall be allowed as provided in the zoning
district regulations provided that where special exception approval is
required, the following additional standards shall be met:
      (1)   A new place of worship shall not be allowed in the R-1, R-2 or R-
3 Districts in building space that is attached to a principal dwelling on
another lot, unless such adjacent lots are in common ownership.
      (2)   The intended use in the proposed location will not adversely affect
the comfortable enjoyment of property rights and otherwise adversely affect the
value of adjacent properties; that the design of any structure to be erected in
connection with such use is in keeping with the general character of the area;
and that sufficient landscaping, including trees, shrubs and lawn are provided
to appropriately buffer these from adjoining properties and to insure an
attractive appearance for the use.
      (3)   No new place of worship with a seating capacity of 300 persons or
more shall front on a minor street as defined in Part 2 of Chapter 515,
Subdivision and Land Development.
      (4)   If a place of worship is on a lot of greater than 10,000 square
feet, then a child day- care center shall be a permitted by right accessory
use. If a place of worship is on a smaller lot, then all of the requirements
for a day-care center shall be met.
   O.   Private surface parking facilities (lot or structure). Private surface
parking facilities shall meet the following additional standards:
      (1)   The facility is to be used primarily for the parking of passenger
automobiles.
      (2)   The facility shall not be used for the sales, long-term storage,
repair or servicing of automobiles.
      (3)   Entrances to and exits from the facility are to be located to
respect the character of the area.
      (4)   No advertising sign may be located on the facility.
      (5)   There shall be provided curbing, a wheel block securely anchored
into the ground or similar measure for each peripheral parking space.
      (6)   The parking facility shall be adequately screened from the street
and adjoining properties as required by §
600-1402 of this chapter.
      (7)   All surface parking facilities shall meet the design and
construction standards set forth in §
600-1602 of this chapter.
   P.   Swimming pools as a principal use. Swimming pools owned and/or operated
by the City of Reading, swimming pool associations, or a club shall be allowed
as provided in the zoning district regulations, and shall meet the following
standards are met and any other requirements as are deemed necessary by the
Zoning Hearing Board where the use requires special exception approval:
      (1)   A statement setting forth full particulars on the operation.
      (2)   Sufficient landscaping including trees, shrubs, and lawn shall be
provided to serve as a buffer between such use and adjoining properties, and to
insure an attractive appearance for the use.
      (3)   The appropriate area and number of off-street parking spaces shall
be established and met.
   Q.   Tower-based WCF facilities. Tower-based WCF facilities shall be allowed
as provided in the zoning district regulations, provided they meet the
standards outlined in Part 21 of this chapter and reasonable conditions set
forth by the Zoning Hearing Board consistent with the PA Municipalities
Planning Code. [Amended 3-27-2017 by Ord. No. 21-2017]
   R.   Roommate housing arrangements (as defined in §
600-2202, “roommate households”). When exceeding three nonrelated persons
living in one dwelling unit, require review and approval by the Zoning Hearing
Board as a special exception review. The applicant must present to the Hearing
Board:
      (1)   A site plan and architectural plans, drawn to scale. These plans
must show the location and dimensions of off-street parking, private entrances,
walkways, the dimensions and square footage of each room and storage space and
shall indicate the intended use of each room.
      (2)   The roommate housing arrangement must meet the standards of the
City of Reading Building, Housing and Fire Codes (Chapter 180, Construction
Codes) as required for residential rental properties. The owner must verify to
the City of Reading on an annual basis that the building meets all of the
plumbing, electrical, heating, building, fire, and similar standards set by the
City and by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
      (3)   No cooking facilities of any kind shall be located in any room
except the central kitchen.
      (4)   Every bedroom shall be at least 70 square feet of floor area and
there shall be no more than two occupants per bedroom.
      (5)   No basement or cellar shall be used as a habitable bedroom except
by special exception approval or variance.
      (6)   No roommate housing arrangement shall be located within 800 feet of
another roommate housing arrangement except by special exception approval or
variance.
§ 600-1203. Conditions for conditional uses.
   A.   Adult business. See "sexually oriented business" in this section.
   B.   Boarding houses. Such uses shall only be allowed where listed in the
zoning district regulations, provided that the following conditions are met in
addition to any conditions set forth by City Council:
      (1)   A site plan and architectural plans, drawn to scale, shall be
submitted. These plans shall show the location and dimensions of off-street
parking, private entrances, walkways, landscaping, the dimensions and square
footage of each room and storage space and shall indicate the intended use of
each room.
      (2)   One off-street parking space shall be provided for each two
occupants of the dwelling.
      (3)   Each boarding house shall contain complete bath facilities and a
central kitchen with complete cooking and washing facilities. The facilities
shall be available to the occupants of the boarding house at all hours. No
cooking facilities of any kind shall be located in any room except the central
kitchen.
      (4)   The applicant shall document to City Council that the boarding
house meets all of the plumbing, electrical, heating, building, fire and
similar standards set by the City and by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
      (5)   Every rooming unit shall contain a minimum of 150 square feet of
floor area and may be occupied by one person. In every rooming unit, the
bedroom thereof shall contain at least 70 square feet of floor area.
      (6)   In any dwelling in which water closet, lavatory basins, bathtubs or
shower facilities are shared by the occupants of more than one rooming unit,
such facilities shall be so located within the dwelling as to be accessible
without going through another dwelling unit or rooming unit.
      (7)   No basement or cellar shall be used as a habitable room or dwelling
unit unless:
         (a)   Floors and walls are substantially watertight.
         (b)   The total window area, total open area and ceiling height are in
accordance with
Chapter 180, Construction Codes. 22
         (c)   The required minimum window area of every habitable room is
entirely above the grade of the ground adjoining such window area, not
including stairwells and accessways.
      (8)   See also provisions for roommate housing arrangements, which is a
separate use.23
   C.   Bottle clubs. Bottle clubs shall only be allowed where listed in the
zoning district regulations, and provided the following standards are met along
with any other conditions set forth by City Council:
      (1)   Parking requirements shall be met as set forth in §
600-1603 of this chapter.
      (2)   A site plan and architectural plans, drawn to scale, shall be
submitted. These plans shall show the location and dimensions of off-street
parking, private entrances, walkways, landscaping, the dimensions and square
footage of each room and storage space and shall indicate the intended use of
each room.
      (3)   A statement must be presented setting forth the full particulars of
the use, including the hours of operation and any proposed entertainment and
dancing.
      (4)   The applicant must demonstrate that the proposed use in the
intended location will not adversely affect the value, or the safe and
comfortable enjoyment of property rights for adjacent property owners.
      (5)   Any building of a bottle club shall not be located within 1,000
feet of any primary or secondary school, place of worship, day-care facility,
municipal park, playground, library, sexually oriented business, or other
bottle club.
      (6)   After-hours clubs that allow on-site consumption of alcoholic
beverages between 2:30 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. in return for an admission charge or
an annual membership fee are effectively prohibited by State Act 219 of 1990,
as amended (18 Pa.C.S.A. § 7327).
      (7)   In the event that such use would be determined to be allowed, a
two-hundred-foot setback shall apply from the building and any parking areas
from any residential zoning district. The applicant shall prove that adequate
on-site security will be in place. See also
Chapter 127, Alcoholic Beverages, of the Code of the City of Reading, or the
successor chapter. Where that provision and this chapter may differ, the
strictest provision shall apply.
   D.   Conversions. This section applies to an existing building where it is
allowed by the zoning district regulations to be converted into new dwelling
units. The conversion of an existing one-family detached dwelling, one-family
attached dwelling or one-family semidetached dwelling into two or more dwelling
units shall be prohibited, as per §§
600-803 and 600-804. [Amended 2-14-2011 by Ord. No. 8-2011; 12-16-2013 by Ord.
No. 83-2013]
      (1)   A site plan, drawn to the scale, showing the location and
dimensions of all off-street parking, private entrances, walkways and
landscaping, shall be submitted, as well as architectural plans showing the
dimensions and square footage of all rooms and storage spaces and indicating
the intended use of all rooms.
      (2)   The conversion shall have the minimum floor area as designated by
the following schedule:
 
Apartment             Square Feet
Efficiency or studio  Not allowed
One-bedroom           550
Two-bedroom           700
Three or more bedroom 850
 
      (3)   For each dwelling unit, there shall be a minimum 1 1/2 off-street
parking spaces per unit.
      (4)   Documents indicating to the City Codes staff's satisfaction that
all plumbing, heating and electrical equipment and facilities are adequate and
appropriate for the proposed use. The entire building shall also be made
available for a code inspection.
      (5)   See also the requirements of
Chapter 308, Housing, including but not limited to requirements for the
designation of a local agent if the owner does not live locally.
   E.   Fire and ambulance stations. A fire and/or ambulance station may be
permitted as provided in the zoning district regulations, provided that the
following standards are met:
      (1)   A proposed social hall and/or benefit association shall be
considered as an additional "principal use" for the purposes of this Part.
      (2)   A complete plan of proposed traffic signalization and disruption
devices, lighting, alarms, sirens, public address systems, and other
infrastructure commonly associated with fire or ambulance stations, shall be
provided to the Planning Commission as part of the review required by §
303.a.2. of the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, 53 P.S. § 10303.a.2,
and/or land development plans.
      (3)   Firefighting, ambulance and rescue vehicles and apparatus may be
staged/displayed within their station's front yard. Fire and ambulance stations
are hereby exempted from the driveway width standards set forth in §
600-1503B(2) and C(1), and the setback consideration of §
600-1602B.
   F.   Bus shelter. The applicant shall seek input from the local public bus
service provider regarding bus stops. Any transit shelter shall be placed such
that it does not impede the normal pedestrian functions of the sidewalk. 24 
[Amended 8-26-2013 by Ord. No. 35-2013]
   G.   Junkyards. Junkyards may be allowed in the H-M Zone and shall need
conditional use approval; provided, that the following conditions are met in
addition to any stipulations set forth by City Council:
      (1)   All junkyards shall establish and maintain a fifty-foot wide buffer
strip in accordance with §
600-1401 of this chapter. No junk material or accessory structures shall be
stored or placed in the setback area.
      (2)   All junk shall be completely screened from public streets and
adjacent off-street parking areas by fencing, landscaping and other appropriate
measures, in accordance with the provisions established in §
600-1402 of this chapter, and City Planning recommendations.
      (3)   All junk shall be stored or arranged to permit access by emergency
equipment and personnel, and to minimize the accumulation of water.
      (4)   Any junkyard shall be maintained in such a manner to minimize
public or private nuisance, nor to cause any offensive or noxious sounds or
odors, nor to cause the breeding or harboring of rats, flies, or other vectors.
   H.   Public utilities. Public utility uses such as telephone equipment
centers and electric substations (but not including service storage yards), may
be allowed where provided in the zoning district regulations, provided that the
following standards are met:
      (1)   The entity shall be regulated by the Pennsylvania Public Utilities
Commission.
      (2)   The proposed installation in a specific residential location is
necessary for efficient service to the public in the neighborhood or area in
which the particular use is to be located.
      (3)   The design of any building in connection with such a facility
conforms to the general character of the area and will not adversely affect the
safe and comfortable enjoyment of property rights.
      (4)   Approved fencing and other security devices shall be provided.
      (5)   A buffer strip 10 feet in width and screening are provided and
shall be continually maintained in accordance with Part 14 of this chapter.
      (6)   Adequate off-street parking is provided.
      (7)   All area yard and building coverage requirements of the zoning
district in which the use is located shall be met.
      (8)   These provisions shall not apply to sanitary sewage pumping
stations, which shall be considered a municipal use.
   I.   Residential care facility, including group care facilities and group
care institutions. See the zoning district regulations concerning which types
are allowed in various districts.
      (1)   The following standards shall be for all residential care
facilities:
         (a)   A site plan and architectural plans, drawn to scale, shall be
submitted. These plans shall show the location and dimensions of off-street
parking, private entrances, walkways, landscaping, the dimensions and square
footage of each room and storage space and shall indicate the intended use of
each room.
         (b)   No residential care facility shall be located within 800 feet of
another group care facility, group institution, school, day-care home, or day-
care center.
         (c)   One off-street parking space shall be provided per employee
computed on the basis of the estimated maximum number of employees at any one
time, plus one space for each four patient/client beds.
         (d)   The premises at which the residential care facility is located
shall be owned or leased by the social service agency sponsoring the group care
facility.
         (e)   The sponsoring entity shall document to the Zoning Administrator
that all building, fire, plumbing, heating, electrical and similar systems meet
the standards set by the City and by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
         (f)   See also §
600-1201B.
      (2)   The following standards are for all group care facilities:
         (a)   Group care facilities, by design and intent, shall provide for
the temporary needs of transient residents.
         (b)   No group care facility shall have more than nine residents at
any given time, not including live-in supervisors. [Amended 12-16-2013 by Ord.
No. 83-2013]
         (c)   The only physical changes to the dwelling shall be those
required by law. When the use is abandoned, any subsequent use shall conform to
permitted uses in that zoning district.
         (d)   No more than two live-in supervisors shall reside in the group
care facility.
         (e)   Although live-in supervision is not required, the sponsoring
social service agency shall document to the Board that the agency shall provide
the residents of the group care facility with the physical safety and the
emotional support they require. Because residents of a group care facility are
likely to be suffering from personal crises, some form of immediate contact
with a counselor should be available at all hours. Likewise, immediate contact
with sponsoring social service agency should be available to members of the
public who may be in need of the services of the group care facility.
      (3)   The following standards are for all group care institutions.
         (a)   The group institution, by design and intent, shall provide for
the long-term needs of its residents and shall not accommodate the needs of
transient individuals.
         (b)   A licensed physician, psychologist, counselor or social worker
in the employ of or under contract to the social service agency shall be
responsible for the assignment of residents to the group institution.
         (c)   At least one supervisor shall be on call during all hours during
which any resident of the group institution is on the premises.
         (d)   The dwelling unit shall not be altered in any manner that would
change the original dwelling unit character of the group institution.
   J.   Sexually oriented businesses. Sexually oriented businesses shall only
be allowed where provided under the zoning district regulations and shall need
conditional use approval and shall meet the following standards, along with any
other conditions set forth by City Council:
      (1)   Such businesses shall include, but not be limited to, book and
video stores, movie theaters, cabarets and massage parlors.
      (2)   No sexually oriented business shall be established within 1,000
feet of a place of worship, a primary or secondary school, lot line of a
dwelling, residential zoning district boundary, child day care, nursery school,
park, playground, recreation trail, recreational facility open to community
use, or existing sexually oriented business.
      (3)   No pornographic material or other material deemed offensive to the
general public shall be visible from the outside of the premises.
      (4)   Any use established or approved after the effective date of this
chapter shall not be open to customers or patrons between the hours of 12:00
midnight and 6:00 a.m.
      (5)   See also
Chapter 473, Sexually Oriented Businesses, of the Code of the City of Reading,
including, but not limited to, the statement of purposes and findings.
   K.   Student home. Student homes in the R-1A, R-1 and R-2 Districts are
permitted only in an existing lawful apartment dwelling, as per §§
600-801, 600-802 and 600-803. In all other districts and in the Institutional
Overlay Zone, the student home regulations shall not apply and instead the
occupancy of a dwelling shall be regulated by the definition of a "family."
[Amended 12-16-2013 by Ord. No. 83-2013]
      (1)   A student home shall meet the same regulations as apply to the type
of dwelling unit, in addition to the student home regulations.
      (2)   The owner of any existing student home shall register its location
with the Zoning Administrator within one year after the enactment of this
chapter.
      (3)   Where a property is used for student housing and has been legally
established as a nonconforming use, the use shall only be allowed to continue
in such nonconforming manner if the owner registers such nonconformity with the
Zoning Administrator within one year after the effective date of this chapter
or a zoning amendment that made the use nonconforming.
      (4)   A site plan and architectural plans, drawn to scale. These plans
must show the location and dimensions of off-street parking, private entrances,
walkways, the dimensions and square footage of each room and storage space and
shall indicate the intended use of each room.
      (5)   The housing arrangement must meet the standards of the City of
Reading Building, Housing and Fire Codes (
Chapter 180, Construction Codes) as required for residential rental properties.
The owner must verify to the Zoning Administrator on an annual basis that the
building meets all of the plumbing, electrical, heating, building, fire, and
similar standards set by the City and by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
      (6)   No cooking facilities of any kind shall be located in any room
except the central kitchen.
      (7)   Every bedroom shall be at least 70 square feet of floor area and
there shall be no more than two occupants per bedroom.
      (8)   No basement or cellar shall be used as a habitable bedroom except
by special exception approval or variance.
      (9)   No student home shall be located within 500 linear feet of any
other lot on which is established a student home, except by variance, measured
by the shortest distance between the two lots where the proposed student home
is located (including, but not limited to, each existing student home use
located in any district which is of a different designation than the district
in which the new student home use is proposed).
      (10)   A one-family dwelling used as a student home shall have a floor
area of at least 1,000 square feet, exclusive of basements, garages and
accessory buildings.
      (11)   A student home shall meet the area and bulk requirements for the
type of dwelling in the applicable zoning district where such use is proposed.
      (12)   The owner of the student home, or the agent or manager of the
student home, shall annually register the student home with the Codes
Enforcement Division on a form provided by the City of Reading. If the owner of
the student home fails to maintain a current registration of his or her student
home, the Codes Enforcement Division in conjunction with the Zoning
Administrator shall enforce such condition in accordance with §
600-201 et seq. of this chapter.
      (13)   If the one-family dwelling where the student home is proposed
cannot meet the parking requirements set forth in §
600-1603A(36) herein, the governing body may still authorize the conditional
use with the condition that the number of occupants which may reside at the
student home shall be limited to the number of off-street parking spaces
provided for the dwelling.
      (14)   See the regulations of the R-1A, R-1 and R-2 Districts, which may
limit the types of dwellings that may be used as a "student home."
   L.   Taverns and nightclubs. Taverns and nightclubs shall be allowed as
provided in Part 8 of this chapter, in addition to any conditions set forth by
the City Council where conditional use approval is needed:
      (1)   For the purpose of this chapter, taverns are reputable, PLCB
licensed establishments designed primarily for the on-site consumption of
alcoholic beverages by consenting adults.
      (2)   The term "taverns" also includes bars, pubs, beer gardens, cocktail
lounges, saloons, and taprooms. See the definition of "nightclub."
      (3)   Except in the C-C District, no tavern or nightclub shall be located
within 500 feet of another tavern or other PLCB-licensed establishment.
      (4)   Except in the C-C District, no tavern or nightclub shall be located
within 1,000 feet of a school, place of worship, playground, hospital, day-care
facility, residential care facility or charitable institution.
      (5)   All taverns or nightclubs shall hold a valid license for the
premises in which the establishment is located.
      (6)   All taverns and nightclubs, except for food sales, if the
establishment holds a state- extended hours food license, shall only operate
between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 2:00 a.m. the following day.
      (7)   No tavern or nightclub shall contain less than 300 square feet of
usable floor area.
      (8)   Entertainment shall be permitted as an accessory use.
      (9)   All taverns and nightclubs shall comply with all state and local
codes regulating such establishments.
   M.   Treatment center.
      (1)   See definition.
      (2)   The applicant shall provide a written description of all conditions
(such as criminal parolees, alcohol addiction) that will cause persons to
occupy the use during the life the permit. Any future additions to this list
shall require an additional conditional use approval.
      (3)   The applicant shall prove to the satisfaction of the City Council
that the use will involve adequate on-site supervision and security measures to
protect public safety. If any applicable county, state, federal or professional
association standards provide guidance on the type of supervision that is
needed, the proposed supervision shall be compared to such standards.
      (4)   City Council may place conditions upon the use to protect public
safety, such as conditions on the types of residents and security measures.
      (5)   A methadone treatment center or other drug treatment center or a
use involving housing of two or more persons required to register their place
of residence under Megan's Law II, 42 Pa.C.S.A. § 9791 et seq., shall be set
back a minimum of 500 feet from each of the following: a primary or secondary
school, a public park or playground, or a child day-care center.
      (6)   See also §
600-1201B.
   N.    Telecommunications facility, tower based WCF and antenna that are not
defined as exempt under the PA Wireless Broadband Collocation Act (Note see
§600-800, 2100 and 2206).
      (1)   The applicant shall present a plan showing the following items:
         (a)   Locations of all existing uses and proposed telecommunications
facilities.
         (b)   Elevations of any existing uses and proposed telecommunications
facilities.
         (c)   Vehicular access, fencing and any easements for access and
utilities.
         (d)   The locations desired with two alternative locations.
      (2)   The telecommunications facility shall comply with all state and
federal laws and regulations concerning aviation safety.
      (3)   The applicant shall provide stealth technology to camouflage the
proposed facility to make them more visually appealing and blend the proposed
facility to render it minimally visible to the casual observer defined, as
approved by the Zoning Administrator, in consultation with the Public Works
Director.
      (4)   The City may retain the assistance of a consultant and/or expert to
assist in the review and evaluation of the application. The fees or costs
incurred will be covered by the zoning permit fee.
      (5)   If additional information is requested by the City or the
consultant before the application is deemed complete, the time required to
provide the additional information shall not be counted toward the 150 day
review period. [Added 3-27-2017 by Ord. No. 21-2017]
22.   Editor's Note: Amended during codification (see
Ch. 1, General Provisions, Part 2).
23.   Editor's Note: See §
600-1202R.
24.   Editor's Note: Original Subsection B, relating to sidewalks, which
immediately followed this subsection, is now included as §
600-1505.
§ 600-1204. Conditional use applications and procedures.
[Added 10-24-2011 by Ord. No. 53-2011]
   A.   Application. Applications for approval of a proposed conditional use
shall be made in writing and submitted in triplicate on forms prepared and
provided by the City of Reading. The application shall be accompanied by
payment of the applicable fee as determined and approved from time to time by
ordinance of City Council 25   and a copy of the deed to the subject property.
Such forms shall require, but shall not be limited to the following
information: 26
      (1)   The name, address and signature of the applicant or appellant.
      (2)   The name and address of the owner of the property.
      (3)   A brief description and location of the property to be affected by
such proposed change or appeal.
      (4)   A statement of the present zoning classification of the property in
question and the present use thereof.
      (5)   A reasonably accurate description of the new construction,
additions or changes intended to be made under this application indicating the
size, height and uses of such proposed improvements.
      (6)   A plot plan of the property to be affected, indicating the location
and size of the lot and the size of existing and intended improvements, shall
be attached to the description. Plot plans shall conform to the requirements
for plans and specifications specified for a zoning permit application in §
600-301D of this chapter.
      (7)   Such other information necessary to allow the City Council to
determine that all requirements of this chapter have been met.
      (8)   The application shall be signed and sworn to by the owner of such
property.
   B.   When the application is deemed by the Zoning Administrator to be
complete, the Zoning Administrator shall determine whether or not the
conditional use sought is one which is specifically authorized as a conditional
use in the zoning district wherein the applicant is seeking a conditional use.
If the Zoning Administrator determines that the conditional use sought is not
one which is specifically authorized in the applicable zoning district, the
application shall be denied and a written report of such finding shall be
submitted to the Zoning Hearing Board and City Council. Any applicant aggrieved
by such determination of the Zoning Administrator shall have the right to
appeal said determination to the Zoning Hearing Board in accordance with the
procedures set forth in §§
600-406 through
600-410 of this chapter.
   C.   If the Zoning Administrator has determined that the conditional use
sought is one which is specifically authorized as a conditional use in the
zoning district wherein the applicant's property is located, one copy of the
application shall be forwarded to the City Planning Commission for its review;
one copy shall be retained by the Zoning Administrator and one copy shall be
forwarded to the City Clerk for review by City Council or its designated member
or independent attorney appointed as a hearing officer pursuant to 53 P.S. §
10913.2.
      (1)   The application shall be reviewed at one or more advertised
hearings of City Council or its designated hearing officer with the initial
hearing being commenced within 60 days of receipt of the completed application,
unless the applicant agrees in writing to an extension of time. Each subsequent
hearing shall be held within 45 days of the prior hearing. The City Council
shall either approve or disapprove the application in writing within 45 days
after the date of the final hearing. If a hearing officer is so designated and
appointed by City Council, the hearing officer shall submit written findings
and recommendations to City Council in sufficient time to permit a decision by
Council or findings, where no decision is called for, within the allotted time
for decision as provided herein.
      (2)   Notices of all hearings shall be given in accordance with the
requirements of §
600-410A of this chapter.
      (3)   The hearing shall be conducted by the designated hearing officer or
City Council in accordance with the same procedures and safeguards as those
specified in §
600-410D through L of this chapter. [Amended 3-23-2015 by Ord. No. 13-2015]
      (4)   The decision and/or findings of City Council shall be made in
accordance with the same requirements as those set forth for the Zoning Hearing
Board in §
600-412 of this chapter. [Amended 3-23-2015 by Ord. No. 13-2015]
      (5)   Notice of the decision and/or findings by the hearing officer or
City Council shall be made in accordance with the same requirements as those
set forth for the Zoning Hearing Board in §
600-413.
      (6)   In the case of a proposed conditional use that may be subject to
additional regulation and control by state or federal regulation(s) or statute
(s), City Council may defer a final decision for up to 30 additional days or
longer upon receipt of written request therefor from the applicant.
      (7)   (Reserved) 27
      (8)   The granting of permission to conduct a conditional use does not
exempt the applicant from acquiring all approvals required by
Chapter 515, Subdivision and Land Development, of the Code of the City of
Reading.
      (9)   All appeals from the decision of City Council shall be made in
compliance with the provisions of the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning
Code, as amended.
   D.   Standards. Conditional uses shall meet the specific standards
established for each use by this chapter and all other applicable zoning
district requirements and general regulations established by this chapter. In
addition, the following standards shall be met:
      (1)   The use shall be one which is specifically authorized as a
conditional use in the zoning district wherein the applicant is seeking a
conditional use.
      (2)   Services and utilities shall be made available to adequately
service the proposed use.
      (3)   The use will not generate traffic such that hazardous or unduly
congested conditions will result.
      (4)   The use is appropriate to the site in question.
      (5)   The use shall not adversely affect the character of the general
neighborhood, or the health and safety of residents or workers on adjacent
properties and in the general neighborhood.
      (6)   The applicant shall demonstrate, as a condition to approval of his
application, that the standards in this subsection and those specified
elsewhere in this chapter for the use in question would be met.
      (7)   The City Council may impose such additional safeguards as are
necessary to protect the public health, safety and welfare.
25.   Editor's Note: See
Ch. 212, Fees.
26.   Editor's Note: Amended during codification (see
Ch. 1, General Provisions, Part 2).
27.   Editor's Note: Former Subsection C(7), regarding cases where a hearing
officer is appointed, was repealed 3-23-2015 by Ord. No. 13-2015.
Part 13
Fences And Walls; Sight Triangles
§ 600-1301. Fence and wall permits.
[Amended 2-14-2011 by Ord. No. 8-2011]
No fence, wall or similar structure greater than three feet in height shall be
erected without first obtaining a permit from the Zoning Administrator. The
height of fences and walls shall be measured based upon the total height above
the ground, such as if a two-foot tall fence is constructed on top of a two-
foot tall wall, the structure shall be considered four feet high. See also
Chapter 180, Construction Codes, for requirements for any retaining wall.
§ 600-1302. Fence and wall heights.
Fences, walls and similar structures in the minimum front yard of a residential
or R-PO District shall not exceed four feet in height. In all other cases,
fences, walls or similar structures exclusive of ornamentation shall not exceed
six feet in height in any district, except: the Manufacturing or C-H Districts
as provided in Subsection A below; or where the applicant proves to the
satisfaction that the taller fencing is needed to secure an electric substation
or similar safety or health hazard. Decorative posts and similar ornamentation
of a fence or wall may extend an additional one foot above the maximum height,
provided the ornamental features are not continuous in a way that effectively
extends the overall height of the fence or wall.
   A.   Fences in Manufacturing or C-H Districts may be taller than six feet;
provided that such fences shall not exceed eight feet in height if the fence is
to be located within 20 feet from a residential zone or a residential use.
§ 600-1303. Required sight triangle. [Amended 3-10-2025 by Ord. No. 15A-2025]
   A.   All lots containing a driveway or located at the intersection of an
alley or street shall comply with the following sight triangle requirements:
      (1)   No building, fence, wall, structure, object and/or site improvement
shall be erected or permitted which exceeds a height of 30 inches above the
elevation of the intersecting streets and is located within the designated
sight triangle.
      (2)   Features that have a clearance of greater than 10 feet shall not be
regulated, such as the trimmed canopy of a shade tree or the sign face of a
pole-mounted sign.
      (3)   A fence that allows more than 75% visibility through it (such as a
typical open chain-link fence) shall not be regulated by this section.
      (4)   A utility pole or a pole for a permitted sign may be located within
a clear sight triangle, provided it does not have a diameter greater than 20
inches.
      (5)   A trunk of an existing tree may continue to be located in a clear
sight triangle, provided the adjacent landowner trims the branches to minimize
sight obstructions.
      (6)   All traffic control signs, street lights and/or standard mail boxes
shall be permitted within the sight triangle.
      (7)   An existing building may be replaced with a new building without
needing a larger setback to comply with the required clear sight triangle.
   B.   The dimensional requirements for clear sight triangles that pertain to
a driveway, alley or street intersection are specified under §
515-502.F.(7) of the Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance.
   C.   A modification or reduction to the dimensional requirements specified
for a clear sight triangle shall be considered as part of a Subdivision and
Land Development Plan Application or a Zoning Variance Application, as
applicable. All such modifications or reductions shall not reduce the required
sight distance requirements nor shall it create a traffic hazard for vehicular
and/or pedestrian traffic patterns.
§ 600-1304. Prohibited fences, walls, materials or similar structures.
The following fences, walls, similar structures or fencing and wall materials
shall be prohibited:
   A.   Barbed wire.
      (1)   When the fence, wall or similar structure is located in any
residential district associated with a residential use, or abuts a residential
property; is located in the C- N or R-PO Zones; or is located in a front yard
area or abuts a street (as defined in
Chapter 515, Subdivision and Land Development) in the C-C and C-R Zones.
      (2)   When the barbed wire would be located less than six feet above
grade.
      (3)   When the barbed wire would extend beyond the exterior facade of the
fence, wail or similar structure.
      (4)   When the fence, wall, or similar structure is not properly buffered
in accordance with §
600-1401 of this chapter.
   B.   Fabric.
   C.   Electrically charged fences, other than invisible fences for animals.
   D.   Broken glass affixed to or on any wall, fence or similar structure.
   E.   Junk, including but not limited to discarded vehicles, appliances, and
anything not in accordance with
Chapter 180, Construction Codes, requirements.
   F.   Razor wire, except around a prison or correctional institution.
§ 600-1305. Temporary fences, walls or similar structures.
Temporary fences, walls or similar structures may be used on construction
sites, provided such fences, walls or similar structures are removed upon
completion of the construction project. The Zoning Administrator may request a
timetable for construction from the contractor. All temporary fences, walls or
similar structures shall meet the requirements of that zoning district.
§ 600-1306. Exceptions.
This Part 13 shall not regulate fences or walls around a City-owned use, public
park, public playground, public school properties or water or sewage
facilities.
Part 14
Buffer Strips And Screening
§ 600-1401. Buffer strips.
   A.   A buffer strip shall be provided where required by another section of
this chapter or where a new or expanded principal nonresidential use is
proposed abutting an existing principal residential use on another lot in a
residential district. Where required, a buffer strip shall meet the following:
[Amended 2-14-2011 by Ord. No. 8-2011]
      (1)   Be established and maintained along the side and rear lot lines
that are not abutting a street and that are adjacent to a residential district.
      (2)   Be free from buildings, structures, accessory buildings, signs,
driveways, parking areas, outdoor storage areas, recreation facilities and all
activity areas, except for any necessary perpendicular crossings.
      (3)   Be landscaped with primarily evergreen trees and shrubs in addition
to lawn or other attractive vegetative ground cover.
      (4)   Be at least six feet in width, unless a wider width is specified by
another section of this chapter.
   B.   In addition, a buffer strip along a public street or lot line of a
dwelling shall be required where three or more tractor-trailers or trailers of
tractor-trailer combinations will be kept overnight on a regular basis and will
be visible from the street or dwelling.
   C.   In addition, a six-foot minimum width buffer strip along a public
street shall be required where new parking spaces for eight or more vehicles
are proposed to be adjacent to and visible from a public street. Such buffer
strip shall include plants with an anticipated mature height of four feet and
deciduous shade trees. Such buffer shall be designed so that it is possible to
have views into the parking area for security reasons. Such buffer strip and
trees may be allowed by the City to intrude into the right-of-way width,
provided sufficient sidewalk width remains for pedestrians and wheelchairs.
   D.   Where a buffer strip is required under
Chapter 515, Subdivision and Land Development, such SALDO requirement shall
apply instead of this chapter requirement. In such case, the Planning
Commission may approve a modification under the SALDO.
§ 600-1402. Screening.
Screening shall be provided and maintained in all buffer strips so as to
provide a visual barrier to reduce views from various operations and features
from a public street or adjacent dwellings. All utilitarian areas such as
delivery and service areas, truck parking areas, outdoor storage areas, and
waste disposal storage and pickup areas for principal business uses shall be
screened. Except for screening required by §
600-1401C above, screening, where required, shall consist of the following:
   A.   Dense hedges of shrubbery or evergreens at least four feet in height,
planted with spacing that can reasonably be expected to result in a continuous
visual screen with minimum height of six feet within three years. Where the
width of the buffer strip allows, the plants shall be placed in staggered rows
to allow room for future growth.
   B.   Where the Zoning Administrator determines that a noise conflict may
occur, the screening shall also be accompanied by a durable fence or masonry
wall at least 70% solid of uniform color(s) and with a height of six feet.
Part 15
Private Roads, Driveways And Parking Areas; Sidewalks
§ 600-1501. Private roads and driveways.
   A.   All private roads and driveways shall be approved by the Department of
Public Works.
   B.   All private roads and driveways shall be properly maintained by the
property owner.
§ 600-1502. Private parking areas.
   A.   All private parking areas shall be constructed to standards in §
600-1602.
   B.   All private parking areas shall be properly graded, constructed and
surfaced. Adequate stormwater runoff measures must be approved by the
Department of Public Works and Codes Services Office.
   C.   All private parking areas, including all required landscaping and/or
buffering, shall be properly maintained.
   D.   All private parking areas shall have direct access to a public street,
unless use of a private street, parking court or similar feature is approved by
the City, with guaranteed rights of access.
   E.   Any new, relocated or expanded driveway or parking lot entrance or exit
onto a public street shall need review and approval by the City Department of
Public Works or their designee. Such entrances and exits shall comply with
Parts 15 and 16 of this chapter.
§ 600-1503. Private driveways.
   A.   All private driveways shall have clear sight triangles as determined in
§
515-502F(7) of
Chapter 515, Subdivision and Land Development.
   B.   Driveways in residential districts and/or for residential uses shall
not be less than 40 feet from any street intersection, measured from the point
of intersection of the respective curblines, nor less than 15 feet from any
intersection of a street and an alley.
      (1)   Residential driveways shall not be less than eight feet or more
than 14 feet in width, unless specifically approved otherwise by the City or
PennDOT.
      (2)   Commercial driveways for two-way traffic shall be 20 feet in width,
unless specifically approved otherwise by the City or PennDOT.
   C.   Driveways in commercial or manufacturing districts (other than for
residential uses) shall be no closer than 50 feet to the nearest curbline
intersection of two streets.
      (1)   Driveways in commercial or manufacturing zones shall not be less
than 20 feet nor more than 36 feet in width at the curbline, unless
specifically approved otherwise by the City or PennDOT.
      (2)   Driveways for two-way traffic shall have a minimum width of 20
feet, unless specifically approved otherwise by the City or PennDOT.
   D.   Section 600-1502E shall apply.
§ 600-1504. Access driveways.
[Amended 2-14-2011 by Ord. No. 8-2011]
Each lot shall not have more than two access driveways onto any one street,
unless specifically approved otherwise by: PennDOT along a State road; or by
the City as part of a subdivision or land development. Insofar as possible, the
use of common accessways by two or more adjoining premises shall be encouraged
in order to reduce the number of access points along the street.
§ 600-1505. Sidewalks.28  [Amended 3-10-2025 by Ord. No. 15A-2025]
   A.   Curbs, sidewalks, pedestrian accessible ramps, crosswalks, paths and/or
driveway ramps shall be located, designed, constructed and maintained in
accordance with the provisions specified under
Chapter 515 Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance and
Chapter 600 (Zoning).
   B.   Curbs, sidewalks, pedestrian accessible ramps, crosswalks, paths and/or
driveway ramps shall not be constructed, altered, removed, modified and/or
replaced unless approval has been granted by the City of Reading via:
      (1)   As part of a Zoning Permit, as issued by the Zoning Office and
authorized by the Property Maintenance Department and/or Public Works
Department; or
      (2)   As part of a Subdivision and/or Land Development Plan, as required
by the Planning Office, Property Maintenance Department and/or Public Works
Department and approved by the Planning Commission under the provisions
specified by
Chapter 515 (Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance); or
      (3)   As part of a public improvements project or permit authorized by
the City of Reading and/or Pennsylvania Department of Transportation.
      (4)   As part of a property maintenance code requirement and/or building
code requirement as determined by the Property Maintenance Department and/or
Building and Trades Department.
28.   Editor's Note: Added during codification (see
Ch. 1, General Provisions, Part 2).
Part 16
Off-Street Parking And Loading
§ 600-1601. New and existing uses.
Adequate off-street parking spaces and loading areas shall be provided for all
new construction and uses where required.
   A.   Every parcel or lot used as a public or private parking garage, lot or
loading area and all off-street parking and loading areas shall be developed,
maintained and used in accordance with the provisions set forth in this
section.
   B.   All uses shall meet the off-street parking and loading requirements set
forth in this section, except that there shall be no off-street parking
required for nonresidential uses in the C-C and C-R Zoning Districts.
§ 600-1602. Design and construction.
   A.   All parking areas shall be: adequately graded; properly drained;
permanently surfaced with concrete, macadam or paving block, or other paving
material approved by the City Engineer (such as porous concrete or porous
asphalt); and maintained adequately. Stone, dirt and similar loose materials
are not permitted, except that the City Engineer may approve crushed stone
parking in specific areas of occasional and/or seasonal use and/or in public
recreational areas. A lawful existing stone driveway and/or parking spaces for
a single-family detached dwelling is not required to be paved, provided it is
maintained in stone.
   B.   Where a rear or side alley exists or can be feasibly extended, vehicle
parking shall be accessed from the alley, as opposed to creating a new driveway
entrance onto a public street, except where required otherwise by PennDOT along
a state road or where approved otherwise by the City Planning Commission. This
provision shall only apply to alleys with a minimum width of 10 feet. For
dwellings in the R-1 District, a minimum of 15 feet of depth of open rear yard
or recreational patio space shall be maintained, such as between the dwelling
and any parking space along the alley. See also limitations on the amount of
front yard parking in §
600-803 for the R-2 District and in §
600-804 for the R-3 District. [Amended 2-14-2011 by Ord. No. 8-2011]
   C.   Parking areas shall be designed so that a vehicle may proceed to and
from it without requiring the movement of any other vehicle, except for parking
for a one-family dwelling.
   D.   Nonparallel off-street parking space stalls shall include a rectangular
area with a minimum width of nine feet and a minimum length of 18 feet. If a
lot or structure includes 40 or more off-street spaces, a maximum of 20% of the
spaces may include a minimum rectangular area of 8.5 feet by 16 feet, if such
spaces are marked "compact cars only" and are distributed so that they are not
the most convenient spaces on the lot or structure.
   E.   All off-street parallel parking spaces shall be at least 20 feet long
and eight feet wide. Uses attracting large vehicles shall provide
proportionately larger spaces.
   F.   The minimum width of aisles providing access to parking spaces shall
be:
 
Angle of Parking Minimum Aisle Width For One- Minimum Aisle Width For Two-Way
(degrees)        Way Traffic (feet)           Traffic (feet)
Parallel         12                           20
1° to 34°      12                           20
35° to 54°     16                           22
55° to 89°     18                           22
90°             22                           22
 
Within a parking structure of two or more levels or underground parking, the
above aisle widths may each be reduced by two feet.
   G.   All parking spaces shall be clearly defined by painted lines or wheel
blocks.
   H.   The space between any parking area and the property line of the
premises shall be landscaped with vegetative ground cover. Plant screening may
also be required under §
600-1402.
   I.   See requirements for buffer strips and plant screening in §§
600-1401 and 600-1402. See §
600-814 for parking setbacks in the Penn Square Overlay Zone.
   J.   Curbing, guardrails, a landscaped strip or anchored wheel blocks shall
be installed adjacent to all public rights-of-way.
   K.   Curbing may be required to control stormwater runoff as determined by
the Department of Public Works.
   L.   No part of any surface parking area for more than five vehicles shall
be closer than 10 feet to any dwelling, primary or secondary school, hospital
or other institution for human care. This distance may be reduced to six feet
on the condition that appropriate screening is provided according to §
600-1402.
   M.   All parking areas of five spaces or more shall be adequately
illuminated for security purposes between the hours of sunset and sunrise.
Lighting shall not spill onto adjacent properties and shall not shine into the
eyes of motorists.
   N.   All off-street parking areas for 10 or more vehicles shall be planted
with shade trees, which shall be located to maximize the visibility of the
trees and the amount of paving that is shaded in a quantity equal to not less
than one shade tree for every 10 parking spaces. The species of such trees
shall be approved by the City and such trees shall have a minimum trunk
diameter of two inches. The trees shall be protected from damage by vehicles by
a setback from paving, curb stops, curbing or similar methods.
   O.   See screening requirements along a street in §§
600-1401 and 600-1402. All off-street truck loading docks shall be effectively
screened on any side facing a public right-of-way, and shall be screened on
each side which adjoins or faces premises situated in any residential zone or
premises used for residential, hospital or institutional purposes in any zone
by a fence of acceptable design, wall or compact hedge. Such fence, wall or
hedge shall be not less than four feet and no solid portion shall be more than
six feet in height and shall be maintained in good condition and shall provide
year-round screening. The City may also approve an architectural wall to serve
as a screen, if the exterior design of such wall is approved in advance.
   P.   No parking area of more than five spaces shall exceed a slope of 5%
grade.
   Q.   All parking areas of more than five spaces shall need approval by the
Department of Public Works after a site plan is submitted.
   R.   All parking areas of more than 10 spaces shall be approved by the
Department of Public Works and the City Planning Commission.
   S.   All areas between a sidewalk and the curb of a street shall be
maintained in vegetation, except at approved driveway crossings. Tree grates
may be used.
   T.   See also restrictions in the C-C and C-R District regulations regarding
parking open to the general public and certain other parking. See also §
600-1008 regarding parking in the R-3 and C-R Districts.
§ 600-1603. Off-street parking standards.
   A.   Off-street parking shall be provided in accordance with the provisions
of this subsection. In the case of mixed occupancies or uses, the Zoning
Administrator shall compute separately the requirements as set forth in this
section, for each occupancy or use, and then add the requirements of the
individual occupancies or uses to obtain the total parking requirements.
      (1)   Sexually oriented business or massage parlor: one parking space for
every 30 square feet of building floor area that is accessible to customers.
      (2)   Auto repair and other service establishments: parking or storage
space for all vehicles used directly in the conduct of the business plus one
parking space for each 1 1/2 employees.
      (3)   Banks and fiduciary institutions: one space for each 300 square
feet of net customer area and one space for each two employees.
      (4)   Bed-and-breakfast facilities: one space for each guest rental unit
plus two additional parking spaces.
      (5)   Bingo halls: one space for each three permitted seats, based upon
legal limits established by the State Fire Code.
      (6)   Boardinghouse: one space for every two occupants age 18 or older
that the building is designed to house.
      (7)   Bowling alleys: two spaces for each bowling lane, plus spaces for
other on-site uses.
      (8)   Clubs, lodges, social buildings: one space for each three permitted
seats, based upon legal limits established by the Fire Code.
      (9)   Child care center or adult care center: one parking space for every
12 persons cared for, with these spaces designed for safe and convenient
dropoff and pickup, plus one additional parking space for every two employees.
[Amended 2-14-2011 by Ord. No. 8-2011; amended 3-10-2025 by Ord. No. 15A-2025]
      (10)   Fire and ambulance stations: one space for each employee on the
largest working shift, in addition to any spaces reserved for City-owned
vehicles and apparatus. An additional 20% shall be provided for visitors.
      (11)   Fire and rescue service operations (other than fire stations):
off-street parking shall be provided at the rate of at least one space for
every four classroom seats. When located in the Municipal Use District, a
common parking area may be delineated.
      (12)   Funeral homes: one space for each 50 square feet of floor area of
the largest viewing room.
      (13)   Gas station: parking or storage space for all vehicles used
directly in the conduct of the business plus four spaces for each vehicle
service bay and one space for every 1 1/2 persons employed on the premises at
maximum employment on a single shift.
      (14)   Group child care home, family child care home, adult care home, or
group care facility: parking for the building or structure occupied by the use
(unless no parking exists on the lot for the existing building or structure)
plus one parking space for each nonresident employee. [Amended 2-14-2011 by
Ord. No. 8-2011; amended 3-10-2025 by Ord. No. 15A-2025]
      (15)   Hospitals and similar uses: one space per one and two-tenths
employee computed on the basis of the estimated maximum number of employees at
any one time and one space for every four beds.
      (16)   Housing for persons 62 years and older and/or persons with
disabilities: one space for every two employees, plus 1 1/2 spaces for every 10
dwelling units.
      (17)   Laundromats: one space for every three washing machines.
      (18)   Law enforcement operations: off-street parking shall be provided
at the rate of at least one space for every four classroom seats/shooting
lanes. When located in the Municipal Use District, a common parking area may be
delineated.
      (19)   Libraries, museums, visitor centers, post offices, civic centers
and similar establishments: parking or storage space for all vehicles used
directly in the operation of such establishment plus four parking spaces for
the first 1,000 square feet of total floor area and one additional space for
every 250 square feet of floor area.
      (20)   Manufacturing and industrial establishments: one space for each
one and two-tenths employees of the maximum working shift.
      (21)   Motor vehicle sales and repair: one space for each 250 square feet
of building floor area and one space for each service bay.
      (22)   Motels and hotels: one space per rental unit and an additional one
space for each two employees.
      (23)   Nursing home or life-care retirement facility: one off-street
parking space shall be provided per employee computed on the basis of the
estimated maximum number of employees at any one time, plus one space for every
three patient/client beds.
      (24)   Offices: one space for each 200 square feet of floor area.
      (25)   Parking garages, in addition to that provided for parking of
customer vehicles: one space for each employee on the maximum work shift.
      (26)   Places of public assembly, such as auditoriums, arenas, stadiums,
theaters:
         (a)   With fixed seating: one space for every four seats.
         (b)   Without fixed seating: one space for every four persons who may
legally be admitted to the largest room at one time under fire prevention laws.
      (27)   Places of worship and similar establishments: one space for each
four seats or one space for every 10 linear feet of pews.
      (28)   Public (municipal) buildings: one space for each 200 square feet
of total floor area.
      (29)   Recreation facilities:
         (a)   Indoor: one space for each 100 square feet of net floor area or
one space for each four persons using the facility at the projected peak hour
of use.
         (b)   Outdoor parks, playgrounds, playing fields, and game courts: one
space for each 5,000 square feet of outdoor recreation area.
      (30)   Residential care facility: one off-street parking space shall be
provided per employee computed on the basis of the estimated maximum number of
employees at any one time, plus one space for every four patient/client beds.
      (31)   Residential uses:
         (a)   Conversions: 1 1/2 spaces for each dwelling unit.
         (b)   Attached dwellings: 1 1/2 spaces for each dwelling unit.
         (c)   Detached dwellings: two spaces for each dwelling unit.
         (d)   Multifamily dwellings: 1 1/2 spaces for each dwelling unit.
      (32)   Restaurants, taverns and nightclubs: one space for each four seats
permitted and one space per two employees. All restaurants shall provide an
absolute minimum of five spaces. [Amended 2-14-2011 by Ord. No. 8-2011]
      (33)   Retail stores (except shopping centers): one space for each 250
square feet of floor area. The Zoning Administrator may reduce off-street
parking spaces to one space per 500 square feet for neighborhood-oriented
retail uses. For retail sales areas of furniture, lumber, carpeting, bedding or
floor coverings, only one space per 800 square feet of floor area shall be
required.
      (34)   Schools, primary or secondary:
         (a)   Elementary, middle, and junior high schools: one space per one
and two-tenths employees, and adequate space for buses and deliveries.
         (b)   High schools and all other types of educational/vocational
institutions: one space per one and two-tenths employees, plus one space for
every 10 classroom seats designed for students 16 years and older, and adequate
space for buses and deliveries.
      (35)   Shopping center: one space for each 250 square feet of floor area
accessible to customers.
      (36)   Student home:
         (a)   R-1A and R-1: one space per every occupant which would be
permitted to reside in the dwelling up to a maximum of three, plus one
additional, subject to the provisions of Part 12.
         (b)   R-2: one space per every occupant which would be permitted to
reside in the dwelling up to a maximum of three, plus one additional, subject
to the provisions of Part 12.
      (37)   Recycling operations: off-street parking shall be provided at the
rate of at least one space per employee, if any. Rather, a minimum of two
loading spaces, exclusive of driveways and sized according to the largest
vehicles permitted, shall be provided for every container placed. When located
in the Municipal Use District, a common parking area may be delineated.
      (38)   Swim clubs: one space per each 400 square feet of water surface.
      (39)   Trade, vocational or hobby schools: one space per two students age
16 or older on premises during peak times plus one space per 1 1/2 employees.
      (40)   Treatment center: one space per two residents age 16 or older plus
one space per nonresident intended to be treatment at peak times, plus one
space per 1 1/2 employees.
      (41)   Universities and colleges: one parking space for every two persons
employed at peak periods at the institution, plus one space for each five
nonresident students on the premises at peak times, plus parking for on-campus
housing, plus additional space as required by this parking schedule because of
any supplementary parking generating activities at the institution. The City
may approve the use of off-site parking if the institution provides a regular
shuttle service.
      (a)   Dormitories of a college or university: one space for every three
beds, provided that the required number of off-street parking spaces for the
dormitory may be located on a separate lot within 500 feet of the building
entrance, subject otherwise to the requirements of Section
600-1603-I-(1).
      (b)   Other dormitories, residence halls, fraternities, sororities: one
space for every two beds.
      (c)   Subparagraphs (a) and (b) shall not apply to dormitories which are
located on a college or university campus, and which exclusively house students
who are prohibited by the college or university from owning or parking a
vehicle on campus. [Amended 3-23-2020 by Ord. No. 32-2020]
      (42)   Wholesale establishments or warehouses: one space for each one and
two-tenths employee of a maximum working shift.
      (43)   Wastewater treatment operations: off-street parking shall be
provided at the rate of at least one space per full-time employee on the
largest shift, plus 10% for visitors, inspectors, shift change flexibility, et
cetera. When located in the Municipal Use District, a common parking area may
be delineated.
   B.   When a computation of the number of required spaces results in a
fraction, such fraction shall be resolved to the next highest whole number.
   C.   The collective provision for off-street parking by two or more
buildings or uses located on adjacent industrial or commercial lots is
permitted, provided there is a written agreement between the property owners
and that the total number of spaces shall not be less than the sum required
when computed separately, except as approved below.
   D.   For the purposes of this chapter, the number of employees of a use
shall be based on the estimated maximum daily or maximum eight-hour shift
requirements in a twenty-four-hour period.
   E.   Structures and uses in existence at the date of adoption of this
chapter shall not be subject to the requirements of this Part so long as the
kind or extent of use is not changed, and provided that any parking facility
now serving such structures or uses shall not in the future be reduced below
such requirements.
   F.   Change in requirements and modifications to parking requirements.
Whenever there is an alteration of a structure or a change or extension of a
use which increases the parking requirements according to the standards of this
Part, the total additional parking required for the alteration, change or
extension shall be provided within 120 days.
      (1)   If a nonresidential use expands by an aggregate total maximum of 5%
in the applicable measurement (such as building floor area) beyond what existed
at the time of adoption of this chapter, then no additional parking is
required. For example, if an existing building included 3,000 square feet, and
a single minor addition of 150 square feet was proposed, then additional
parking would not be required. This addition without providing new parking
shall only be allowed one time per lot.
      (2)   As a special exception, the Zoning Hearing Board is authorized to
approve modifications to the off-street parking requirements for a lot if the
applicant proves to the satisfaction of the Zoning Hearing Board that such
modifications are necessary to allow appropriate adaptive reuse of an existing
principal nonresidential building into a new approved use.
      (3)   Reduction of parking requirements.
         (a)   Purposes. To minimize the amount of land covered by paving,
while making sure adequate parking is provided. To recognize that unique
circumstances may justify a reduction in parking.
         (b)    As a special exception, the Zoning Hearing Board may authorize
a reduction in the number of off-street parking spaces required to be provided
for a use, provided that the applicant has demonstrated to the satisfaction of
the Board that the proposal would not substantially increase traffic congestion
along a street, create a traffic safety hazard, or otherwise negatively impact
public health or safety. The Zoning Administrator may require that the
applicant shall submit a parking and traffic management plan to the Planning
Commission for review and comment prior to making an application for such
relief to the Zoning Hearing Board. The Zoning Hearing Board shall consider the
recommendations and findings of the Planning Commission, if any, before
granting a reduction in off-street parking requirements. [Amended 3-23-2020 by
Ord. No. 31-2020]
         (c)   The applicant shall provide evidence justifying the proposed
reduced number of spaces, such as studies of similar developments during their
peak hours. The applicant shall also provide relevant data, such as numbers of
employers, peak excepted number of customers/visitors and similar data.
         (d)   As part of its parking and traffic management plan, the
applicant may provide evidence that parking needs will be reduced or that off-
site parking is feasible because the applicant agrees to make a long-term
commitment to a shuttle service for residents or employees and/or to subsidize
the use of public transit for employees. Such plan shall include sufficient
information about the hours and days of operation of transportation services,
location of shuttle/bus stops, location of satellite parking areas, emergency
ride provisions, and any other information necessary for the Board to determine
whether the traffic and parking demands of the proposal would substantially
increase traffic congestion along a street, create a traffic safety hazard, or
otherwise negatively impact public health or safety. [Amended 3-23-2020 by Ord.
No. 31-2020]
         (e)   Reserved area for additional parking. Under this section, the
Zoning Hearing Board may require that a portion of the required parking be met
through a reservation of an area for future parking. The Board may require the
reservation for a certain number of years or an indefinite period corresponding
to the years the buildings are in use.
            [1]   Such reservation shall be in a form acceptable to the Zoning
Hearing Board Solicitor that legally binds current and future owners of the
land to keep the reserved parking area in open space and then to provide the
additional parking if the City determines it is necessary. A deed restriction
is recommended.
            [2]   If approved under this Subsection F(3)(e), the applicant
shall present a site plan to the Zoning Administrator that shows the layout
that will be used for the additional parking if the parking is required to be
provided in the future. The site plan shall show that the additional parking is
integrated with the overall traffic access and pedestrian access for the site,
and that the additional parking will be able to meet City requirements.
            [3]   The additional parking that is "reserved" under this
subsection shall be required to be kept as landscaped open area, until such
time as the Zoning Hearing Board decision may authorize the land's release from
the restriction, or until the City may require that the land be developed as
parking.
            [4]   The Zoning Administrator shall periodically review the
sufficiency of the parking that is provided. If the Zoning Administrator in the
future determines that the reserved parking is needed to meet actual demand,
he/ she shall provide written notice to the property owner. The property owner
shall then have one year to develop the reserved area into off-street parking
in compliance with this chapter.
   G.   Conflict with other uses. No parking area shall be used for any use
that interferes with its availability for the parking need it is required to
serve.
   H.   Joint use.
      (1)   Two or more uses may provide for required parking in a common
parking lot if the total space provided is not less than the sum of the spaces
required for each use individually. If a parking area includes principal
nonresidential use(s) that all are routinely are not occupied outside of the
hours of 8:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. and dwelling units, and all of the spaces are
shared among all of the uses, then the total number of required off-street
parking may be reduced by 20%.
      (2)   The number of spaces required in a shared parking facility may be
also be reduced below the total required by approval by the Planning Commission
if it can be demonstrated to the Commission that the hours or days of peak
parking needed for the various uses are so different that a lower total will
provide adequately for all uses served by the facility.
   I.   Location of parking spaces. Required off-street parking spaces shall be
on the same lot or premises with the principal use served, except as follows:
      (1)   Required off-street parking spaces may be on a separate lot from
the use served by the parking if the applicant proves to the satisfaction of
the Zoning Administrator that a method of providing the spaces is guaranteed to
be available during all of the years the use is in operation and will be within
300 feet walking distance from the entrance of the principal use being served.
Such distance may be increased to 500 feet for employee parking of a
nonresidential use. A written and signed lease shall be provided, if
applicable. For customer parking, a sign shall direct persons to the parking
spaces. The zoning permit shall be conditioned upon the continued availability
of the parking, unless the applicant provides evidence of suitable replacement
parking.
   J.   Parking for persons with disabilities/handicapped parking.
      (1)   Number of spaces. See requirements under the Federal Americans With
Disabilities Act for parking for persons with disabilities. The following is a
summary of some of the relevant requirements in effect as of the enactment of
this chapter:
Total No. of Parking Spaces on the Lot Required Minimum No./Percent of ADA-
                                       Accessible Parking Spaces
Total No. of Parking Spaces on the Lot Required Minimum No./Percent of ADA-
                                       Accessible Parking Spaces
1 to 25                                1 van-accessible
26 to 50                               2, 1 of which must be van-accessible
51 to 75                               3, 1 of which must be van-accessible
76 to 100                              4, 1 of which must be van-accessible
101 to 150                             5, 1 of which must be van-accessible
151 to 200                             6, 1 of which must be van-accessible
201 to 300                             7, 1 of which must be van-accessible
301 to 400                             8, 1 of which must be van-accessible
401 to 500                             9, 2 of which must be van-accessible
501 to 1,000                           2% of total number of spaces, 1/8 of
                                       which must be van- accessible
                                       20 plus 1% of spaces for each 100 over
1,001 or more                          1,000 spaces, 1/8 of which must be van-
                                       accessible
 
      (2)   Location. Handicapped parking spaces shall be located where they
would result in the shortest reasonable accessible distance to a handicapped-
accessible building entrance. Curb cuts shall be provided as needed to provide
access from the handicapped spaces.
      (3)   Minimum size and slope. See requirements of the Americans With
Disabilities Act regulations.
      (4)   Marking. All required handicapped spaces shall be well-marked in
compliance with the Americans With Disabilities Act. Such signs and/or markings
shall be maintained over time.
      (5)   Paving. Handicapped parking spaces and adjacent areas needed to
access them with a wheelchair shall be covered with a smooth surface that is
usable with a wheelchair.
   K.   Bicycle parking. If a use will involve a new principal nonresidential
building of 3,000 or more square feet of building floor area or a lot will
include 10 or more new multifamily/ apartment dwelling units, then at least one
bicycle hitch, rack or locker shall be required. The current landowner shall be
responsible to ensure that the hitch, rack or locker continues to be available
and is well-maintained and is replaced if damaged or removed. For dwelling
units, such facilities may be limited to use by residents. For a commercial
use, at least one hitch, rack or locker shall be designed for use by the
general public. If the hitch, rack or locker is within a street right-of-way, a
City encroachment permit shall be required.
   L.   Parking of trucks, trailers and recreational vehicles. See
Chapter 564, §
564-105, of the Code of the City of Reading. [Amended 2-14-2011 by Ord. No. 8-
2011]
§ 600-1604. Off-street loading spaces.
   A.   Any and all off-street loading spaces shall have dimensions not less
than 12 feet in width, 35 feet in length and 14 feet in height. Off-street
loading spaces shall be provided in addition to off-street parking spaces and
shall not be counted as or considered as off-street parking spaces.
   B.   Off-street loading spaces shall be designed so as to provide adequate
space for standing, turning, loading and unloading and shall not interfere with
the public use of the streets.
   C.   Off-street loading spaces shall be provided according to the following
table:
 
Nonresidential Building Floor Area  Loading and Unloading Space Required
(square feet)
0 to 4,000                          None
4,001 to 20,000                     1 space
                                    1 space, provided that an office building
20,000 to 100,000                   of 20,000 square feet or less is not
                                    required to provide an off-street parking
                                    space
                                    5 spaces plus one space for each 40,000
100,000 to 500,000                  square feet in excess of 100,000 square
                                    feet up to 500,000 square feet
                                    15 spaces plus 1 space for each 80,000
Over 500,000                        square feet in excess of 500,000 square
                                    feet
 
   D.   Floor area, as used in Subsection C above, for offices, trade or
service types of uses, shall mean the cross floor area used or intended to be
used for service to the public and shall also include areas occupied by
fixtures and equipment used for display or sale of merchandise. The term "net
floor area" shall not include areas used principally for nonpublic purposes
such as storage, incidental repair, processing or packaging of merchandise,
show windows, offices incidental to the management or maintenance of storage or
buildings, rest rooms, utilities, dressing rooms, fitting or alteration rooms.
§ 600-1605. Miscellaneous.
It shall be a violation of this chapter for any entity to use any structure
without providing vehicle parking and loading spaces that meet the requirements
of this Part. See §
600-1603I regarding off-site parking.
Part 17
Signs29
29.   NOTE: See Also
Chapter 485, Signs, including Part 1, Political Campaign Matter, and Part 2,
Unauthorized Roadside and Utility Pole Signs.
§ 600-1701. Sign purposes and scope.
   A.   This Part is enacted:
      (1)   To control the erection, location and maintenance of outdoor signs
in a manner designed to protect the public health, safety and morals, and to
promote the public welfare.
      (2)   To promote economic development, but in a way that avoids conflicts
between advertising signs themselves and between advertising signs and traffic-
regulating devices.
      (3)   To provide equality in displaying identification signs by
establishing regulations on size and location of such signs.
      (4)   To seek that official traffic-regulating devices be easily visible
and free from such nearby visual obstructions as blinking signs and excessive
number of signs, or signs in any way resembling official signs.
      (5)   To avoid uncontrolled erection and maintenance of large signs that
could seriously detract from the enjoyment and pleasure of the natural scenic
beauty and historic character of the City.
      (6)   To recognize that the ability of a community to attract and keep
residents and desirable businesses and industries could be seriously impaired
by the uncontrolled proliferation of signs.
   B.   Therefore, this Part is enacted to provide for fair and equal treatment
of sign users. This Part shall apply to the design, quality of materials,
construction, location, electrification, illumination and maintenance of all
signs and sign structures located within the City. Within a Historic District,
an additional approval may be required concerning the design of a sign.
   C.   Scope. This Part regulates outdoor signs located within a building, or
signs that are arranged, intended or designed, used or placed for exterior
observance.
§ 600-1702. Sign policies.
   A.   Sign standards are based on the following concepts:
      (1)   The primary purpose of signs is to identify principal uses and/or
services available at such premises.
      (2)   Uncontrolled use of signs interferes with this primary purpose of
signs for identification.
      (3)   It is necessary to protect residential neighborhoods from the
destruction of residential atmosphere that results from the glare and confusion
that the uncontrolled proliferation of signs.
   B.   Only signs as prescribed herein shall be permitted to be erected or
maintained on a lot located in the specified zoning district. Where a building,
lot or parcel of land is bounded by two or more streets, the number of signs
permitted on each street frontage shall be as established herein.
   C.   When a single business exists on lots separated by a street or a public
alley, each lot shall be treated separately for sign purposes.
   D.   Permits. A zoning sign permit shall be required for any sign with a
sign area of more than two square feet, except such limit shall be 10 square
feet for a temporary sign that is posted less than 60 days per year and no
permit is required for nonilluminated temporary signs placed inside a window.
   E.   PennDOT approval. Where a sign along a state road is required to have a
PennDOT
approval, the applicant shall submit evidence of such approval to the Zoning
Administrator.
§ 600-1703. Signs allowed in Residential Districts (R-1A, R-1, R-2, and R-3)
and the INS Institutional Overlay Zone.
In these districts, signs should be designed for pedestrians or for vehicles
moving at 25 miles per hour. The following signs shall be permitted on
properties located within areas designated as R-1A, R-1, R-2, and R-
3 Districts, within the following regulations:
   A.   Lighting. See §§
600-1714 and 600-912.
   B.   Allowed signs.
      (1)   Wall signs shall be located no higher than the height of the
building wall to which the sign is attached. Maximum horizontal projection from
a building for a wall sign shall not exceed 18 inches. A sign shall not be
located as so to obscure the cornice, windows, transom or similar architectural
features of the building.
      (2)   Roof signs and off-premises signs are prohibited in any residential
district unless specified otherwise by this Part.
      (3)   Signs for a home occupation shall be limited to one non-internally
illuminated name plate. Such name plate shall not exceed 1.5 square feet in
surface area and shall be a flat wall sign. Home occupations, including
offices, are permitted to erect a projecting sign or ground sign, not to exceed
three square feet in total surface area, in lieu of a wall sign. A ground sign
shall have a maximum height of six feet.
      (4)   Each multiple-family dwelling property containing 10 or more
dwelling units (including rental, condominium or cooperative apartments, or
rental, condominium or cooperative townhouses) shall be limited to one
identification sign not exceeding 32 square feet in total surface area (per
side if double-faced). Such sign shall be either ground-mounted, extending not
more than eight feet above grade, or a flat wall sign.
      (5)   New development signs. The following signs shall be permitted in
conjunction with proposed new development involving more than 10 dwelling units
or more than five business establishments:
         (a)   Signs announcing the subdivision and improvement of property,
when located on the property to be improved, shall be single-faced, with a
maximum surface area for each sign of 64 square feet. The maximum height of
such development signs shall be eight feet.
         (b)   Development signs shall not be erected until zoning approval and
subdivision approval, if required, have been given by the City. Such signs may
be maintained for a period of one year from the date of erection of such signs.
If the development is not completed within one year after erection of the sign,
the sign permit may be renewed for periods not exceeding one year, provided the
sign is maintained in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.
         (c)   Signs not located on the advertised property, which are a
maximum six square feet in area or less, may be allowed during construction and
for a period of 30 days thereafter, upon application to the Zoning
Administrator. Other off- premises advertising signs are prohibited.
   C.   Off-premises signs shall be prohibited in residential districts, except
for signs that are specifically allowed by this Part 17.
   D.   Public, semipublic and private recreational uses shall be limited to
one sign not exceeding 20 square feet in surface area per sign face. Such sign
shall be either ground-mounted with up to two sides, to extend not more than
six feet above grade, or a flat wall sign.
   E.   Lawful principal commercial, public utility or industrial use in a
residential district shall be limited to one of the following:
      (1)   One wall sign not to exceed 32 square feet in surface area.
      (2)   One pole-mounted sign not to exceed 12 square feet in area (per
side if double faced), contained totally within the property line, and placed
no more than 10 feet above grade.
      (3)   One projecting sign not to exceed 12 square feet in area (per side
if double faced), and placed no higher than the uppermost portion of the second
floor of the building to which attached and which meets the minimum vertical
clearance of
Chapter 180, Construction Codes.
   F.   A lawful principal nonresidential use may also include directional
signs of up to four square feet each, as required for the safe and orderly flow
of traffic on the property. These signs, if freestanding, shall not extend more
than four feet above grade.
   G.   If one or more retail stores are located in a building built for a
principal industrial use, each such store may have, along each street upon
which the building fronts, one identity sign which may be projecting, V-shaped,
or a flat wall sign. Such sign may have no more than two faces and no single
face may exceed 20 square feet in surface area, except for an overall identity
sign described in the next subsection.
      (1)   There shall be no sign projecting above the second floor occupancy
area as defined in §
600-2205. Below such point, signs may project in the following manner: A sign
projection may occupy the vertical space created by drawing an imaginary line
four feet from and parallel to the vertical building walls.
      (2)   If four or more stores occupy a single building, such building may
contain one overall identity wall sign per street front, in addition to the
individual identity signs just described. Each overall identity sign face shall
not exceed 40 square feet in surface area.
   H.   Private parking lots shall have no signs except for directional signs,
warning signs, and one identification sign not exceeding 12 square feet in
surface area for each fronting street. Such sign shall be a wall sign or a
ground-mounted sign not to extend into the public right- of-way.
   I.   Window identity signs are permitted in commercial storefronts located
in all residential zones given the following conditions:
      (1)   Signs on show window glass shall be limited to 30% of the glass
area, or 600 square inches, whichever is greater.
      (2)   Temporary signs on window glass (e.g., "sale") shall be limited to
35% of the glass area, or 700 square inches, whichever is greater, for a
thirty-day maximum.
   J.   Each principal building of a college or university may have a wall sign
area of 40 square feet per building side. A college or university may include
the following ground-mounted signs with a maximum height of six feet each,
provided the signs are not internally illuminated:
      (1)   One sign at each major entrance to the campus with a maximum sign
area of 60 square feet on each of two sides.
      (2)   One sign of 20 square feet per street frontage for each principal
building.
   K.   See also additional signs allowed under §
600-1712, such as signs for places of worship, and under §
600-1711, such as temporary signs.
§ 600-1704. Signs allowed in Residential-Professional Office District (R-PO).
In the R-PO District, signs should be designed for pedestrians or for vehicles
moving at 25 miles an hour. It is the intent that businesses in a residential
area should be treated in a manner to make them as nearly compatible as
possible with their surrounding residential environment.
   A.   General. Section 600-1703A and B(1) and (2) shall also apply to the R-
PO District.
   B.   Signs.
      (1)   Permitted signs. Each principal nonresidential use is permitted one
wall-mounted sign not to exceed eight square feet.
      (2)   Each principal nonresidential lot is allowed one freestanding sign.
The total surface area for freestanding or ground-mounted signs shall not
exceed 12 square feet on each of two sides.
      (3)   No signs shall extend into the public right-of-way. No sign shall
exceed six feet in total height above grade level. All ground-mounted and
freestanding signs are subject to landscape requirements as specified in §
600-1713B of this Part.
      (4)   Wall signs exceeding eight square feet, roof signs, marquee signs,
projecting signs, off-premises signs, and portable signs are not permitted in
the R-PO District.
      (5)   Signs allowed by §
600-1703 shall also be allowed in the R-PO District.
§ 600-1705. Signs allowed in Commercial Core and Commercial Residential
Districts (C- C, C-R).
Sign heights, locations and dimensions are generally based on the visibility
needs of pedestrians and of traffic moving at approximately 20 miles per hour.
   A.   Allowed signs.
      (1)   Sign surface area. The total surface area of all faces of all wall
signs shall not exceed three square feet for each lineal foot of building wall
to which the signs are attached. Maximum horizontal projection from a wall
should not exceed 18 inches, except it may extend six feet if integrated with
an awning. Signs shall not be located so as to obscure the windows, cornice,
transom or other historic architectural features of the building.
      (2)   Projecting signs. One projecting sign is permitted on each separate
street frontage of a lot, provided such signs shall not exceed the height of
the attached building wall, and shall meet the minimum clearance above the
adjacent sidewalk or grade line as provided in
Chapter 180, Construction Codes. Signs shall have a total surface area not in
excess of 24 square feet (per side if double-faced). Signs shall be configured
to form an angle of 90° to the building face and projection from the building
face shall be limited to six feet. No sign shall project within two feet of a
street curbline or driveway.
      (3)   Marquee signs. Marquee signs are permitted for theaters, performing
arts centers and hotels. The surface area of marquee signs shall be considered
as part of the total allowable wall sign surface area. The marquee sign shall
be located a minimum of two feet from a street curbline, provided a City
encroachment permit is approved.
      (4)   Under-marquee signs. Under-marquee signs are permitted, provided
such signs shall not project more than 12 inches below an allowed marquee, and
shall not be less than the clearance above the sidewalk or grade line required
by
Chapter 180, Construction Codes. The surface area of under-marquee signs shall
not be considered as part of the total allowable sign surface area.
      (5)   Ground-mounted and freestanding signs. In place of an allowed
projecting sign, one ground-mounted or freestanding sign is permitted on each
separate street frontage. Such signs shall have a surface area not in excess of
one square foot per every lineal foot of property frontage, or a maximum of 36
square feet (per side if double-faced). Such sign shall not be higher than four
feet from grade and may be located no closer than four feet from any property
line and shall not be located within a street right-of- way.
      (6)   Window identity signs are permitted in commercial storefronts
located in all Commercial Core and Commercial Residential zones given the
following conditions: [Added 12-16-2013 by Ord. No. 83-2013]
         (a)   Signs on show window glass shall be limited to 30% of the glass
area, or 600 square inches, whichever is greater.
         (b)   Temporary signs on window glass (e.g., "sale") shall be limited
to 35% of the glass area, or 700 square inches, whichever is greater, for a
thirty-day maximum.
   B.   Off-premises signs. Off-premises signs are not permitted, except for
signs posted by the City of Reading or PennDOT within a street right-of-way.
   C.   In addition to other signs, one sandwich board sign shall be allowed
for each lot occupied by a commercial use. Such sign shall not exceed two feet
in width and four feet in height, shall not obstruct the main pedestrian
pathway, and shall be moved inside when the business is not open.
   D.   See also additional signs allowed under §
600-1712, such as signs for places of worship.
§ 600-1706. Signs allowed in Commercial Neighborhood District (C-N).
The following signs shall be permitted on properties located within the C-
N District:
   A.   General. Section 600-1703A and B(1) and (2) shall also apply to the C-
N District unless specified otherwise.
      (1)   Neither roof signs nor off-premises signs are permitted in the C-
N District unless specified otherwise.
      (2)   Signs allowed by §
600-1703 shall also be allowed in the C-N District.
   B.   See also additional signs allowed under §
600-1712, such as signs for places of worship.
   C.   Public, semipublic and private recreational uses shall be limited to
one single-faced sign not exceeding 20 square feet in surface area. Such sign
shall be either ground-mounted, to extend not more than six feet above grade,
or a flat wall sign.
   D.   Allowed principal commercial, public utility or industrial uses, other
than uses listed separately, shall be limited to wall signs not to exceed a
total of three square feet of sign area per each linear foot of building wall
to which the signs are attached. Part or all of the wall sign area may be
integrated with an awning that extends a maximum of six feet from the building.
In addition, one of the following signs is allowed per lot per street frontage:
one freestanding sign not to exceed 32 square feet in area (per side if double-
faced), contained totally within the property line, and placed no more than 16
feet above grade, or one projecting sign not to exceed 12 square feet in area
(per side if double- faced), and placed no higher than the wall of the building
to which attached and extending a maximum of six feet from the building wall.
   E.   As needed, a principal nonresidential use may include, at each point of
ingress or egress, one directional sign not to exceed six square feet (per side
if double-faced). An allowed drive-through may also include lane and window
directional signs, and ATM designation signs, as required for the safe and
orderly flow of traffic on the property. These directional signs, if
freestanding, shall not extend more than four feet above grade.
   F.   Private parking lots shall have no signs except for directional signs,
warning signs, and one identification sign not exceeding 12 square feet in
surface area for each fronting street. Such sign shall be a ground-mounted sign
not extending more than four feet above ground or a wall sign and shall not
extend into the public right-of-way.
   G.   Window identity signs are permitted in commercial storefronts given the
following conditions:
      (1)   Signs on window glass shall be limited to 30% of the glass area, or
600 square inches, whichever is greater.
      (2)   Temporary signs on window glass (e.g., "sale") shall be limited to
35% of the glass area, or 700 square inches, whichever is greater, for a
thirty-day maximum.
   H.   Off-premises signs and roof signs shall not be permitted.
   I.   In addition to other signs, one sandwich board sign shall be allowed
for each lot occupied by a commercial use. Such sign shall not exceed two feet
in width and four feet in height, shall not obstruct the main pedestrian
pathway, and shall be moved inside when the business is not open.
§ 600-1707. Signs allowed in Commercial Highway Districts (C-H).
C-H District signs are generally related to automobiles approaching at higher
speeds, in excess of 30 miles per hour.
   A.   Sign area. The total surface area of all signs, except freestanding
signs, shall not exceed three square feet of surface area for each lineal foot
of building wall of the wall to which the signs are attached. Signs on window
glass shall be limited to 30% of the glass area.
   B.   Sign height. No part of any sign shall be higher than 25 feet from
grade. A sign attached to a building shall not exceed the height of the
attached building wall.
   C.   Freestanding signs. Each lot shall be permitted one freestanding sign
structure per street frontage, provided that such sign area shall include a
maximum of 60 square feet for a lot occupied by one establishment and 100
square feet for a lot occupied by two or more establishments (per side if
double-faced). All portions of any such sign shall be contained within the
property lines of the property. Sign area shall not be less than the minimum
clearance above the sidewalk required by
Chapter 180, Construction Codes, or obstruct a sight triangle.
      (1)   In addition, restaurants with drive-through service shall be
allowed to have menu boards, provided the text is not readable from a street or
dwelling, and each menu board has a maximum sign area of 60 square feet.
      (2)   In addition, gas stations may have an additional sign area of 60
square feet that can be used for freestanding sign area or signs on a canopy.
   D.   Projecting signs. A projecting sign with a maximum sign area of 12
square feet on each of two sides may be used in place of a freestanding sign.
Such sign shall not extend more than six feet from the building wall.
   E.   Roof signs. No roof signs shall be permitted in the C-H District.
   F.   Marquee signs. Marquee signs and under-marquee signs may be erected in
compliance with the provisions of the C-C District.
   G.   Billboard signs and other off-premises signs. Section 600-1717 shall
apply.
   H.   Portable signs. Portable signs are permissible only in the C-H Zone.
Signs are not to exceed 20 square feet and must be located within established
setback areas. No portable sign may be located within the public right-of-way
at any time and no sign shall obstruct sight triangles. Such sign shall not be
illuminated.
   I.   See also additional signs allowed under §
600-1712, such as signs for places of worship.
   J.   Signs allowed by §
600-1703 shall also be allowed.
§ 600-1708. Signs allowed in Heavy Manufacturing and Manufacturing/Commercial
Districts (H-M and M-C).
Within the H-M and M-C Districts, the same sign regulations shall apply as
within the C- H District except the maximum height of a freestanding sign shall
be 16 feet, and except as provided in §
600-1717.
§ 600-1709. Signs allowed in Preservation District.
No signs shall be permitted in the Preservation District except those specified
in §
600-1712B and signs erected by the City of Reading or PennDOT.
§ 600-1710. Special exception signs.
After proper notice and hearing, the Zoning Hearing Board may, by special
exception, authorize the following signs:
   A.   Time, temperature and/or public information signs may be erected in any
zoning district without regard to regulations governing occupancy, height
projections or movement, except that all such signs shall conform to §§
600-1713 through 600-1715, if it is shown to the satisfaction of the Board that
such sign, which may also be an identity sign, has the primary function of
informing the public. Such signs may also be erected by right if they conform
to the regular sign requirements.
   B.   Other signs which do not lend themselves to the ordinary processes of
measurement, because they are integrated in the design of the building
structure, or signs designed for a special purpose which makes strict
application of this Part difficult or signs that re-create landmark historic
signs, may be permitted by the Board when the Board finds such signs to be in
conformity with the intent of this Part and appropriate to the type of
development or structure to which they are related.
§ 600-1711. Temporary signs on private property.
The following types of signs, if not located within a street right-of-way, are
allowed in addition to other allowed signs. Such signs shall not be
illuminated:
   A.   Announcing signs. One sign announcing the names of architects,
engineers, financing entities and/or contractors of a building under
construction, alteration or repair, and signs announcing the character of the
building, enterprise or the purpose for which the building is intended;
provided such signs shall not exceed eight square feet of surface area for a
one- or two-family dwelling and 32 square feet in surface area in other
circumstances. Flat- wall signs or freestanding signs may have a maximum height
of eight feet above grade. Such signs may have a maximum surface area of 64
square feet, if combined with the sign permitted in Subsection B hereof. Signs
on show window glass shall be limited to 30% of the glass area.
   B.   Real estate signs and room and board signs. Signs not exceeding six
square feet in surface area, advertising the sale, rental or lease of the
premises on which displayed in the residential districts; 16 square feet in the
C-N Districts; and 32 feet for the C-C, C-R, C-H, H-M, and M-C Districts. Such
signs may be freestanding or wall-mounted, with a maximum height of eight feet
above grade.
   C.   Political campaign signs. Signs or posters that each do not exceed 32
square feet in surface area, announcing candidates seeking political office or
providing an opinion on a political matter, may be erected. Political campaign
signs do not need a zoning permit if they are less than 32 square feet in sign
area. Such signs shall be removed within two weeks after the election for the
office sought. Such signs shall:
      (1)   Be wall-mounted or freestanding.
      (2)   Not be located within any public area, public park or street right-
of-way, except as allowed outside a polling place on election day.
      (3)   Not be affixed in any manner to any tree. See also
Chapter 485, Part 1, Political Campaign Matter.
   D.   Directional signs. Up to three signs may direct persons to a real
estate open house auction, and similar temporary occasions, not exceeding six
square feet in surface area. Such signs shall not be posted more than 10 days
per year, and shall be removed within one day after the event.
§ 600-1712. Additional allowed signs.
[Amended 2-14-2011 by Ord. No. 8-2011]
The following signs are allowed in addition to other allowed signs. The
following signs do not need a zoning permit, except for signs of more than two
square feet each that are allowed by Subsection A below.
   A.   Institutional signs. A maximum of one wall sign per building side and
one freestanding sign for a cemetery, governmental use, primary or secondary
school, hospital, place of worship or similar charitable or religious
institution, when located on the premises of such use, provided each such sign
shall not exceed 32 square feet in surface area, and is not internally
illuminated in a residential district. A maximum of one freestanding sign shall
be allowed per street frontage. Freestanding signs shall have a maximum height
of six feet.
   B.   Public signs. Signs of a public, noncommercial nature, which shall
include safety signs, danger signs, no-trespassing signs, and signs indicating
scenic or historical points of interest, shall be allowed if erected by a
public officer in the performance of a public duty.
   C.   Traffic-directing signs. Directional signs shall be allowed that
indicate traffic movement onto a premises, or within a premises, not exceeding
six square feet of surface area for each sign face, with two sign faces allowed
per entrance to the premises. Such signs shall not exceed four feet in height.
   D.   Memorial signs and tablets. Nonilluminated memorial signs, cornerstones
or tablets indicating the name of a building or date of erection, not exceeding
two square feet in surface area, which are part of the building construction,
or are attached as wall signs.
   E.   Name plates and directories. Nonilluminated name plates and building
directories relating only to the use or occupancy of the building to which
attached and not exceeding 12 square feet of surface area, which are part of
the building construction, or are attached as wall signs.
   F.   Seasonal decorations. See §
600-912.
   G.   Temporary signs. One sign per lot of up to 30 square feet on each of
two sides announcing parades or other special events, grand openings of
businesses, special sales or the like, may be permitted. Such temporary signs
shall be permitted for a total of only 60 days per calendar year, unless
special exception approval is granted from the Zoning Hearing Board for a
longer period.
   H.   Murals. An artistic mural that does not serve a commercial purpose
shall be allowed and shall not be regulated as a sign.
§ 600-1713. Landscape designs and landscaping requirements.
   A.   Floral arrangements or other landscape designs which depict a symbol,
device, name or the like shall not be considered signs and shall not be
governed by any regulations contained within this chapter.
   B.   Except within the CC District, all freestanding and billboard signs
that are more than 60 square feet in sign area shall be surrounded by a minimum
12 square feet of area beneath the sign that is landscaped with shrubs and
vegetative ground cover.
§ 600-1714. Illumination and electronically changing message signs.
All signs and other illumination within the City shall be subject to the
following restrictions upon illumination:
   A.   See also §
600-912.
   B.   Flashing, blinking, electronically moving, or animated lighting of
signs shall be prohibited.
An electronic sign shall not change its message more than once every six
seconds, except a changeable message sign of more than 100 square feet shall
not change more than once every 10 seconds. This subsection shall not apply to
theaters, arenas or visual or performing arts centers in the C-C District. If a
sign has a sign area of more than 20 square feet, it shall not have a scrolling
message.
   C.   No sign will be permitted which is not effectively shielded so as to
prevent beams or rays of light from being directed at any portion of any public
street or which is of such intensity or brilliance as to cause glare or to
impair the vision of the driver of any vehicle, or which interferes with any
driver's operation of a motor vehicle.
   D.   No sign shall be so illuminated that it interferes with the
effectiveness of or obscures an official traffic sign, device or signal.
   E.   Signs which contain, include or are illuminated by any flashing,
intermittent or moving light(s) are prohibited, except those giving public
service information such as time, date, temperature, weather or similar public
service information.
   F.   Where a LED or an internally illuminated sign is allowed in a
residential district (such as for a place of worship), such illuminated sign
area shall not exceed 20 square feet on each of two sides.
   G.   The aggregate output of the light sources from any sign shall not
exceed 500 initial lumens per square foot of sign face per side. LED sign
surfaces or other internally illuminated sign faces shall not be allowed if
they exceed 100 square feet per side and are located within 400 feet of a
residential district. Off-premises signs with LED or other internally
illuminated sign faces that are within 300 feet from a residential district and
that face onto that residential district shall not be internally illuminated
between 11:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m.
§ 600-1715. Projection of signs.
   A.   A sign shall not project horizontally more than 18 inches from a
building, except for allowed projecting, awning and marquee signs.
   B.   Only an official sign, projecting sign or marquee sign shall be allowed
to intrude into a street right-of-way. Any allowed projecting sign or marquee
sign shall not project within less than two feet of any curb or driveway line.
This regulation shall take precedence over any other regulation in this Part
governing sign projection.
§ 600-1716. Prohibited signs.
No sign shall be constructed, erected or maintained:
   A.   Which bears or contains statements, words or pictures of an obscene,
indecent or immoral character, such as will offend public morals or decency.
   B.   Which purports to be, or is an imitation of, or resembles an official
traffic sign or signal, which bears the words "STOP," "GO," "SLOW," "CAUTION,"
"DANGER," "WARNING" or similar words.
   C.   Which, by reason of its size, location, movement, content, coloring or
manner of illumination, may be confused with or construed as a traffic control
device, or which hides from view any traffic or street sign or signal.
   D.   Which advertises or publicizes an activity, business, product or
service not conducted on the premises upon which such signs are maintained,
except as specified otherwise in this chapter.
   E.   Which rotates or has a rotating or moving part or parts that revolve.
   F.   Which consists of ribbons, streamers, strings of light bulbs, spinners
or elements creating sound or smell which are signs defined by this Part,
except seasonal decorations as per §
600-1712F.
   G.   Which shall be located so as to obstruct two-thirds of the view of a
sign on adjoining property when viewed from a distance of 200 feet at a point
four feet above the roadway grade of the traffic lane closest to the street
property line.
§ 600-1717. Billboards and other off-premises signs.
   A.   General. See the definition of "off-premises signs" in §
600-2205.
      (1)   No part of any billboard or other off-premises sign shall be
located more than 100 feet from the nearest street line of any traffic route
and no billboard or other off-premises sign shall be oriented primarily toward
any street other than a traffic route as defined herein.
   B.   Regulations. Billboards and other off-premises signs, including those
painted on building walls, shall conform to the following regulations, in
addition to other applicable requirements:
      (1)   Exemptions. A sign that includes occasional public service messages
shall not by itself be considered an off-premises sign. Signs that are
authorized by PennDOT or the City of Reading to direct persons to visitor
attractions shall not be considered off- premises signs.
      (2)   Location.
         (a)   Billboards and other off-premises signs shall be permitted only
along "traffic routes," as defined in §
600-2205 in the MU, H-M and C-H Zoning Districts. An off-premises sign in the
C-H, MU and H-M Districts shall not exceed 300 square feet on each of a maximum
of two sides.
         (b)   Billboards and other off-premises signs shall be located to
conform with all yard and special setback requirements of this chapter.
         (c)   Any such sign located adjacent to a building, on another lot,
containing windows facing such billboard or other off-premises sign shall be
located a minimum of 50 feet from such windows. Any billboard or off-premises
sign that is illuminated or more than 50 square feet in sign area shall be
located a minimum of: 300 feet from an existing dwelling in a residential
district; and 500 feet from any City-recognized Historic Preservation District
or any public park, primary or secondary school or hospital in any direction.
         (d)   No billboard structure shall be located on or over the roofs of
buildings situated on the same lot. No billboard structure shall be located on
or adjacent to another billboard structure at the same site, with the exception
of two billboard sign areas that are approximately back-to-back.
      (3)   (Reserved)
      (4)   Height. The maximum height of any off-premises free standing sign
shall be 35 feet above grade. When the topography is such that the point at
which a billboard must be erected is lower in grade than the fronting street or
highway, the elevation of the street or highway shall be considered grade.
      (5)   No two billboard sign structures shall be spaced less than 1,200
feet apart along any City street. The distance between sign structures shall be
measured along the nearest edge of the pavement between points directly
opposite the signs along the same side of traveled way. The spacing requirement
applies to signs located on both sides of the street. The distance between
billboard signs shall be measured radially from the base of the sign structure
nearest to the base of any other billboard sign structure along the same
street, regardless of whether the relevant sign structures are on the same or
opposite sides of the street.
      (6)   Lighting. See §
600-1714.
      (7)   Billboards and other off-premises signs may be single-faced,
double-faced, or V- shaped structures. Double-faced and/or V-shaped billboard
structures shall not exceed 300 square feet per display area regardless of
street frontage or length of building wall.
   C.   Landscaping requirements.
      (1)   Single-faced billboards with the rear viewable from a public right-
of-way or other public property shall have three equally spaced eight-foot tall
evergreen trees planted in the rear of the billboard and the reverse side of
the sign shall be of one color.
      (2)   All landscaping surrounding signage shall be maintained in a neat,
attractive and clean condition.
   D.   Other off-premises sign provisions. In addition to the provisions of
Subsection B hereof, the following provisions shall apply to other off-premises
signs:
      (1)   A business may have one directional off-premises sign within one
mile distance from its business location, provided such sign contains not over
32 square feet of surface area which shall be included within the surface area
permitted by Subsection B hereof, and is located in either the CH, M-C or H-
M Zones.
      (2)   Any off-premises sign exceeding 32 square feet in surface area
shall be deemed a billboard.
§ 600-1718. Sign permit and fee exceptions.
The following signs and operations shall not require a sign permit or fee, but
shall conform to all other applicable provisions of this chapter:
   A.   Advertising copy or message on a painted or printed sign or a billboard
sign or on a theater or marquee and similar signs specifically designed for the
use of replaceable copy.
   B.   Painting, repainting, cleaning and normal maintenance and repair of a
sign or sign structure, including electrical equipment, unless a structural
change is made, except that signs painted on walls which are made nonconforming
by this Part shall not be repainted unless such repainting is done to eliminate
that sign. No new sign shall be painted in its place.
   C.   Signs as provided by §§
600-1711 and 600-1712, other than §
600-1712A.
   D.   See permit requirements in §
600-1702D.
§ 600-1719. Sign inspections.
Signs for which a permit is required shall be inspected by the Zoning
Administrator for conformance with the requirements of this chapter.
§ 600-1720. Sign maintenance.
All signs, together with all of their supports, braces, guys, anchors and
electrical equipment, shall be kept fully operable, in good repair and
maintained in safe condition and in a neat, clean and attractive condition. The
display surfaces of all signs shall be kept neatly painted or posted.
§ 600-1721. Unsafe sign removal.
[Amended 2-14-2011 by Ord. No. 8-2011]
If the Zoning Administrator finds that any sign or structure by reason of its
condition presents an immediate and serious danger to the public, he or she may
order its immediate removal or repair depending upon the degree of danger, the
Zoning Administrator may grant an extension, specifying a reasonable period of
time to complete the repair or removal. The Zoning Administrator may remove or
authorize others to remove the sign, in the event that the person responsible
for the sign cannot be found, or if the persons, after notification, refuse to
repair or remove it within the specified time.
§ 600-1722. Abandoned sign removal.
Any person who owns or leases a sign shall remove the sign within 30 days after
notification by the Zoning Administrator when either the business it advertises
has discontinued business in the City, or the business it advertises is no
longer conducted in or upon the premises on which the sign is located. If the
person who owns or leases the sign fails to remove it as provided in this
section, the Zoning Administrator shall give the owner of the building,
structure or premises on which the sign is located, 30 days' written notice to
remove it. If the owner of the building, structure or premises on which the
sign is located fails to remove the sign within 30 days after receipt of
written notice from the Zoning Administrator, the Zoning Administrator may
remove the sign or cause it to be removed. The following signs need not be
removed in accordance with this section:
   A.   Billboards, where a person has merely leased or contracted advertising
space thereon.
   B.   Signs which the successor to a person's business location or business
agrees to maintain, as provided in this Part.
§ 600-1723. Illegal sign removal.30
Upon notice from the Zoning Administrator, any person who owns or leases any
sign following the enactment of this section and in violation of this Part
shall have 30 days' written notice to remove it. Failure to remedy the
violation within that period by the owner of the building, structure or
premises upon which the sign is located may cause the Zoning Administrator, or
his duly authorized representative, to remove the sign from the premises.
30.   Editor's Note: Amended during codification (see
Ch. 1, General Provisions, Part 2).
§ 600-1724. Cost of sign removal.
Whenever the Zoning Administrator or his or her representative removes or
causes to be removed a sign pursuant to §§
600-1721 to 600-1723, the cost of such removal shall be paid by the owner of
the property on which such sign is or was located. The cost of removal shall be
certified to the Managing Director. Upon filing of such certification, the City
Clerk shall cause
30 days' written notice to be given by certified mail to the person or persons
against whose property an assessment has been made. The notice shall state the
amount of the assessment and the time and place of payment, and shall be
accompanied by a copy of the certificate. The expense of such notice shall be
borne by the City. The amount assessed against the real estate shall be a lien
from the time of filing of the certificate with City Council and, if not paid
within the time stipulated, a claim may be filed and collected in the same
manner as municipal claims are filed and collected.
§ 600-1725. Sign appeals to Zoning Hearing Board.
The Zoning Hearing Board is empowered to grant special exceptions in order to
prevent or to lessen such practical difficulties and unnecessary physical or
economic hardships inconsistent with the objectives of this Part as would
result from a strict or literal interpretation and enforcement of certain of
the regulations herein prescribed. A practical difficulty or unnecessary
physical hardship may result from the size, shape or dimensions of a site or
the locations of existing structures thereon; from geographic, topographic or
other physical conditions on the site or in the immediate vicinity; from
population densities, street locations or traffic conditions in the immediate
vicinity; or from the location or height of the sign in question. The power to
grant a special exception does not extend to an economic hardship related to
the cost, size or location of a new sign, or to the convenience of the
applicant; nor is it intended to extend to the convenience of regional or
national businesses that wish to use a standard sign, when it does not conform
to the provisions of this chapter.
§ 600-1726. Signs within RR Overlay Zone.
In the RR Riverfront Redevelopment Overlay Zone, signs shall meet the
requirements that apply in the C-C District, except that the Planning
Commission may approve modifications to sign provisions under the PRD
provisions, in response to a written request from the applicant. In no case
shall more than one freestanding sign be allowed per building per street
frontage. In addition, a professional sports stadium may also include one 200
square feet freestanding sign with up to two sides. Signs that are not readable
from a street and from beyond the property line are not regulated by this
section.
Part 18
Floodplain Overlay Zone
[Amended 6-11-2012 by Ord. No. 64-2012]
§ 600-1801. Statutory authorization.
The Legislature of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania has, by the passage of the
Pennsylvania Floodplain Management Act of 1978, 31  delegated the
responsibility to local governmental units to adopt floodplain management
regulations to promote public health, safety, and the general welfare of its
citizenry. Therefore, the Council of the City of Reading does hereby order as
follows.
31.   Editor's Note: See 32 P.S. § 679.101 et seq.
§ 600-1802. Purpose.
The purpose of
Chapter 600, Zoning, Part 18 (referred to herein as "this Part") is to:
   A.   Promote the general health, welfare, and safety of the community.
   B.   Encourage the utilization of appropriate construction practices in
order to prevent or minimize flood damage in the future.
   C.   Minimize danger to public health by protecting water supply and natural
drainage.
   D.   Reduce financial burdens imposed on the community, its governmental
units, and its residents, by preventing excessive development in areas subject
to flooding.
   E.   Comply with federal and state floodplain management requirements.
§ 600-1803. Applicability.
   A.   It shall be unlawful for any person, partnership, business or
corporation to undertake, or cause to be undertaken, any construction or
development anywhere within the City of Reading unless a floodplain zoning
permit has been obtained from the Floodplain Administrator.
   B.   A Floodplain Zoning Permit shall not be required for minor repairs to
existing buildings or structures.
§ 600-1804. Abrogation and greater restrictions.
This section supersedes any other conflicting provisions which may be in effect
in the Floodplain Overlay Zone. However, any other ordinance provisions shall
remain in full force and effect to the extent that those provisions are more
restrictive. If there is any conflict between any of the provisions of this
Part, the more restrictive shall apply.
§ 600-1805. Severability.
Refer to Part 1, §
600-106.
§ 600-1806. Warning and disclaimer of liability.
   A.   The degree of flood protection sought by the provisions of this Part is
considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on accepted
engineering methods of study. Larger floods may occur or flood heights may be
increased by man-made or natural causes, such as ice jams and bridge openings
restricted by debris. This Part does not imply that areas outside any
identified floodplain areas or that land uses permitted within such areas will
be free from flooding or flood damages.
   B.   This Part shall not create liability on the part of the City of Reading
or any officer or employee thereof for any flood damages that result from
reliance on this Part or any administrative decision lawfully made thereunder.
§ 600-1807. Designation of Floodplain Administrator.
The Zoning Administrator is hereby appointed to administer and enforce this
Part and is referred to herein as the "Floodplain Administrator."
§ 600-1808. Floodplain zoning permits required.
A floodplain zoning permit is required to insure compliance with all applicable
local, state and federal floodplain regulations, and a permit must be issued
before any construction or development is undertaken in a Floodplain Overlay
Zone within the City of Reading.
§ 600-1809. Duties and responsibilities of Floodplain Administrator.
   A.   The Floodplain Administrator shall issue a floodplain zoning permit
("permit") only after it has been determined that the proposed work to be
undertaken will be in conformance with the requirements of this and all other
applicable codes and ordinances.
   B.   Prior to the issuance of the permit, the Floodplain Administrator, with
assistance from the City Planning Commission and City Engineer, as required by
other sections of this Part, shall review the application for the permit to
determine if all other necessary government permits required by the City, state
and federal laws have been obtained, such as those required by
Chapter 515, Subdivision and Land Development, the Pennsylvania Sewage
Facilities Act (Act 1966-537, as amended) 32 ; the Pennsylvania Dam Safety and
Encroachments Act (Act 1978-325, as amended) 33 ; the Pennsylvania Clean
Streams Act (Act 1937-394, as amended) 34 ; and the U.S. Clean Water Act,
Section 404, 33, U.S.C. § 1344. No permit shall be issued until this
determination has been made.
   C.   During the construction period, the Floodplain Administrator or other
authorized official shall inspect the premises to determine that the work is
progressing in compliance with the information provided on the permit
application and with all applicable municipal laws and ordinances. He/she shall
make as many inspections during and upon completion of the work as are
necessary.
   D.   In the discharge of his/her duties, the Floodplain Administrator shall
have the authority to enter any building, structure, premises or development in
the Floodplain Overlay Zone, upon presentation of proper credentials, at any
reasonable hour to enforce the provisions of this Part.
   E.   In the event the Floodplain Administrator discovers that the work does
not comply with the permit application or any applicable laws and ordinances,
or that there has been a false statement or misrepresentation by any applicant,
the Floodplain Administrator shall take appropriate action in accordance with
this Part which can include revoking the permit and reporting such fact to the
City Solicitor's office for whatever action it considers necessary.
   F.   The Floodplain Administrator shall maintain all records associated with
the requirements of this Part including, but not limited to, permitting,
inspection and enforcement.
   G.   The Floodplain Administrator shall coordinate his/her duties with the
City's codes official and with the requirements of the PA Uniform Construction
Codes as adopted in
Chapter 180, Construction Codes.
32.   Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 750.1 et seq.
33.   Editor's Note: See 32 P.S. § 693.1 et seq.
34.   Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 691.1 et seq.
§ 600-1810. Floodplain permit application procedures and requirements.
   A.   Application for the permit shall be made, in writing, to the Floodplain
Administrator on forms supplied by the City of Reading. Such application shall
contain the following:
      (1)   Name and address of applicant;
      (2)   Name and address of owner of land on which proposed construction is
to occur;
      (3)   Name and address of contractor;
      (4)   Site location, including address;
      (5)   Listing of other permits required;
      (6)   Brief description of proposed work and estimated cost, including a
breakout of flood- related cost and the market value of the building before the
flood damage occurred, where appropriate; and
      (7)   A plan of the site showing the exact size and location of the
proposed construction as well as any existing buildings or structures.
   B.   If any proposed construction or development is located entirely or
partially within the Floodplain Overlay Zone, applicants for permits shall
provide all the necessary information in sufficient detail and clarity to
enable the Floodplain Administrator to determine that:
      (1)   All such proposals are consistent with the need to minimize flood
damage and conform with the requirements of this and all other applicable codes
and ordinances;
      (2)   All utilities and facilities, such as sewer, gas, electrical and
water systems are located and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood
damage; and
      (3)   Adequate drainage is provided so as to reduce exposure to flood
hazards;
      (4)   Structures will be anchored to prevent floatation, collapse, or
lateral movement;
      (5)   Building materials are flood-resistant;
      (6)   Appropriate practices that minimize flood damage have been used;
and
      (7)   Electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, air-conditioning
equipment, and other service facilities have been designed and located to
prevent water entry or accumulation.
   C.   Applicants shall file the following minimum information plus any other
pertinent information as may be required by the Floodplain Administrator to
make the above determination:
      (1)   A completed permit application form;
      (2)   A plan of the entire site, clearly and legibly drawn at a scale of
one inch being equal to 100 feet or less, showing the following:
         (a)   North arrow, scale, and date;
         (b)   Topographic contour lines, if available;
         (c)   The location of all existing and proposed buildings, structures,
and other improvements, including the location of any existing or proposed
subdivision and development;
         (d)   The location of all existing streets, drives, and other
accessways;
         (e)   The location of any existing bodies of water or watercourses,
identified floodplain areas, and, if available, information pertaining to the
floodway, and the flow of water including direction and velocities; and
      (3)   Plans of all proposed buildings, structures and other improvements,
drawn at suitable scale showing the following:
         (a)   The proposed lowest floor elevation of any proposed building
based upon North American Vertical Datum of 1988;
         (b)   The elevation of the base flood;
         (c)   Supplemental information as may be necessary under 34 PA Code,
the 2009 IBC or the 2009 IRC; and
      (4)   The following data and documentation:
         (a)   If available, information concerning flood depths, pressures,
velocities, impact and uplift forces and other factors associated with a base
flood;
         (b)   Detailed information concerning any proposed floodproofing
measures and corresponding elevations;
         (c)   Documentation, certified by a registered professional engineer
or a registered architect, to show that the cumulative effect of any proposed
development when combined with all other existing and anticipated development,
will not increase the base flood elevation more than one foot at any point;
         (d)   A document, certified by a registered professional engineer or
architect, which states that the proposed construction or development has been
adequately designed to withstand the pressures, velocities, impact and uplift
forces associated with the base flood. Such statement shall include a
description of the type and extent of flood proofing measures which have been
incorporated into the design of the structure and/or the development;
         (e)   Detailed information needed to determine compliance with §
600-1824F, Storage, and §
600-1825, Development which may endanger human life, including:
            [1]   The amount, location and purpose of any materials or
substances referred to in §§
600-1824F and 600-1825, which are intended to be used, produced, stored or
otherwise maintained on site;
            [2]   A description of the safeguards incorporated into the design
of the proposed structure to prevent leaks or spills of the dangerous materials
or substances listed in §
600-1825 during a base flood;
         (f)   The appropriate component of the Department of Environmental
Protection's "Planning Module for Land Development"; and
         (g)   Where any excavation or grading is proposed, a plan meeting the
requirements of the Department of Environmental Protection, to implement and
maintain erosion and sedimentation control.
   D.   Applications for permits shall be accompanied by a fee, payable to the
City of Reading based upon the fee schedule established in Part 2 of this
chapter, as amended. 35
35.   Editor's Note: See
Ch. 212, Fees.
§ 600-1811. Review of permit application by others.
A copy of all plans and permit applications for any proposed construction or
development in any Floodplain Overlay Zone to be considered for approval shall
be submitted by the Floodplain Administrator to other appropriate City agencies
and/or staff, including but not limited to the Zoning Hearing Board, the
Planning Commission, the Community Development Director, Building and Trades
and the City Engineer for review and recommendations.
§ 600-1812. Changes to permit.
After the issuance of a permit by the Floodplain Administrator, no changes of
any kind shall be made to the application, the permit or any of the plans,
specifications or other documents submitted with the application without the
prior written approval of the Floodplain Administrator. Requests for any such
change shall be in writing, and shall be submitted by the applicant to the
Floodplain Administrator for consideration.
§ 600-1813. Placards.
In addition to the permit, the Floodplain Administrator shall issue a placard
which shall be displayed on the premises during the time construction is in
progress. This placard shall show the number of the permit, the date of its
issuance, and shall be signed by the Floodplain Administrator.
§ 600-1814. Start of construction.
   A.   Work on the proposed construction or development shall begin within 180
days after the date of issuance of the floodplain permit and shall be completed
within 12 months after the date of issuance of the permit, or the permit shall
expire unless a time extension is granted, in writing, by the Floodplain
Administrator. The actual start of construction means either the first
placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site, such as the
pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction of
columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation; or the placement of a
manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include land
preparation, such as clearing, grading, and filling; nor does it include the
installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for a
basement, footings, piers, or foundations or the erection of temporary forms;
nor does it include the installation on the property of accessory buildings,
such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main
structure. For a substantial improvement, the actual start of construction
means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural
part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the external
dimensions of the building.
   B.   Time extensions shall be granted only if a written request is submitted
by the applicant, which sets forth sufficient and reasonable cause for the
Floodplain Administrator to approve such a request.
§ 600-1815. Enforcement.
   A.   Notices. Whenever the Floodplain Administrator or other authorized
municipal representative determines that there are reasonable grounds to
believe that there has been a violation of any provisions of this Part, or of
any regulations adopted pursuant thereto, the Floodplain Administrator shall
give notice of such alleged violation as hereinafter provided. Such notice
shall:
      (1)   Be in writing;
      (2)   Include a statement of the reasons for its issuance;
      (3)   Allow a reasonable time, not to exceed a period of 30 days, for the
performance of any action it requires;
      (4)   Be served upon the property owner or his agent as the case may
require; provided, however, that such notice or order shall be deemed to have
been properly served upon such owner or agent when a copy thereof has been
served with such notice by any other method authorized or required by
Pennsylvania law;
      (5)   Contain an outline of remedial actions which, if taken, will effect
compliance with the provisions of this Part.
   B.   Penalties. Any person who fails to comply with any of the requirements
or provisions of this Part or who fails or refuses to comply with any notice,
order of direction of the Floodplain Administrator or any other authorized
representative of the City shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction
shall pay a fine to the City of Reading, in accordance with the provisions of §
600-206. In addition to the penalties all other actions are hereby reserved
including an action in equity for the proper enforcement of this Part. The
imposition of a fine or penalty for any violation of, or noncompliance with,
this Part shall not excuse the violation or noncompliance or permit it to
continue and all such persons shall be required to correct or remedy such
violations and noncompliance within a reasonable time. Any development
initiated or any structure or building constructed, reconstructed, enlarged,
altered, or relocated, in noncompliance with this Part may be declared by City
Council to be a public nuisance and abatable as such.
§ 600-1816. Appeals.
   A.   Any person aggrieved by any action or decision of the Floodplain
Administrator concerning the administration of the provisions of this Part, may
appeal to the Zoning Hearing Board in accordance with this chapter.
   B.   Upon receipt of such appeal, the Zoning Administrator shall set a time
and place as established in this chapter for the purpose of considering the
appeal.
   C.   Any person aggrieved by any decision of the Zoning Hearing Board may
seek relief therefrom by appeal to court, as provided by the laws of the
commonwealth, including the Pennsylvania Floodplain Management Act. 36
36.   Editor's Note: See 32 P.S. § 679.101 et seq.
§ 600-1817. Floodplain Overlay Zone identification.
   A.   The identified floodplain areas shall be all areas within the City of
Reading, classified as special flood hazard areas (SFHA) in the Flood Insurance
Study (FIS) and indicated on the accompanying Flood Insurance Rate Maps (FIRMs)
dated July 3, 2012 and issued by the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA)
or the most recent revision thereof, including all digital data developed as
part of the Flood Insurance Study.
   B.   The above referenced FIS and FIRMs, and any subsequent revisions and
amendments, are hereby adopted by City of Reading and declared to be a part of
this Part.
§ 600-1818. Description and requirements of the floodplain overlay
subdistricts.
The Floodplain Overlay Zone (or "Floodplain Zone") and its subdistricts
referred to in this Part shall be considered a mandatory zoning overlay zone,
and shall be subject to the requirements contained in this Part as well as the
qualifications and restrictions of the underlying zoning districts and any
other applicable overlay zones. The Floodplain Overlay Zone shall consist of
the following subdistricts:
   A.   The floodway subdistricts shall be those areas identified as floodway
areas on the FIRM as well as those floodway areas which have been identified in
other available studies or sources of information for those special floodplain
areas where no floodway has been identified in the FIS. The floodway represents
the channel of a watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved
in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water
surface elevation by more than one foot at any point.
      (1)   Within any floodway subdistrict, no encroachments, including fill,
new construction, substantial improvements, or other development shall be
permitted unless it has been demonstrated through hydrologic and hydraulic
analysis performed in accordance with standard engineering practice that the
proposed encroachment would not result in any increase in flood levels within
the community during the occurrence of the base flood discharge. Such technical
data should be submitted to the Floodplain Administrator and to FEMA. The
analyses shall be prepared by a licensed professional engineer in a format
required by FEMA for a Conditional Letter of Map Revision or Letter of Map
Revision. Submittal requirements and processing fees shall be the
responsibility of the applicant.
      (2)   The following uses and activities are permitted, provided that they
are in compliance with the provisions of the underlying district and are not
prohibited by any other applicable overlay zone or ordinance, and provided the
use does not require a structure, fill or storage of materials and equipment.
         (a)   Accessory residential uses such as yard areas, gardens, play
areas and parking areas.
         (b)   Accessory industrial and commercial uses such as yard areas,
parking and loading areas and airport landing strips.
      (3)   The following uses and activities may be permitted by special
exception, provided that they are in compliance with the provisions of the
underlying district and provided they will not present a flood hazard, or an
obstruction to flood flow or a movable hazard, and are not prohibited by any
other applicable overlay zone or ordinance:
         (a)   Utilities and public facilities and improvements such as
railroads, streets, bridges, transmission lines, pipe lines, water and sewage
plants, and other similar or related uses;
         (b)   Water-related uses such as boat landings that do not present an
encroachment;
         (c)   Extraction of sand, gravel and other materials;
         (d)   Temporary uses such as circuses, carnivals and similar events;
         (e)   Storage of certain materials in underground storage tanks
provided they are not buoyant, flammable, explosive or contain any materials
listed in §
600-1825.
      (4)   No new construction or development shall be allowed, unless a
permit is obtained from the Department of Environmental Protection Regional
Office. The proposed development activity may be permitted if the analyses
demonstrate that the activity:
         (a)   Will not result in any increase in the base flood elevation; or
         (b)   Will result in an increase in the base flood elevation, provided
a Conditional Letter of Map Revision has been issued by FEMA and the applicant
completes all of the following:
            [1]   Submits technical data required in §
600-1810;
            [2]   Evaluates alternatives which would not result in increased
base flood elevations and an explanation why these alternatives are not
feasible;
            [3]   Certifies that no structures are located in areas which would
be impacted by the increased base flood elevation;
            [4]   Documents that individual legal notices have been delivered
to all impacted property owners to explain the impact of the proposed action on
their properties;
            [5]   Requests and receives concurrence of the Floodplain
Administrator for the City of Reading and the Floodplain Administrator for any
other community impacted by the proposed actions; and
            [6]   Notifies the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental
Protection.
   B.   The Zone AE Without Floodway Subdistrict (previously referred to as the
"Flood-Fringe District") shall include those areas within Zone AE and outside
of the floodway area as identified on the FIRM included in the FIS prepared by
FEMA. The Zone AE Without Floodway Subdistrict comprises those areas that lie
between the Zone AE floodplain boundary and the floodway boundary as indicated
on the FIRM.
      (1)   In the Zone AE Without Floodway Subdistrict, no permit shall be
granted for any construction, development, use, or activity unless it is
demonstrated that the cumulative effect of the proposed development would not,
together with all other existing and anticipated development, increase the BFE
more than one foot at any point.
      (2)   Development and use may be permitted in accordance with the
regulations of the underlying district and with other applicable overlay zones
provided that the proposed use, activity and/or development complies with the
restrictions included herein. Refer to the prohibited and special exception
restrictions included in §§
600-1829 and 600-1830.
   C.   The Zone A Subdistrict shall be those areas identified within the Zone
A areas on the FIRM included in the FIS prepared by FEMA, and for which no base
flood elevations have been provided, if applicable. For these areas, elevation
and floodway information shall be obtained from other federal agencies, state,
or other acceptable published sources when available. When other acceptable
published information is not available, the base flood elevation shall be
determined by using the methods prescribed in the FEMA Guide for Approximate
Zone A Manual, latest edition.
      (1)   If the above determination is insufficient to adequately define the
base flood elevation, the City will require a determination utilizing detailed
engineering methods. Under this requirement, the applicant shall determine the
base flood elevation utilizing hydrologic and hydraulic engineering techniques,
and shall submit such technical data to the Floodplain Administrator and to
FEMA. Hydrologic and hydraulic analyses shall be prepared by professional
engineers, or in certain cases professional licensed surveyors, who shall
certify that the technical methods used correctly reflect currently accepted
engineering procedures. Studies, analyses, computations, etc., shall be
submitted in sufficient detail and in a format required by FEMA for a
Conditional Letter of Map Revision or Letter of Map Revision to allow a
thorough technical review by the municipality. Submittal requirements and
processing fees shall be the responsibility of the applicant.
      (2)   The proposed development activity may be permitted if the analysis
demonstrates that the cumulative effect of the proposed development activity,
when combined with all other existing and potential flood hazard area
encroachments, will not increase the base flood elevation more than one foot at
any point.
      (3)   Development and use may be permitted in accordance with the
regulations of the underlying district and with other applicable overlay zones,
provided that the proposed use, activity and/or development complies with the
restrictions included herein. Refer to the prohibited and special exception
restrictions included in §§
600-1829 and 600-1830.
   D.   The Shallow Flooding Subdistrict shall be those areas identified as
Zones AO and AH on the FIRM and in the FIS, as well as those shallow flooding
areas which have been identified in other studies or sources. These areas are
subject to inundation by one-percent- annual-chance shallow flooding where
average depths are between one foot and three feet. In Zones AO and AH,
drainage paths shall be established to guide floodwaters around and away from
structures on slopes. Development and use may be permitted in accordance with
the regulations of the underlying district and with other applicable overlay
zones, provided that the proposed use, activity and/or development complies
with the restrictions included herein. Refer to the prohibited and special
exception restrictions included in §§
600-1829 and 600-1830.
§ 600-1819. Changes in identification of Floodplain Overlay Zone.
The Floodplain Overlay Zone may be revised or modified by the City where
studies or information provided by a qualified agency or person documents the
need for such revision. However, prior to any such change, approval must be
obtained from the FEMA. Additionally, as soon as practicable, but not later
than six months after the date such information becomes available, a community
shall notify the FEMA of the changes by submitting technical or scientific
data.
§ 600-1820. District boundary disputes.
Should a dispute concerning any Floodplain Overlay Zone boundary arise, an
initial determination shall be made by the City of Reading Planning Commission,
and any party aggrieved by this decision or determination may appeal to the
Zoning Hearing Board. The burden of proof shall be on the appellant.
§ 600-1821. Jurisdictional boundary changes.
Prior to development occurring in areas where annexation or other corporate
boundary changes are proposed or have occurred, the community shall review
flood hazard data affecting the lands subject to boundary changes. The
community shall adopt and enforce floodplain regulations in areas subject to
annexation or corporate boundary changes which meet or exceed those in 44 CFR
60.3.
§ 600-1822. General technical provisions.
   A.   Alteration or relocation of watercourse.
      (1)   No encroachment, alteration, or improvement of any kind shall be
made to any watercourse until all adjacent municipalities which may be affected
by such action have been notified by the City, and until all required permits
or approvals have been first obtained from the Department of Environmental
Protection Regional Office.
      (2)   No encroachment, alteration, or improvement of any kind shall be
made to any watercourse unless it can be shown that the activity will not
reduce or impede the flood-carrying capacity of the watercourse in any way.
      (3)   In addition, FEMA and the Pennsylvania Department of Community and
Economic Development Department shall be notified prior to any alteration or
relocation of any watercourse.
   B.   Alteration or changes to the base flood elevation. Technical or
scientific data shall be submitted by the applicant to FEMA for a Conditional
Letter of Map Revision (CLOMR), or a Letter of Map Revision (LOMR), or other
activity resulting in changes in the BFE. The situations when a LOMR or a CLOMR
are required are:
      (1)   For any development that will cause any rise in the base flood
elevations within the Floodway Subdistrict;
      (2)   For any development occurring in the Zone A Subdistrict or Zone AE
Without Floodway Subdistrict, which will cause a rise of more than one foot in
the base flood elevation; or
      (3)   For alteration or relocation of a stream (including but not limited
to installing culverts and bridges).
   C.   Alterations to the floodway.
      (1)   Within the Zone A Subdistrict or the Shallow Flooding Subdistrict,
no new construction or development shall be located within the area measured 50
feet landward from the top-of-bank of any watercourse, unless a water
obstruction permit is obtained from the Pennsylvania Department of
Environmental Protection.
      (2)   For development in the Floodway Subdistrict and the Zone AE Without
Floodway Subdistrict, refer to §
600-1818.
   D.   Any new construction, development, uses or activities allowed within
any identified floodplain area or within the Floodplain Overlay Zone shall be
undertaken in strict compliance with the provisions contained in this Part and
all other applicable codes, ordinances and regulations.
§ 600-1823. Elevation and floodproofing requirements.
   A.   Residential structures.
      (1)   Within the Zone AE Without Floodway Subdistrict, any new
construction or substantial improvement shall have the lowest floor (including
basement) elevated to at least 1 1/2 feet above the Base Flood Elevation (BFE).
      (2)   Within the Zone A Subdistrict, where there are no Base Flood
Elevations specified on the FIRM, any new construction or substantial
improvement shall have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated to least
1 1/2 feet above the BFE, determined in accordance with §
600-1818C of this Part.
      (3)   Within Shallow Flooding Subdistrict (if applicable), any new
construction or substantial improvement shall have the lowest floor (including
basement) at or above the highest adjacent grade at least as high as the flood
depth number specified on the FIRM.
      (4)   The design and construction standards and specifications contained
in
Chapter 180, Construction Codes,
Chapter 295, Historic Districts, and
Chapter 302, House Numbering, shall be utilized.
   B.   Nonresidential structures.
      (1)   Within the Zone AE Without Floodway Subdistrict, any new
construction or substantial improvement of a nonresidential structure shall
have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated to least 1 1/2 feet above
the BFE.
      (2)   In the Zone A Subdistrict, where no Base Flood Elevations are
specified on the FIRM, any new construction or substantial improvement shall
have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated or completely floodproofed
to least 1 1/2 feet above the BFE, determined in accordance with section §
600-1818C of this Part.
      (3)   In Zone AO (if applicable), any new construction or substantial
improvement shall have their lowest floor elevated or completely floodproofed
above the highest adjacent grade to at least as high as the flood depth number
specified on the FIRM.
      (4)   Any nonresidential structure, or part thereof, made watertight
below the BFE shall be floodproofed in accordance with the WI or W2 space
classification standards contained in the publication entitled "Flood-Proofing
Regulations" published by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers (June 1972, as
amended March 1992) or with some other equivalent standard. All plans and
specifications for such floodproofing shall be accompanied by a statement
certified by a registered professional engineer or architect which states that
the proposed design and methods of construction are in conformance with the
above referenced standards.
      (5)   The design and construction standards and specifications contained
in
Chapter 180, Construction Codes,
Chapter 295, Historic Districts, and
Chapter 302, House Numbering, shall be utilized.
   C.   Space below the lowest floor.
      (1)   Fully enclosed space below the lowest floor (excluding basements)
which will be used solely for the parking of a vehicle, building access, or
incidental storage in an area other than a basement, shall be designed and
constructed to allow for the automatic entry and exit of floodwaters for the
purpose of equalizing hydrostatic forces on exterior walls. The term "fully
enclosed space" also includes crawl spaces.
      (2)   Designs for meeting this requirement must either be certified by a
registered professional engineer or architect, or meet or exceed the following
minimum criteria:
         (a)   A minimum of two openings having a net total area of not less
than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed space;
         (b)   The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot
above grade;
         (c)   Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, etc. or other
coverings or devices, provided that they permit the automatic entry and exit of
floodwaters.
   D.   Historic structures. See Part 22, Definitions, for requirements for the
substantial improvement of any historic structures.
   E.   Accessory structures shall meet the requirements of these regulations.
§ 600-1824. Design and construction standards.
The following minimum standards shall apply for all construction and
development proposed within the Floodplain Overlay Zone, except for development
within the Floodway Subdistrict:
   A.   Fill.
      (1)   Disposal of fill, including but not limited to rubble, construction
debris, woody debris, and trash, shall not be permitted in the Floodplain
Overlay Zone.
      (2)   If engineered fill is used for building purposes, it shall meet all
of the FEMA development criteria, including but not limited to:
         (a)   Extend laterally at least 15 feet beyond the building line from
all points;
         (b)   Consist of soil or small rock materials only; sanitary landfills
shall not be permitted;
         (c)   Be compacted and stabilized to provide the necessary
permeability and resistance to erosion, scouring, and settling;
         (d)   Be no steeper than one vertical to two horizontal, feet unless
substantiated data, justifying steeper slopes are submitted to, and approved by
the Floodplain Administrator; and
         (e)   Be used to the extent to which it does not adversely affect
adjacent properties.
      (3)   Any proposed development, including fill, proposed within the
Floodway Subdistrict shall comply with §
600-1818.
   B.   Drainage facilities. Storm drainage facilities shall be designed to
convey the flow of stormwater runoff in a safe and efficient manner. The system
shall insure proper drainage along streets, and provide positive drainage away
from buildings. The system shall also be designed to prevent the discharge of
excess runoff onto adjacent properties.
   C.   Water and sanitary sewer facilities and systems.
      (1)   All new or replacement water supply and sanitary sewer facilities
and systems shall be located, designed and constructed to minimize or eliminate
flood damages and the infiltration of floodwaters.
      (2)   Sanitary sewer facilities and systems shall be designed to prevent
the discharge of untreated sewage into floodwaters.
      (3)   No part of any on-site sewage system shall be located within any
identified floodplain area except in strict compliance with all state and local
regulations for such systems. If any such system is permitted, it shall be
located so as to avoid impairment to it, or contamination from it, during a
flood.
      (4)   The design and construction provisions of the UCC and FEMA No. 348,
Protecting Building Utilities From Flood Damages, and The International Private
Sewage Disposal Code, shall be utilized.
   D.   Other utilities. All other utilities such as gas lines, electrical and
telephone systems shall be located, elevated (where possible) and constructed
to minimize the chance of impairment during a flood.
   E.   Streets. The finished elevation of all new streets shall be no more
than one foot below the regulatory food elevation.
   F.   Storage. All materials that are buoyant, flammable, explosive, or in
times of flooding, could be injurious to human, animal, or plant life, and
which are not listed in §
600-1825, Development which may endanger human life, shall be stored at or
above the regulatory flood elevation or floodproofed to the maximum extent
possible.
   G.   Placement of buildings and structures. All buildings and structures
shall be designed, located, and constructed so as to offer the minimum
obstruction to the flow of water and shall be designed to have a minimum effect
upon the flow and height of floodwater.
   H.   Anchoring.
      (1)   All buildings and structures shall be firmly anchored in accordance
with accepted engineering practices to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral
movement.
      (2)   All air ducts, large pipes, storage tanks, and other similar
objects or components located below the regulatory flood elevation shall be
securely anchored or affixed to prevent flotation.
   I.   Floors, walls and ceilings.
      (1)   Wood flooring used at or below the regulatory flood elevation shall
be installed to accommodate a lateral expansion of the flooring, perpendicular
to the flooring grain without causing structural damage to the building.
      (2)   Plywood used at or below the regulatory flood elevation shall be of
a "marine" or "water-resistant" variety.
      (3)   Walls and ceilings at or below the regulatory flood elevation shall
be designed and constructed of materials that are water-resistant and will
withstand inundation.
      (4)   Windows, doors, and other components at or below the regulatory
flood elevation shall be made of metal or other water-resistant material.
   J.   Paints and adhesives.
      (1)   Paints and other finishes used at or below the regulatory flood
elevation shall be of marine or water-resistant quality.
      (2)   Adhesives used at or below the regulatory flood elevation shall be
of a marine or water-resistant variety.
      (3)   All wooden components (doors, trim, cabinets, etc.) used at or
below the regulatory flood elevation shall be finished with a marine or water-
resistant paint or other finishing material.
   K.   Electrical components.
      (1)   Electrical distribution panels shall be at least three feet above
the base flood elevation.
      (2)   Separate electrical circuits shall serve lower levels and shall be
dropped from above.
   L.   Equipment. Water heaters, furnaces, air conditioning and ventilating
units, and other electrical, mechanical or utility equipment or apparatus shall
not be located below the regulatory flood elevation.
   M.   Fuel supply systems. All gas and oil supply systems shall be designed
to prevent the infiltration of floodwaters into the system and discharges from
the system into floodwaters. Additional provisions shall be made for the
drainage of these systems in the event that floodwater infiltration occurs.
   N.   Uniform Construction code coordination. The Standards and
Specifications contained in 34 Pa. Code (Chapters 401 through 405), as amended,
and not limited to the following provisions, shall apply to the above and other
sections of this Part, to the extent that they are more restrictive and
supplement the requirements of this Part:
      (1)   International Building Code (IBC) 2009 or the latest edition
thereof: Secs. 801, 1202, 1403, 1603, 1605, 1612, 3402, and Appendix G.
      (2)   International Residential Building Code (IRC) 2009 or the latest
edition thereof: Secs. R104, R105, R109, R323, Appendix AE101, Appendix E and
Appendix J.
§ 600-1825. Development which may endanger human life.
   A.   In accordance with the Pennsylvania Floodplain Management Act, 37   and
the regulations adopted by the Pennsylvania Department of Community and
Economic Development as required by the Act, any new or substantially improved
structure which: will be used for the production or storage of any of the
following dangerous materials or substances; or, will be used for any activity
requiring the maintenance of a supply of more than 550 gallons, or other
comparable volume, of any of the following dangerous materials or substances on
the premises; or, will involve the production, storage, or use of any amount of
radioactive substances; shall be prohibited within the Floodplain Overlay Zone.
   B.   The following list of materials and substances are considered dangerous
to human and/or aquatic life:
      (1)   Acetone.
      (2)   Ammonia.
      (3)   Benzene.
      (4)   Calcium carbide.
      (5)   Carbon disulfide.
      (6)   Celluloid.
      (7)   Chlorine.
      (8)   Hydrochloric acid.
      (9)   Hydrocyanic acid.
      (10)   Magnesium.
      (11)   Nitric acid and oxides of nitrogen.
      (12)   Petroleum products (gasoline, fuel oil, etc.).
      (13)   Phosphorus.
      (14)   Potassium.
      (15)   Sodium.
      (16)   Sulphur and sulphur products.
      (17)   Pesticides (including insecticides, fungicides, and rodenticides).
      (18)   Radioactive substances, insofar as such substances are not
otherwise regulated.
37.   Editor's Note: See 32 P.S. § 679.101 et seq.
§ 600-1826. Special requirements for subdivisions.
All subdivision proposals and development proposals containing at least 50 lots
or at least five acres, whichever is the lesser, in the Floodplain Overlay Zone
where base flood elevation data are not available, shall be supported by
hydrologic and hydraulic engineering analyses that determine base flood
elevations and floodway information. The analyses shall be prepared by a
licensed professional engineer in a format required by FEMA for a Conditional
Letter of Map Revision or Letter of Map Revision. Submittal requirements and
processing fees shall be the responsibility of the applicant.
§ 600-1827. Special requirements for manufactured homes.
   A.   Within the Floodplain Overlay Zone, manufactured homes shall be
prohibited within the floodway or the area measured 50 feet landward from the
top-of-bank of any watercourse.
   B.   Where permitted within the Floodplain Overlay Zone, all manufactured
homes, and any improvements thereto, shall be:
      (1)   Placed on a permanent foundation;
      (2)   Elevated so that the lowest floor of the manufactured home is at
least 1 1/2 feet above base flood elevation; and
      (3)   Anchored to resist flotation, collapse, or lateral movement.
   C.   Installation of manufactured homes shall be done in accordance with the
manufacturers' installation instructions as provided by the manufacturer. Where
the applicant cannot provide the above information, the requirements of
Appendix E of the 2009 International Residential Building Code or the U.S.
Department of Housing and Urban Development's Permanent Foundations for
Manufactured Housing, 1984 Edition, draft or latest revision thereto, shall
apply and 34 Pa. Code Chapters 401 through 405.
   D.   Consideration shall be given to the installation requirements of the
2009 IBC, and the 2009 IRC or the most recent revisions thereto and 34 Pa.
Code, as amended where appropriate and/or applicable to units where the
manufacturers' standards for anchoring cannot be provided or were not
established for the unit(s) proposed installation.
§ 600-1828. Special requirements for recreational vehicles.
Recreational vehicles within the Floodplain Overlay Zone must either:
   A.   Be on the site for fewer than 180 consecutive days;
   B.   Be fully licensed and ready for highway use; or
   C.   Meet the permit requirements for manufactured homes in §
600-1827.
§ 600-1829. Prohibited uses.
In accordance with the administrative regulations promulgated by the
Pennsylvania Department of Community and Economic Development to implement the
Pennsylvania Floodplain Management Act, the following uses shall be prohibited
within the Floodplain Overlay Zone:
   A.   The construction, enlargement or expansion of any of the following
uses; or the construction, enlargement, or expansion of any structure used, or
intended to be used, for any of the following activities:
      (1)   Hospitals;
      (2)   Nursing homes;
      (3)   Jails or prisons.
   B.   The commencement of, or any construction of, a new manufactured home
park or manufactured home subdivision, or substantial improvement to an
existing manufactured home park or manufactured home subdivision.
§ 600-1830. Special exception uses and special exception application
requirements.
   A.   The development or placement of a new dwelling within the Floodplain
Overlay Zone shall only be permitted by a special exception. Refer to §
600-1818 for other types of developments requiring a special exception. The
applicant for a special exception shall bear the burden of proof that the
proposed development meets the requirements set forth in this Part. Dwellings
are not permitted within the Floodway Subdistrict; refer to §
600-1818.
   B.   Applicants for special exceptions within the Floodplain Overlay Zone
shall comply with the application requirements set forth in this Part
pertaining to special exceptions. In addition, the application shall include
five copies of the following items:
      (1)   A written request including a completed Floodplain Permit
Application Form;
      (2)   A small-scale map showing the vicinity in which the proposed site
is located;
      (3)   A plan of the entire site, clearly and legibly drawn at a scale of
one inch being equal to 100 feet or less, showing the following:
         (a)   North arrow, scale and date;
         (b)   Topography based upon the North American Vertical Datum (NAVD)
of 1988, showing existing and proposed contours at intervals of not more than
two feet;
         (c)   All property and lot lines including dimensions, and the size of
the site expressed in acres or square feet;
         (d)   The location of all existing streets, drives, other accessways,
and parking areas, with information concerning widths, pavement types and
construction, and elevations;
         (e)   The location of any existing bodies of water or watercourses,
buildings, structures and other public or private facilities, including
railroad tracks and facilities, and any other natural and man-made features
affecting, or affected by, the proposed activity or development;
         (f)   The location of the floodplain boundary line, information and
spot elevations concerning the base flood elevation, and information concerning
the flow of water including direction and velocities;
         (g)   The location of all proposed buildings, structures, utilities,
and any other improvements; and
         (h)   Any other information which the municipality considers necessary
for adequate review of the application.
      (4)   Plans of all proposed buildings, structures and other improvements,
clearly and legibly drawn at suitable scale showing the following:
         (a)   Sufficiently detailed architectural or engineering drawings,
including floor plans, sections, and exterior building elevations, as
appropriate;
         (b)   For any proposed building, the elevation of the lowest floor
(including basement) and, as required, the elevation of any other floor;
         (c)   Complete information concerning flood depths, pressures,
velocities, impact and uplift forces, and other factors associated with the
base flood;
         (d)   Detailed information concerning any proposed floodproofing
measures;
         (e)   Cross section drawings for all proposed streets, drives, other
accessways, and parking areas, showing all rights-of-way and pavement widths;
         (f)   Profile drawings for all proposed streets, drives, and vehicular
accessways including existing and proposed grades; and
         (g)   Plans and profiles of all proposed sanitary and storm sewer
systems, water supply systems, and any other utilities and facilities;
      (5)   The following data and documentation:
         (a)   Certification from the applicant that the site upon which the
activity or development is proposed is an existing separate and single parcel,
owned by the applicant or the client he represents;
         (b)   Certification from a registered professional engineer,
architect, or landscape architect that the proposed construction has been
adequately designed to protect against damage from the base flood;
         (c)   A statement, certified by a registered professional engineer,
architect, landscape architect, or other qualified person which contains a
complete and accurate description of the nature and extent of pollution that
might possibly occur from the development during the course of a base flood,
including a statement concerning the effects such pollution may have on human
life;
         (d)   A statement certified by a registered professional engineer,
architect, or landscape architect, which contains a complete and accurate
description of the effects the proposed development will have on base flood
elevation and flows;
         (e)   A statement, certified by a registered professional engineer,
architect, or landscape architect, which contains a complete and accurate
description of the kinds and amounts of any loose buoyant materials or debris
that may possibly exist or be located on the site below the base flood
elevation and the effects such materials and debris may have on base flood
elevation and flows;
         (f)   The appropriate component of the Department of Environmental
Protection's "Planning Module for Land Development";
         (g)   Where any excavation or grading is proposed, a plan meeting the
requirements of the Department of Environmental Protection to implement and
maintain erosion and sedimentation control;
         (h)   Any other applicable permits such as, but not limited to, a
permit for any activity regulated by the Department of Environmental Protection
under Section 302 of Act 1978-166; 38  and
         (i)   An evacuation plan which fully explains the manner in which the
site will be safely evacuated before or during the course of a base flood.
38.   Editor's Note: See 32 P.S. § 679.302.
§ 600-1831. Special exception application review procedures.
Upon receipt of an application for a special exception, the following
procedures shall apply in addition to those of §
600-1810. Within three working days following receipt of the application, a
complete copy of the application and all accompanying documentation shall be
forwarded to the County Planning Commission by registered or certified mail for
its review and recommendations. Copies of the application shall also be
forwarded to the Planning Commission and City Engineer for review and comment.
   A.   If an application is received that is incomplete, the City shall notify
the applicant in writing, stating in what respect the application is deficient.
   B.   If the City decides to disapprove an application, it shall notify the
applicant, in writing, of the reasons for the disapproval.
§ 600-1832. Special exception technical requirements.
   A.   In addition to the requirements of §
600-1830, the following minimum requirements shall also apply to any proposed
development requiring a special exception. If there is a conflict between any
of the following requirements and any other section within this Part, or in any
other code, ordinance, or regulation, the more restrictive provision shall
apply.
   B.   No application for a special exception shall be approved unless it can
be determined that the structure or activity will be located, constructed and
maintained in a manner which will:
      (1)   Fully protect the health and safety of the general public and any
occupants of the structure. At a minimum, all new structures shall be designed,
located, and constructed so that:
         (a)   The structure will survive inundation by waters of the base
flood without any lateral movement or damage to either the structure itself, or
to any of its equipment or contents below the BFE;
         (b)   The lowest floor (including basement) will be elevated to at
least 1 1/2 feet above base flood elevation;
         (c)   The occupants of the structure can remain inside for an
indefinite period of time and be safely evacuated at any time during the base
flood; and
      (2)   Prevent any significant possibility of pollution, increased flood
levels or flows, or debris endangering life and property.
   C.   All hydrologic and hydraulic analyses shall be undertaken only by
professional engineers or others of demonstrated qualifications, who shall
certify that the technical methods used correctly reflect currently accepted
technical concepts. Studies, analyses, computations, etc. shall be submitted in
sufficient detail to allow a thorough technical review by the City and the
Pennsylvania Department of Community and Economic Development.
§ 600-1833. Existing structures in identified floodplain areas.
The provisions of this Part do not require any changes or improvements to be
made to lawfully existing structures within the Floodplain Overlay Zone.
However, when an improvement is made to any existing structure, the provisions
of §
600-1834 shall apply.
§ 600-1834. Improvements to existing structures.
The following provisions shall apply whenever any improvement is made to an
existing structure located within the Floodplain Overlay Zone:
   A.   No expansion or enlargement of an existing structure shall be allowed
within the Floodway Subdistrict that would cause any increase in BFE.
   B.   No expansion or enlargement of an existing structure shall be allowed
within the Zone AE Without Floodway Subdistrict or the Zone A Subdistrict that
would, together with all other existing and anticipated development, increase
the BFE more than one foot at any point.
   C.   Any modification, alteration, reconstruction, or improvement, of any
kind to an existing structure, to an extent or amount of 50% or more of its
market value, shall constitute a substantial improvement and shall be
undertaken only in full compliance with §
600-1823 and all other applicable provisions of this Part.
   D.   The above activity shall also address the requirements of the 34 Pa.
Code, as amended and the 2009 IBC and the 2009 IRC.
§ 600-1835. Granting of variances.
If compliance with any of the requirements of this Part would result in an
exceptional hardship to a prospective builder, developer or landowner, the
Zoning Hearing Board may, upon request, grant relief from the strict
application of the requirements.
§ 600-1836. Variance procedures and conditions.
   A.   Requests for variances shall be considered by the City in accordance
with the procedures contained in §
600-1816 and the following:
      (1)   No variance shall be granted for any construction, development,
use, or activity within any Floodway Subdistrict that would cause any increase
in the BFE.
      (2)   No variance shall be granted for any construction, development,
use, or activity within the Zone AE Without Floodway Subdistrict that would,
together with all other existing and anticipated development, increase the BFE
more than one foot at any point.
      (3)   Except for a possible modification of the regulatory BFE
requirement involved, no variance shall be granted for any of the other
requirements pertaining specifically to a development regulated by prohibited
uses (§
600-1829) or to development which may endanger human life (§
600-1825).
      (4)   If granted, a variance shall involve only the least modification
necessary to provide relief.
      (5)   In granting any variance, the City shall attach whatever reasonable
conditions and safeguards it considers necessary in order to protect the public
health, safety, and welfare, and to achieve the objectives of this Part.
      (6)   Whenever a variance is granted, the City shall notify the applicant
in writing that:
         (a)   The granting of the variance may result in increased premium
rates for flood insurance;
         (b)   Such variances may increase the risks to life and property.
      (7)   In reviewing any request for a variance, the City shall consider,
at a minimum, the following:
         (a)   That there is good and sufficient cause;
         (b)   That failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional
hardship to the applicant;
         (c)   That the granting of the variance will:
            [1]   Neither result in an unacceptable or prohibited increase in
flood heights, additional threats to public safety, or extraordinary public
expense;
            [2]   Nor create nuisances, cause fraud on, or victimize the
public, or conflict with any other applicable state or local ordinances and
regulations.
      (8)   A complete record of all variance requests and related actions
shall be maintained by the City. In addition, a report of all variances granted
during the year shall be included in the annual report to the FEMA.
   B.   Notwithstanding any of the above, however, all structures shall be
designed and constructed so as to have the capability of resisting the one-
percent-annual-chance flood.
§ 600-1837. Word usage.
Unless specifically defined below, words and phrases used in this Part shall be
interpreted so as to give this Part its most reasonable application. Refer also
to Part 22, Definitions. If duplication of terms or conflict occurs, then the
definitions listed below will take precedence.
§ 600-1838. Specific definitions.
As used in this Part, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
   ACCESSORY USE OR STRUCTURE — A use or structure on the same lot with, and of
a nature customarily incidental and subordinate to, the principal use or
structure.
   BASE FLOOD — A flood which has a 1% chance of being equaled or exceeded in
any given year (also called the "one-hundred-year flood" or "one-percent-
annual-chance flood").
   BASE FLOOD DISCHARGE — The volume of water resulting from a base flood as it
passes a given location within a given time, usually expressed in cubic feet
per second (cfs).
   BASE FLOOD ELEVATION (BFE) — The elevation shown on the Flood Insurance Rate
Map (FIRM) for Zones AE, AH, A1-30 that indicates the water surface elevation
resulting from a flood that has a 1% or greater chance of being equaled or
exceeded in any given year.
   BASEMENT — Any area of the building having its floor below ground level on
all sides.
   BUILDING — A combination of materials to form a permanent structure having
walls and a roof. Included shall be all manufactured homes and trailers to be
used for human habitation.
   CITY — City of Reading, Pennsylvania.
   DEVELOPMENT — Any man-made change to improved or unimproved real estate,
including but not limited to the construction, reconstruction, renovation,
repair, expansion, or alteration of buildings or other structures; the
placement of manufactured homes; streets, and other paving; utilities; filling,
grading and excavation; mining; dredging; drilling operations; storage of
equipment or materials; and the subdivision of land.
   EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION — A manufactured home park or
subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on
which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the
installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site
grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed before the effective date
of the floodplain management regulations adopted by a community.
   EXPANSION TO AN EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION — The
preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing
the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including the
installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site
grading or the pouring of concrete pads).
   FLOOD — A temporary inundation of normally dry land areas.
   FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM) — The Official Map on which the Federal
Emergency Management Agency has delineated both the areas of special flood
hazards and the risk premium zones applicable to the community.
   FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY (FIS) — The official report provided by the Federal
Emergency Management Agency that includes flood profiles, the Flood Insurance
Rate Map, the Flood Boundary and Floodway Map, and the water surface elevation
of the base flood.
   FLOODPLAIN AREA — A relatively flat or low land area which is subject to
partial or complete inundation from an adjoining or nearby stream, river or
watercourse; and/or any area subject to the unusual and rapid accumulation of
surface waters from any source.
   FLOODPROOFING — Any combination of structural and nonstructural additions,
changes, or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate flood damage to
real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary facilities,
structures and their contents.
   FLOODWAY — The channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land
areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without
cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than one foot.
   HIGHEST ADJACENT GRADE — The highest natural elevation of the ground surface
prior to construction next to the proposed walls of a structure.
   HISTORIC STRUCTURES — Any structure that is:
   A.   Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a
listing maintained by the Department of Interior) or preliminarily determined
by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for individual
listing on the National Register;
   B.   Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior
as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic
district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify as
a registered historic district;
   C.   Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states
which have been approved by the Secretary of the Interior; or
   D.   Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in
communities with historic preservation that have been certified either:
      (1)   By an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of the
Interior; or
      (2)   Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without
approved programs.
   LOWEST FLOOR — The lowest floor of the lowest fully enclosed area (including
basement). An unfinished, flood-resistant partially enclosed area, used solely
for parking of vehicles, building access, and incidental storage, in an area
other than a basement area is not considered the lowest floor of a building,
provided that such space is not designed and built so that the structure is in
violation of the applicable non-elevation design requirements of this Part.
   MANUFACTURED HOME — A structure, transportable in one or more sections,
which is built on a permanent chassis, and is designed for use with or without
a permanent foundation when attached to the required utilities. The term
includes park trailers, travel trailers, recreational and other similar
vehicles which are placed on a site for more than 180 consecutive days.
   MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION — A parcel (or contiguous parcels) of
land divided into two or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale.
   MINOR REPAIR — The replacement of existing work with equivalent materials
for the purpose of its routine maintenance and upkeep, but not including the
cutting away of any wall, partition or portion thereof, the removal or cutting
of any structural beam or bearing support, or the removal or change of any
required means of egress, or rearrangement of parts of a structure affecting
the exitway requirements; nor shall minor repairs include addition to,
alteration of, replacement or relocation of any standpipe, water supply, sewer,
drainage, drain leader, gas, oil, waste, vent, or similar piping, electric
wiring or mechanical or other work affecting public health or general safety.
   NEW CONSTRUCTION — Structures for which the start of construction commenced
on or after July 3, 2012 and includes any subsequent improvements to such
structures. Any construction started after September 29, 1978 and before July
3, 2012 is subject to the ordinance in effect at the time the permit was
issued, provided the start of construction was within 180 days of permit
issuance.
   NEW MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION — A manufactured home park or
subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on
which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum, the
installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site
grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed on or after the effective
date of floodplain management regulations adopted by a community.
   PERSON — An individual, partnership, public or private association or
corporation, firm, trust, estate, municipality, governmental unit, public
utility or any other legal entity whatsoever, which is recognized by law as the
subject of rights and duties.
   POST-FIRM STRUCTURE — A structure for which construction or substantial
improvement occurred after December 31, 1974 or on or after the community's
initial Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) dated 9-29-1978, whichever is later,
and, as such, would be required to be compliant with the regulations of the
National Flood Insurance Program.
   PRE-FIRM STRUCTURE — A structure for which construction or substantial
improvement occurred on or before December 31, 1974 or before the community's
initial Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) dated 9-29-1978, whichever is later,
and, as such, would not be required to be compliant with the regulations of the
National Flood Insurance Program.
   RECREATIONAL VEHICLE — A vehicle which is:
   A.   Built on a single chassis;
   B.   Not more than 400 square feet, measured at the largest horizontal
projections;
   C.   Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light-duty
truck;
   D.   Not designed for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living
quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use.
   REGULATORY FLOOD ELEVATION — The base flood elevation (BFE) or estimated
flood height as determined using simplified methods plus a freeboard safety
factor of 1 1/2 feet.
   REPETITIVE LOSS — Flood-related damages sustained by a structure on two
separate occasions during a ten-year period for which the cost of repairs at
the time of each such flood event, on average, equals or exceeds 25% of the
market value of the structure before the damages occurred.
   SPECIAL EXCEPTION FOR FLOODPLAIN USES — A special approval which is required
for certain developments when such developments are located in all, or a
designated portion of the Floodplain Overlay Zone.
   SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA (SFHA) — An area in the floodplain subject to a 1%
or greater chance of flooding in any given year. It is shown on the FIRM as
Zone A, AO, A1-A30, AE, A99, or, AH.
   START OF CONSTRUCTION — Includes substantial improvement and other proposed
new development and means the date the permit was issued, provided the actual
start of construction, repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition,
placement, or other improvement was within 180 days from the date of the permit
and shall be completed within 12 months after the date of issuance of the
permit unless a time extension is granted, in writing, by the Floodplain
Administrator. The actual start means either the first placement of permanent
construction of a structure on a site, such as the pouring of slab or footings,
the installation of piles, the construction of columns, or any work beyond the
stage of excavation; or the placement of a manufacture home on a foundation.
Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing,
grading, and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and
walkways; nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings, piers, or
foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the
installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds
not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure. For a
substantial improvement, the actual start of construction means the first
alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building,
whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building.
   STRUCTURE — A walled and roofed building, including a gas or liquid storage
tank that is principally above ground, as well as a manufactured home.
   SUBDIVISION — The division or redivision of a lot, tract, or parcel of land
by any means into two or more lots, tracts, parcels or other divisions of land
including changes in existing lot lines for the purpose, whether immediate or
future, of lease, partition by the court for distribution to heirs, or
devisees, transfer of ownership or building or lot development; provided,
however, that the subdivision by lease of land for agricultural purposes into
parcels of more than 10 acres, not involving any new street or easement of
access or any residential dwelling, shall be exempted.
   SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE — Damage from any cause sustained by a structure whereby
the cost of restoring the structure to its before-damaged condition would equal
or exceed 50% or more of the market value of the structure before the damage
occurred.
   SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT —
   A.   Any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or other improvement of a
structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds 50% of the market value of the
structure before the start of construction of the improvement. This term
includes structures which have incurred substantial damage, regardless of the
actual repair work performed. The term does not, however, include any project
for improvement of a structure to correct existing violations of state or local
health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which have been identified by
the local code enforcement official and which are the minimum necessary to
assure safe living conditions.
   B.   Historic structures undergoing repair or rehabilitation that would
constitute a substantial improvement as defined in this Part must comply with
all ordinance requirements that do not preclude the structure's continued
designation as a historic structure. Documentation that a specific ordinance
requirement will cause removal of the structure from the National Register of
Historic Places or the State Inventory of Historic places must be obtained from
the Secretary of the Interior or the State Historic Preservation Officer. Any
exemption from ordinance requirements will be the minimum necessary to preserve
the historic character and design of the structure.
   UNIFORM CONSTRUCTION CODE (UCC) — The statewide building code adopted by the
Pennsylvania General Assembly in 1999 applicable to new construction in all
municipalities whether administered by the municipality, 39  a third party or
the Department of Labor and Industry. Applicable to residential and commercial
buildings, the code adopted the International Residential Code (IRC) and the
International Building Code (IBC), by reference, as the construction standard
applicable with the state floodplain construction. For coordination purposes,
references to the above are made specifically to various sections of the IRC
and the IBC.
   VIOLATION — The failure of a structure or other development to be fully
compliant with the community's floodplain management regulations. A structure
or other development without the elevation certificate, other certifications,
or other evidence of compliance required in 44 CFR 60.3(b)(5), (c)(4), (c)(10),
(d)(3), (e)(2), (e)(4), or (e)(5), is presumed to be in violation until such
time as that documentation is provided.
39.   Editor's Note: See
Ch. 180, Construction Codes.
§ 600-1839. Adoption.
Part 18 shall be effective on July 3, 2012, and shall remain in force until
modified, amended or rescinded by City of Reading, Berks County, Pennsylvania.
Part 19
Heliports
§ 600-1901. Where permitted.
Heliports shall be permitted as an accessory use, building or structure in the
M-C Manufacturing/ Commercial and H-M Heavy Manufacturing Zoning Districts and
on hospital properties in all zoning districts, provided that a license is
obtained from the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation, Bureau of
Aviation.
§ 600-1902. General requirements.
All heliports shall:
   A.   Have a minimum landing size of twice the length of the helicopter used.
   B.   Have a landing pad not less than 32 feet in diameter.
   C.   Be approachable from two directions.
   D.   Provide sufficient clearances, 8:1 ratio, so as to permit landings and
takeoffs from the outer limits of the landing pad.
   E.   Have 8:1 ratio approach lanes.
   F.   Have flight paths 200 feet wide and 500 feet outward from the outer
edge of the landing pad.
   G.   Have a wind direction indicator and appropriate lighting.
   H.   Conform to all regulations as promulgated by the Pennsylvania
Department of Transportation, Bureau of Aviation.
§ 600-1903. Permits.
No heliport shall be used, maintained or operated until a permit is secured
from the Zoning Administrator.
§ 600-1904. Revocation of permits.
Permits shall automatically be revoked if:
   A.   The Pennsylvania Department of Transportation, Bureau of Aviation,
revokes or refuses to re-license the primary operator or the heliport.
   B.   An operator of a heliport fails to cure any defect or nonconformity
with regulations as established by this section or the Pennsylvania Department
of Transportation, Bureau of Aviation, within 30 days, of being notified of
such defect or nonconformity.
Part 20
Airport Overlay Zones
§ 600-2001. Purposes.
This Part is enacted to insure and promote the health, safety and welfare of
the general public and property in and about the Reading Regional Airport, to
protect the users, facilities and services of the airport, to prevent hazardous
conditions to the users, facilities or services of the airport and to
eliminate, remove, mitigate, mark or light any existing hazard which cannot be
completely abated.
§ 600-2002. Applicability.
The provisions of this Part shall apply to all lands within the City that are
shown on the official Airport Approach Zoning Map as being located within the
boundaries of any airport zone.
§ 600-2003. Airport zones.
Airport zones shall be overlays to the underlying zoning districts as shown on
the Official Zoning Map. If there is any conflict between the provisions or
requirements of this Part and any other zoning provision, the more restrictive
provision shall apply.
§ 600-2004. Airport Approach Zone identification.
The airport zones as shown on the official Airport Approach Zoning Map are:
   A.   Conical zone.
   B.   Horizontal zone.
   C.   Precision instrument runway approach zone.
   D.   Runway larger than utility visual approach zone.
   E.   Runway larger than utility with a visibility minimum greater than
three-quarters of a mile nonprecision instrument approach zone.
   F.   Transitional zone.
   G.   Utility runway–visual approach zone.
§ 600-2005. Airport height limitations.
   A.   No building, structure or portion thereof or any other obstruction
shall be erected, altered or maintained in excess of the height limitations as
established hereinafter for each zone.
   B.   The height limitations for each zone are as follows:
      (1)   Conical Zone. One hundred fifty feet above the airport elevation at
the intersection with the Horizontal Zone and extending thereafter 20 feet
horizontal for each foot of vertical elevation extending to a height of 350
feet above the airport elevation.
      (2)   Horizontal Zone. One hundred fifty feet above the airport
elevation.
      (3)   Precision Instrument Runway Approach Zone. Beginning at the end of
and at the same elevation as the primary surface and extending 50 feet
horizontal for each one foot vertical for a distance of 10,000 feet along the
extended runway center line and thereafter 40 feet horizontal for each foot
vertical to a horizontal distance of 40,000 feet along the extended runway
center line.
      (4)   Runway Larger Than Utility Visual Approach Zone. Beginning at the
end of and at the same elevation as the primary surface and extending 20 feet
horizontally for each foot vertically to a distance of 5,000 feet along the
extended runway center line.
      (5)   Runway larger than utility with a visibility minimum greater than
three-quarters of a mile Nonprecision Instrument Approach Zone. Beginning at
the end of and at the same elevation as the primary surface and extending 50
feet horizontally for each one foot vertical extending to a horizontal distance
of 10,000 feet along the extended runway center line and thereafter 40 feet
horizontal for each one foot vertical to an additional horizontal distance of
40,000 feet along the extended runway center line.
      (6)   Transitional Zone. Beginning at the sides of and at the same
elevation as the primary surface and the approach surface extending seven feet
horizontal for each foot vertical and extending to a height of 100 feet above
the airport elevation and extending to the intersection with the conical
surface.
      (7)   Utility Runway Visual Approach Zone. Beginning at the end of and at
the same elevation as the primary surface and extending 20 feet horizontal for
each foot vertical a distance of 5,000 along the extended runway center line.
   C.   Where the precision instrument runway approach zone projects beyond the
conical zone, the height: limit shall begin at the side of and at the same
elevation as the approach surface extending seven feet horizontal for each foot
vertical extending a distance of 5,000 feet horizontal measured at 90° angles
to the extended runway center line.
§ 600-2006. Airport exceptions.
Nothing in this Part shall be construed as to prohibit the construction or
maintenance of any building, structure or part thereof or obstruction at a
maximum height of 35 feet.
§ 600-2007. Airport use restrictions.
No use may be made of land, buildings, structures, objects or water within any
district that:
   A.   Creates electrical interference with navigational signals or radio
communication between the airport and aircraft.
   B.   Makes it difficult for pilots to distinguish between airport lights and
others.
   C.   Results in glare to pilots using the airport.
   D.   Impairs visibility in the vicinity of the airport.
   E.   Creates bird strike hazards.
   F.   Endangers or interfere with the landing and taking off or maneuvering
of aircraft.
§ 600-2008. Airport nonconforming uses.
Nothing in this Part shall be construed to require the removal, alteration or
change of existing buildings, structures or parts thereof or obstruction not
conforming to the regulations as herein set forth. In the event any building,
structure or part thereof or obstruction shall violate and/ or exceed the
limitations as heretofore set forth and is deemed to be a nonconforming use,
the owner or lessee thereof shall permit the installation, operation and
maintenance thereon of any marker or light that shall be deemed necessary by
the airport authority to indicate to the operators of aircraft in the vicinity
of the presence of such building, structure, part thereof or obstruction.
§ 600-2009. Special Airport Zone permits.
   A.   No land, building, structure, part thereof, or obstruction shall be
established or changed in any of the airport zones unless a permit therefor has
been obtained from the Zoning Administrator.
   B.   Within the horizontal and conical zones, a permit shall not be required
for any building, structure, part thereof or obstruction less than 75 feet in
height, provided that such building, structure, part thereof or obstruction
does not exceed the height limitations as prescribed hereinbefore.
   C.   Within the approach zones, and at a horizontal distance not less than
4,200 feet from each end of a runway, a permit shall not be required for any
building, structure, part thereof or obstruction less than 75 feet in height,
provided that such building, structure, part thereof or obstruction does not
exceed the height limitations as prescribed hereinbefore.
   D.   Within the transition zones beyond the perimeter of the horizontal
zone, a permit shall not be required for any building, structure, part thereof
or obstruction less than 75 feet in height, provided that such building,
structure, part thereof or obstruction does not exceed above the height
limitations as prescribed hereinbefore.
§ 600-2010. Existing uses in Airport Zones.
No use, building, structure, part thereof or obstruction shall be permitted to
be altered or changed to become nonconforming in height or more nonconforming
in height.
§ 600-2011. Airport variances.
Variances to the provisions of this Part may be granted by the Zoning Hearing
Board. In addition to the requirements as established by this chapter and the
Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq., the
following shall also be considered and required:
   A.   The application shall be submitted to the Federal Aviation
Administration and the Pennsylvania Bureau of Aviation for review. The
application shall not be approved if either entity provides a written statement
that the proposal would interfere with the operation of air navigation
facilities and/or the safe efficient use of navigable air space.
   B.   Comments of the Airport Manager. A copy of the application shall be
furnished to the Airport Manager for advice as to the aeronautical effects of
the proposal. The Board is only required to consider comments received prior to
the Board's last hearing on the matter. An unfavorable report by the Airport
Manager or failure to respond shall not bind the Board, but may be a factor in
its decision.
Part 21
Wireless Communications Facilities
[Added 4-24-2023 by Ord. No. 41-2023]
§ 600-2101. Purpose and scope.
The purpose of this Part is to establish uniform standards for the siting,
design, permitting, maintenance, and use of wireless communications facilities
in City of Reading in compliance with applicable federal and state laws and
regulations. While the City recognizes the importance of wireless
communications facilities in providing high quality communications service to
its residents and businesses, the City also recognizes that it has an
obligation to protect public safety and to minimize the adverse visual effects
of such facilities through the standards set forth in the following provisions.
§ 600-2102. General requirements for all wireless communications facilities.
   A.   Standard of care.
      (1)   All WCFs shall meet or exceed all applicable standards and
provisions of the FAA, the FCC and any other agency of the state or federal
government with the authority to regulate wireless communications facilities,
the latest National Electrical Safety Code (NESC), American National Standards
Institute (ANSI) Code, and the structural standards of the American Association
of State Highway and Transportation Officials or any other industry standard
applicable to the structure. In case of conflict, the most stringent
requirements shall prevail. All necessary certifications shall be obtained by
the WCF Applicant and provided to the City.
      (2)   If such standards or regulations are changed, the owner of the WCF
shall bring such WCF into compliance with the revised standards within six (6)
months of the effective date of such standards or regulations, unless a
different compliance schedule is mandated by the controlling state or federal
agency. Failure to bring such facilities into compliance shall constitute
grounds for the removal of the WCF at the owner's expense.
      (3)   The WCF applicant shall submit proof of compliance with all
applicable federal and state standards, including but not limited to those
established by the Federal Communications Commission, as part of any complete
WCF application.
   B.   Engineer signature. All plans and drawings included in an application
for a WCF shall contain a seal and signature of a professional engineer,
licensed in the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania and certifying compliance with all
local, state and federal laws and regulations applicable to the proposed WCF.
   C.   Eligible facilities requests. WCF applicants proposing a modification
to an existing WCF shall be required only to obtain all necessary permits of
general applicability from the City. In order to be considered for such
permits, the WCF applicant must submit permit applications to the City in
accordance with the requirements of the City Code. Such permit applications
shall clearly state that the proposed modification constitutes an eligible
facilities request pursuant to the requirements of 47 CFR § 1.6100. The permit
applications shall detail all dimensional changes being made to the WCF and
wireless support structure.
   D.   Wind and ice. All WCFs shall be designed to withstand the effects of
wind gusts and ice to the standard designed by the American National Standards
Institute as prepared by the engineering departments of the Electronics
Industry Association, and Telecommunications Industry Association (ANSI/TIA-
222, as amended), or to the industry standard applicable to the structure.
   E.   Non-conforming wireless support structures. WCFs shall be permitted to
collocate upon existing non-conforming wireless support structures. Collocation
of WCFs upon existing wireless support structures is encouraged even if the
existing wireless support structure is non-conforming as to use within a zoning
district.
   F.   Signs. All WCFs shall post a sign in a readily visible location on each
major equipment component identifying the name and phone number of a party to
contact in the event of an emergency. The size and design of such signage shall
be approved by the City. The only other signage permitted on the WCF shall be
those required by the FCC, or any other federal or state agency.
   G.   Inspections; reports. Inspection reports shall be submitted to the City
by the owner of a WCF upon request to ensure structural integrity and
compliance with applicable federal, state and local codes and regulations.
   H.   Permit fees. The City may assess appropriate and reasonable permit fees
directly related to the City's actual costs in reviewing and processing the
application for approval of a WCF, as well as related inspection, monitoring,
and related costs. Such permit fees shall be established by the City fee
schedule.
   I.   Performance bond. The owner of a WCF obtain a performance bond in an
amount sufficient to guarantee removal of the WCF. Evidence of such performance
bond shall be provided to the City as part of a complete WCF application.
   J.   Indemnification. Each person that owns or operates a WCF shall, at its
sole cost and expense, indemnify, defend and hold harmless the City, its
elected and appointed officials, employees and agents, at all times against any
and all claims for personal injury, including death, and property damage
arising in whole or in part from, caused by or connected with any act or
omission of the person, its officers, agents, employees or contractors arising
out of, but not limited to, the construction, installation, operation,
maintenance or removal of the WCF. Each person that owns or operates a WCF
shall defend any actions or proceedings against the City in which it is claimed
that personal injury, including death, or property damage was caused by the
construction, installation, operation, maintenance or removal of a WCF. The
obligation to indemnify, hold harmless and defend shall include, but not be
limited to, the obligation to pay judgments, injuries, liabilities, damages,
reasonable attorneys' fees, reasonable expert fees, court costs and all other
costs of indemnification.
   K.   Non-commercial usage exemption. City residents utilizing satellite
dishes, citizen and/or band radios, and antennas for the purpose of maintaining
television, phone, and/or internet connections at their residences shall be
exempt from the regulations enumerated in this Part.
   L.   Historic buildings. No tower-based WCF or non-tower WCF may be located
on a building or structure that is listed on either the National or
Pennsylvania Registers of Historic Places or the official historic structures
and/or historic or conservation districts list maintained by the City. Small
WCFs shall be permitted in the public rights-of-way in such districts subject
to the requirements of this Part 21 and the City's Small WCF Design Manual.
   M.   Change in ownership. If ownership of a WCF is transferred to a party
other than the party designated as the owner on the application for the WCF,
notice detailing the change in ownership shall be provided to the City within
thirty (30) days of such change in ownership.
   N.   Abandonment; removal. In the event that use of a WCF and/or its
dedicated accessory equipment is to be discontinued, the owner shall provide
written notice to the City of its intent to discontinue use and the date when
the use shall be discontinued. A WCF and/or dedicated accessory equipment not
operated for a period of twelve (12) months shall be considered abandoned.
Discontinued or abandoned WCFs, or portions of WCFs, shall be removed as
follows:
      (1)   All abandoned or unused WCFs and accessory equipment shall be
removed within ninety (90) days of the cessation of operations at the site or
receipt of notice that the WCF has been deemed abandoned by the City, unless a
time extension is approved by the City.
      (2)   If the WCF or accessory equipment is not removed within ninety (90)
days of the cessation of operations at a site, or within any longer period
approved by the City, the WCF and/or associated facilities and equipment may be
removed by the City and the cost of removal assessed against the owner of the
WCF regardless of the owner's or operator's intent to operate the WCF in the
future.
      (3)   The City reserves the right to pursue all available remedies under
the law to ensure removal of the WCF and restoration of the site at the expense
of the owner. Any delay by the City in taking action shall not invalidate the
City's right to take action.
      (4)   Where there are two or more users of a single WCF, this provision
shall not become effective until all users have terminated use of the WCF for a
period of twelve (12) months.
   O.   Maintenance. The following maintenance requirements shall apply:
      (1)   All WCFs shall be fully automated and unattended on a daily basis
and shall be visited only for maintenance, repair or replacement.
      (2)   Such maintenance shall be performed by the owner of the WCF to
ensure the upkeep of the WCF in order to promote the safety and security of the
City's residents and in accordance with all applicable City, state and federal
regulations.
      (3)   All maintenance activities shall utilize nothing less than the best
available technology for preventing failures and accidents. Maintenance logs
will be provided to the City upon request.
   P.   Timing of Approval. The following table details the applicable
timeframe of approval for each type of WCF application:
 
Type of WCF/Application Notice of Incompleteness    Final Decision
                        30 calendar days from
                        receipt of initial          60 total calendar days from
Eligible Facilities     application; 10 calendar    receipt of initial
Request                 days from receipt of        application
                        supplemental application
                        for subsequent notices.
                        10 business days from       60 total calendar days from
Small WCF (Collocated)  receipt of initial or       receipt of initial
                        supplemental application.   application.
Small WCF (New or       10 business days from       90 total calendar days from
Replacement Wireless    receipt of initial or       receipt of initial
Support Structure       supplemental application.   application.
                        30 calendar days from
                        receipt of application for  90 total calendar days from
Non-Tower WCF           initial notice; 10 calendar receipt of initial
                        days from receipt of        application.
                        supplemental application
                        for subsequent notices.
                        30 calendar days from
                        receipt of application for  150 total calendar days
Tower-Based WCF         initial notice; 10 calendar from receipt of initial
                        days from receipt of        application.
                        supplemental application
                        for subsequent notices.
 
§ 600-2103. Tower-based wireless communications facilities outside the rights-
of-way.
   A.   The following regulations shall apply to all tower-based wireless
communications facilities that do not meet the definition of a small WCF.
      (1)   Permitted in certain zones. Tower-based WCFs are permitted outside
the public rights-of-way as a conditional use in the following zoning
districts:
         (a)   C-H Highway Commercial District.
         (b)   M-C Manufacturing Commercial District.
         (c)   H-M Heavy Manufacturing District.
         (d)   MU Municipal District.
      (2)   Conditional use required. Tower-based WCFs are permitted outside
the public rights-of-way as a conditional use, subject to the requirements of
this § 600-2103.
         (a)   Upon approval of an application for a tower-based WCF, the WCF
applicant shall mail notice thereof to the owner or owners of every property
zoned residential on the same street within 500 linear feet of the parcel or
property of the proposed facility and of every property zoned residential not
on the same street within 500 feet of the parcel or property of the proposed
facility if the application will be heard as a conditional use or a variance,
not less than 30 days before the hearing or install is to commence. The WCF
applicant shall then provide a copy of the notice and a list of the addresses
notice was delivered to the City of Reading Zoning Administrator.
         (b)   Prior to the City Council's approval of a conditional use
authorizing the construction and installation of a tower-based WCF, it shall be
incumbent upon the WCF applicant for such conditional use approval to prove to
the reasonable satisfaction of the City Council that the WCF applicant cannot
adequately extend or infill its communications system by the use of equipment
installed on existing structures, such as utility poles or their appurtenances
and other available structures. The WCF applicant shall further demonstrate
that the proposed Tower-Based WCF must be located where it is proposed in order
to serve the WCF applicant's service area and that no other viable, less-
intrusive alternative location exists.
         (c)   The conditional use application shall include the name and
contact information, including phone number, for both the WCF applicant and the
owner of the proposed tower-based WCF.
         (d)   The conditional use application shall include a site plan, drawn
to scale, showing property boundaries, power location, total height of the
tower-based WCF, guy wires and anchors, existing structures, elevation
drawings, typical design of proposed structures, parking, fences, landscaping
and existing uses on adjacent properties.
         (e)   The conditional use application shall include aerial photographs
of the area within a 500' radius of the proposed tower-based WCF and identify
all existing WCFs in that area.
         (f)   The conditional use application shall be accompanied by a
description of the type and manufacturer of the proposed transmission/radio
equipment, the frequency range (megahertz band) assigned to the WCF applicant,
the power in watts at which the WCF applicant transmits, and any relevant
related tests conducted by the WCF applicant in determining the need for the
proposed site and installation.
         (g)   The conditional use application shall include evidence that a
significant gap in wireless coverage or capacity exists in the applicable area
and that the type of WCF being proposed is the least intrusive means by which
to fill that gap in wireless coverage. The existence or nonexistence of a gap
in wireless coverage shall be a factor in the City Council's decision on an
application for approval of tower-based WCF.
         (h)   Where the tower-based WCF is located on a property that is not
owned by the WCF applicant, the WCF applicant shall present evidence to the
City Council that the owner of the property has granted an easement or other
property right, if necessary, for the proposed WCF and that vehicular access
will be provided to the facility.
         (i)   The conditional use application shall include a written
certification by a structural engineer licensed in the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania of the proposed WCF's ability to meet the structural standards
offered by either the Electronic Industries Association or the
Telecommunication Industry Association and certify the proper construction of
the foundation and the erection of the structure.
         (j)   The conditional use application shall demonstrate that the
wireless communications equipment planned for the proposed tower-based WCF
cannot be accommodated on an existing or approved structure or building. Any
application for approval of a tower-based WCF shall include a comprehensive
inventory of all existing towers and other suitable structures within a one-
mile radius from the point of the proposed tower, unless the WCF applicant can
show to the satisfaction of the City that a different distance is more
reasonable, and shall demonstrate conclusively why an existing tower or other
suitable structure cannot be utilized.
         (k)   The conditional use application shall include a report by a
qualified engineering expert which shows that the tower-based WCF will comply
with applicable FCC regulations, including applicable standards for radio
frequency emissions.
         (l)   The conditional use application shall also be accompanied by
documentation demonstrating that the proposed tower-based WCF complies with all
applicable provisions of this Part.
      (3)   Development regulations.
         (a)   Sole use on a lot. A tower-based WCF is permitted as a sole use
on a lot subject to the minimum lot area and yards complying with the
requirements for the applicable zoning district in § 600-800.
         (b)   Combined with another use. A tower-based WCF may be permitted on
a property with an existing use or on a vacant parcel in combination with
another industrial, commercial, institutional or municipal use, subject to the
following conditions:
            [i]   The existing use on the property may be any permitted use in
the applicable district as per § 600-800, and need not be affiliated with the
WCF.
      (4)   Design regulations.
         (a)   Height. Any tower-based WCF shall be designed at the minimum
functional height and shall not exceed a maximum total height of 150 feet;
provided, however, that a tower-based WCF which existed prior to the approval
of this part and pursuant to Part 21 of this chapter maybe extended beyond the
height of 150 feet if not previously extended and such extension does not
amount to a substantial change as per the definition of Substantial Change
located in the Definitions § 600-2206. Tower-based WCF applicants must submit
documentation to the City justifying the total height of the structure.
         (b)   Visual appearance and land use compatibility.
            [i]   Tower-based WCFs shall employ stealth technology which may
include the wireless support structure being painted a certain color as
approved by City Council or utilizing a galvanized finish.
            [ii]   All tower-based WCFs and accessory equipment shall be
aesthetically and architecturally compatible with the surrounding environment
and shall maximize the use of a like facade to blend with the existing
surroundings and neighboring buildings to the greatest extent possible.
            [iii]   The City Council shall consider whether its decision upon
the subject application will promote the harmonious and orderly development of
the zoning district involved; encourage compatibility with the character and
type of development existing in the area; prevent a negative impact on the
aesthetic character of the community; preserve woodlands and trees existing at
the site to the greatest possible extent; and encourage sound engineering and
land development design and construction principles, practices and techniques.
         (c)   Anti-climbing device. If deemed necessary by the City Council, a
tower- based WCF shall be equipped with an anti-climbing device, as approved by
the manufacturer.
         (d)   Minimum setbacks. The tower-based WCF and accompanying equipment
building shall comply with the requirements for the applicable zoning district,
provided that no tower-based WCF shall be located within 500 feet of a lot in
residential use or a residential district boundary.
      (5)   Surrounding environs.
         (a)   The WCF applicant shall ensure that the existing vegetation,
trees and shrubs located within proximity to the WCF structure shall be
preserved to the maximum extent possible.
         (b)   The WCF applicant shall submit a soil report to City Council
complying with the standards of Appendix I: Geotechnical Investigations, ANSI/
TIA-222, as amended, to document and verify the design specifications of the
foundation of the tower-based WCF, and anchors for guy wires, if used.
      (6)   Fence/screen.
         (a)   A security fence having a height not to exceed eight (8) feet
shall completely surround any tower-based WCF located outside the public
rights-of-way, as well as accessory equipment, guy wires, or any building
housing accessory equipment.
         (b)   A WCF applicant for tower-based WCF where the WCF is more than
40 feet in height, located outside of the right-of-way, shall submit a
landscaping and screening design including the following. The plan shall be
approved by the Zoning Administrator in consultation with the Public Works
Director:
            [i]   The WCF Applicant shall ensure that the existing vegetation,
trees and shrubs located within proximity to the wireless support structure
shall be preserved to the extent practicable.
            [ii]   Ground mounted equipment may be screened from public view
using an evergreen screen, artificial screen, or fencing, as directed by the
Zoning Administrator and/or Public Works Director.
      (7)   Accessory equipment.
         (a)   To the extent permitted by federal and state law, ground-mounted
equipment associated to, or connected with, a tower-based WCF shall be screened
from public view using stealth technology approved by the Zoning Administrator,
in consultation with the Public Works Director. In no case shall ground-mounted
equipment, walls, screening or landscaping be located within 12 inches of the
face of the curb, or in an area in which there are no curbs, within two feet of
the edge of cartway.
         (b)   All utility buildings and accessory structures shall be
architecturally designed to blend into the environment in which they are
situated and shall meet the minimum setback requirements of the underlying
zoning district.
      (8)   Additional antennas. As a condition of approval for all tower-based
WCFs, the WCF applicant shall provide the City Council with a written
commitment that it will allow other service providers to collocate antennas on
the tower-based WCF where technically and economically feasible. To the extent
permissible under state and federal law, the owner of a tower-based WCF shall
not install any additional antennas without complying with the applicable
requirements of this Part.
      (9)   FCC license. Each person that owns or operates a tower-based WCF
shall submit a copy of its current FCC license, including the name, address,
and emergency telephone number for the operator of the facility.
      (10)   Lighting. No tower-based WCF shall be artificially lighted, except
as required by law. If lighting is required, the WCF applicant shall provide a
detailed plan for sufficient lighting, demonstrating as unobtrusive and
inoffensive an effect as is permissible under state and federal regulations.
The WCF applicant shall promptly report any outage or malfunction of FAA-
mandated lighting to the appropriate governmental authorities and to the City
Secretary.
      (11)   Storage. The storage of unused equipment, materials or supplies is
prohibited on any tower-based WCF site.
      (12)   Repair of non-conforming tower-based WCF. Non-conforming tower-
based WCFs which are hereafter damaged or destroyed due to any reason or cause
may be repaired and restored at their former location but must otherwise comply
with the terms and conditions of this section. The collocation of antennas is
permitted on non-conforming structures.
      (13)   Insurance. Each person that owns or operates a tower-based WCF
shall provide the City Zoning Administrator with a certificate of insurance
evidencing general liability coverage in the minimum amount of $5,000,000 per
occurrence and property damage coverage in the minimum amount of $5,000,000 per
occurrence covering the tower-based WCF.
      (14)   Bond. Prior to the issuance of a permit, the owner of a tower-
based WCF outside the ROW shall, at its own cost and expense, obtain from a
surety licensed to do business in Pennsylvania and maintain a bond or other
form of security acceptable to the City Solicitor, in an amount of $10,000 to
assure the removal of the tower-based WCF upon abandonment or cessation of use
for a period of six months. The bond shall provide that the City may recover
from the principal and surety any and all compensatory damages incurred by the
City for violations of this Part, after reasonable notice and opportunity to
cure. The owner shall file the bond with the City.
§ 600-2104. Non-tower wireless communications facilities outside the rights-of-
way.
   A.   The following regulations shall apply to all non-tower WCFs that do not
meet the definition of a small WCF:
      (1)   Permitted in all districts. Non-tower WCFs shall be permitted
outside the public rights-of-way in all zoning districts subject to the
restrictions and conditions prescribed below and subject to the prior written
approval of the City.
      (2)   Application procedures.
         (a)   Applications for non-tower WCFs shall be submitted to the City
Zoning Administrator.
         (b)   All applications for non-tower WCFs shall include the following
information:
            [i]   Upon submission of an application for any non-tower WCF, the
WCF applicant shall mail notice thereof to the owner or owners of every
property zoned residential on the same street within 500 linear feet of the
parcel or property of the proposed WCF and of every property zoned residential
not on the same street within 500 feet of the parcel or property of the
proposed WCF if the application will be heard as a conditional use or a
variance.
            [ii]   The name and contact information, including phone number,
for both the WCF applicant and the owner of the proposed non-tower WCF.
            [iii]   A site plan, drawn to scale, showing property boundaries,
power location, total height of the non-tower WCF, the entirety of the
structure upon which the non-tower WCF will be collocated, and accessory
equipment locations.
            [iv]   A before-and-after depiction of the proposed site, such as a
construction drawing, showing all equipment being proposed as part of the non-
tower WCF.
            [v]   If the non-tower WCF is proposed for location on a wireless
support structure that currently supports existing WCFs or other attachments,
the depiction shall show the location and dimensions of all such attachments.
            [vi]   The manufacturer and model, proposed location, and physical
dimensions (including volume) of each piece of equipment proposed as part of
the non-tower WCF.
            [vii]   An aerial photograph of the proposed site showing the area
within 500 feet of the non-tower WCF. The aerial photograph shall identify all
structures within such radius.
            [viii]   Photo simulations depicting the non-tower WCF from at
least three locations near the proposed site. The photo simulations should
reflect the proposed design and location of all equipment associated with the
non-tower WCF.
            [ix]   A written certification by a structural engineer licensed in
the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania confirming that the proposed non-tower WCF and
wireless support structure are structurally sound and shall not endanger public
health and safety.
            [x]   A report by a qualified engineering expert which shows that
the non-tower WCF will comply with applicable FCC regulations, including
applicable standards for radio frequency emissions.
            [xi]   A certificate of insurance as required by §
600-2103A.(9).
            [xii]   Certification of the application's compliance with all
requirements of this §
600-2103.
            [xiii]   All application fees required by the City as detailed in
the City fee schedule.
      (3)   Development regulations.
         (a)   To the extent permitted by federal and state law, the total
height of the wireless support structure and non-tower WCF shall not exceed a
maximum height of 150 feet. Non-tower WCFs which are mounted to a building or
similar structure may not exceed a height of 15 feet above the roof or parapet,
whichever is higher, unless the WCF applicant obtains a conditional use permit
or variance.
         (b)   In accordance with industry standards, all non-tower WCF
applicants must submit documentation to the City showing that the proposed non-
tower WCF is designed to be the minimum height technically feasible and
justifying the total height of the non-tower WCF.
         (c)   If the WCF applicant proposes to locate the accessory equipment
in a separate building, the building shall comply with the minimum requirements
for the applicable zoning district.
         (d)   A security fence with a minimum height of six (6) feet shall
surround any separate communications equipment building if such communications
equipment building is located at ground level. Vehicular access to the
communications equipment building shall not interfere with the parking or
vehicular circulations on the site for the principal use.
      (4)   Design.
         (a)   Non-tower WCF shall employ stealth technology and be treated to
match the wireless support structure in order to minimize aesthetic impact. The
application of the stealth technology utilized by the WCF applicant shall be
subject to the approval of the City.
         (b)   Non-tower WCFs shall, to the extent technically feasible,
incorporate architectural features, materials and colors which blend with
surrounding buildings, structures, terrain or landscape.
         (c)   All non-tower WCF applicants must submit documentation to the
City justifying the total height of the non-tower WCF structure. Such
documentation shall be analyzed in the context of such justification on an
individual basis.
      (5)   Prohibited on certain structures. No non-tower WCF shall be located
on single- family detached residences, single-family attached residences, semi-
detached residences, duplexes, or any residential accessory structure.
      (6)   Third party wireless support structures. Where the non-tower WCF is
proposed for collocation on a wireless support structure that is not owned by
the WCF applicant, the WCF applicant shall present documentation to the Zoning
Administrator that the owner of the wireless support structure has authorized
collocation of the proposed non-tower WCF.
      (7)   Retention of experts. The City may hire any consultant(s) and/or
expert(s) necessary to assist the City in reviewing and evaluating the
application for approval of the WCF at its sole discretion and, once approved,
in reviewing and evaluating any potential violations of the terms and
conditions of these WCF provisions. The WCF applicant and/or owner of the WCF
shall reimburse the City for all costs of the City's consultant(s) in providing
expert evaluation and consultation in connection with these activities. At the
sole discretion of the City Zoning Administrator, the establishment of a
professional services agreement may be required.
      (8)   Insurance. Each person that owns or operates a Non-Tower WCF shall
annually provide the City with a certificate of insurance evidencing general
liability coverage in the minimum amount of $1,000,000 per occurrence and
property damage coverage in the minimum amount of $1,000,000 per occurrence
covering the Non-Tower WCF.
      (9)   Substantial Change. Any Substantial Change to a WCF shall require
notice to be provided to the City Zoning Administrator, and possible
supplemental permit approval as determined by the City Zoning Administrator in
accordance with the City Code.
§ 600-2105. Small wireless communications facilities.
   A.   The following regulations shall apply to all tower-based wireless
communications facilities that do not meet the definition of a small WCF.
      (1)   Application procedures.
         (a)   Small WCFs shall be a permitted use in the public rights-of-way
in all City zoning districts, subject to the requirements of this § 600-2104
and generally applicable permitting as required by the City Code.
         (b)   Applications for small WCFs shall be submitted to the City
Zoning Administrator.
      (2)   Applications for small WCFs shall include the following:
         (a)   The name and contact information, including phone number, for
both the WCF applicant and the owner of the proposed small WCF.
         (b)   A cover letter detailing the location of the proposed site, all
equipment being proposed as part of the small WCF, and a certification that the
WCF applicant has included all information required by the City Code, signed by
a representative of the WCF applicant.
         (c)   A before-and-after depiction of the proposed site, such as a
construction drawing, showing all equipment being proposed as part of the small
WCF.
            [i]   If the small WCF is proposed for location on an existing or
replacement wireless support structure that currently supports existing
attachments, the depiction shall show the location and dimensions of all such
attachments.
            [ii]   If installation of a new or replacement wireless support
structure is being proposed, the depiction shall include the color, dimensions,
material and type of wireless support structure proposed.
         (d)   The manufacturer and model, proposed location, and physical
dimensions (including volume) of each piece of equipment proposed as part of
the Small WCF.
         (e)   An aerial photograph of the proposed site showing the area
within 500 feet of the small WCF. The aerial photograph shall identify all
structures within such radius.
         (f)   Photo simulations depicting the small WCF from at least three
locations near the proposed site. The photo simulations should reflect the
proposed design and location of all equipment associated with the small WCF.
         (g)   A written certification by a structural engineer licensed in the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania confirming that the proposed small WCF and
wireless support structure are structurally sound and shall not endanger public
health and safety.
         (h)   A report by a qualified engineering expert which shows that the
small WCF will comply with applicable FCC regulations, including applicable
standards for radio frequency emissions.
         (i)   A certificate of insurance as required by §
600-2104A.(15).
         (j)   Certification of the application's compliance with all
requirements of this §
600-2104.
         (k)   All application fees required by the City as detailed in the
City fee schedule.
      (3)   Resubmission following denial.
         (a)   If the City denies an application for a small WCF, the City
shall provide the WCF applicant with written documentation of the basis for
denial, including the specific provisions of the City Code on which the denial
was based, within five (5) business days of the denial.
         (b)   The WCF applicant may cure the deficiencies identified by the
City and resubmit the application within thirty (30) days of receiving the
written basis for the denial without being required to pay an additional
application fee. The City shall approve or deny the revised application within
thirty (30) days of the application being resubmitted for review.
      (4)   Consolidated applications. A single WCF applicant may not submit
more than one consolidated or 20 single applications for collocated small WCFs
in a 30-day period. If the City receives more than one consolidated application
or 20 single applications within a 45-day period, the applicable timeframe
under § 600-2102P. shall be extended by 15 days.
      (5)   Location and development standards.
         (a)   Small WCFs in the public ROW requiring the installation of a new
wireless support structure shall not be located in front of any building
entrance or exit.
         (b)   All small WCFs shall comply with the applicable requirements of
the Americans with Disabilities Act and all City Code requirements applicable
to streets and sidewalks.
      (6)   Time, place and manner. Once approved, the City shall determine the
time, place and manner of construction, maintenance, repair and/or removal of
all small WCFs in the ROW based on public safety, traffic management, physical
burden on the ROW, and related considerations.
      (7)   Attachment to municipal structures. The City shall allow the
collocation of small WCFs to structures owned by the City in accordance with
the hierarchy detailed in this section. If the WCF applicant is proposing the
collocation of a small WCF on a lower priority structure, it shall be a
condition to the approval of the application that the WCF applicant provide
evidence that collocation on a higher priority structure or wireless support
structure owned by a third-party is not technically feasible. In order from
most preferable to least preferable, the City's collocation preferences are as
follows.
         (a)   Power poles;
         (b)   Traffic signage poles without traffic signals;
         (c)   Traffic signal poles;
         (d)   Decorative light poles.
      (8)   Obstruction. Small WCFs and accessory equipment shall be located so
as not to cause any physical or visual obstruction to pedestrian or vehicular
traffic, create safety hazards to pedestrians and/or motorists, or to otherwise
inconvenience public use of the ROW as determined by the City.
      (9)   Graffiti. Any graffiti on a small WCF, including the wireless
support structure and any accessory equipment, shall be removed at the sole
expense of the owner within ten (10) calendar days of notification by the City.
      (10)   Design standards. All small WCFs in the City shall comply with the
requirements of the City Small Wireless Communications Facility Design Manual.
A copy of such shall be kept on file at the City Zoning Office.
      (11)   Obsolete equipment. As part of the construction, modification or
replacement of a small WCF, the WCF applicant shall remove any obsolete or
abandoned equipment from the wireless support structure.
      (12)   Relocation or removal of facilities. Within ninety (90) days
following written notice from the City, or such longer period as the City
determines is reasonably necessary or such shorter period in the case of an
emergency, an owner of a small WCF in the ROW shall, at its own expense,
temporarily or permanently remove, relocate, change or alter the position of
any WCF when the City, consistent with its police powers and applicable Public
Utility Commission regulations, shall determine that such removal, relocation,
change or alteration is reasonably necessary under the following circumstances:
         (a)   The construction, repair, maintenance or installation of any
City or other public improvement in the right-of-way;
         (b)   The operations of the City or other governmental entity in the
right-of-way;
         (c)   Vacation of a street or road or the release of a utility
easement; or
         (d)   An emergency that constitutes a clear and immediate danger to
the health, welfare, or safety of the public as determined by the City.
      (13)   Time limit for completion of construction. The proposed
collocation, the modification or replacement of a wireless support structure or
the installation of a new wireless support structure with small WCF attached
for which a permit is granted under this section shall be completed within one
year of the permit issuance date unless the City and the WCF applicant agree in
writing to extend the period.
      (14)   Reimbursement for ROW Use. In addition to permit fees as described
in this section, every small WCF in the ROW is subject to the City's right to
fix annually a fair and reasonable fee to be paid for use and occupancy of the
ROW. Such compensation for ROW use shall be directly related to the City's
actual ROW management costs including, but not limited to, the costs of the
administration and performance of all reviewing, inspecting, permitting,
supervising and other ROW management activities by the City. The owner of each
small WCF shall pay an annual fee to the City to compensate the City for the
City's costs incurred in connection with the activities described above. Such
fees shall comply with the applicable requirements of the Federal
Communications Commission.
      (15)   Insurance. Each person that owns or operates a small WCF shall
annually provide the City with a certificate of insurance evidencing general
liability coverage in the minimum amount of $1,000,000 per occurrence and
property damage coverage in the minimum amount of $1,000,000 per occurrence
covering the small WCF.
Appendix A
Small Wireless Communications Facility Design Manual
[Added 4-24-2023 by Res. No. 55A-2023]
SECTION I. DEFINITIONS
The following terms are defined as follows:
   1.   Accessory Equipment — Any equipment serving or being used in
conjunction with a Wireless Communications Facility or Wireless Support
Structure, including but not limited to transmission equipment, power supplies,
generators, batteries, cables, equipment buildings, cabinets and storage sheds,
shelters or similar structures.
   2.   Antenna — An apparatus designed for the purpose of emitting radio
frequency (RF) radiation, to be operated or operating from a fixed location
pursuant to Federal Communications Commission authorization, for the provision
of wireless service and any commingled information services.
   3.   Collocation — The mounting of one or more Wireless Communications
Facilities, including antennae, on a pre-existing structure, or modifying a
structure for the purpose of mounting or installing a Wireless Communications
Facility on that structure.
   4.   Decorative Pole — A City-owned pole that is specially designed and
placed for aesthetic purpose and on which no appurtenances or attachments,
other than a Small Wireless Communications Facility, lighting, banners, or
municipal attachments have been placed or are permitted to be placed.
   5.   Front Facade Area  — The area of the public right-of-way directly in
front of a structure, identified by drawing a perpendicular line from each
comer of the front of the structure to the public right-of-way.
   6.   Prior Approved Design — A design for a small Wireless Communications
Facility that has been reviewed and deemed to be in accordance with this Design
Manual and approved for construction by the City.
   7.   Small Wireless Communications Facility — A Wireless Communications
Facility that meets each of the following criteria:
      (1)   The Wireless Communications Facility —
         (i)   is mounted on a Wireless Support Structure that is 50 feet or
less in height, or
         (ii)   is mounted on a Wireless Support Structure that is no more than
10 percent taller than other adjacent structures, or
         (iii)   does not extend an existing Wireless Support Structure to a
height of more than 50 feet or by more than 10 percent above its preexisting
height prior to the installation of any Wireless Communications Facilities,
whichever is greater; and
      (2)   Each Antenna associated with the deployment of the Wireless
Communications Facility (excluding the associated equipment) is no more than
three cubic feet in volume; and
      (3)   All wireless equipment associated with the Wireless Support
Structure including the wireless equipment associated with the Antenna and any
pre-existing associated equipment on the Wireless Support Structure, are
cumulatively no more than 28 cubic feet in volume.
      (4)   The Wireless Communications Facility does not require antenna
structure registration under 47 CFR Part 17;
      (5)   The Wireless Communications Facility is not located on Tribal
lands, as defined under 36 CFR 800. 16(x); and
      (6)   The Wireless Communications Facility does not result in human
exposure to radio frequency radiation in excess of the applicable safety
standards specified in 47 CFR 1.1307(b).
   8.   Stealth Technology — Camouflaging methods applied to Wireless
Communications Facilities and accessory equipment which render them more
visually appealing or blend the proposed facility into the existing structure
or visual backdrop in such a manner as to render it minimally visible to the
casual observer. Such methods include, but are not limited to, architecturally
screened roof-mounted Antennas, building-mounted Antennas painted to match the
existing structure and Wireless Communications Facilities constructed to
resemble trees, shrubs, and light poles.
   9.   Technically Feasible — By virtue of engineering or spectrum usage, the
proposed placement for a small wireless facility or its design or site location
can be implemented without a material reduction in the functionality of the
Small Wireless Communications Facility.
   10.   Underground District — A zoning district in which all utility
installations are required to by installed underground on a non-discriminatory
basis.
   11.   Wireless Communications Facility Applicant (WCF Applicant) — Any
person that applies for a Wireless Communications Facility building permit,
zoning approval and/or permission to use the public ROW or other City-owned or
third party land or property.
   12.   Wireless Support Structure — a pole, tower, base station, or other
building, whether or not it has an existing Antenna facility, that is used or
to be used for the provision of wireless service (whether on its own or
comingled with other types of services).
SECTION II. GENERAL STANDARDS FOR SMALL WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS FACILITIES
   1.   All Small WCFs shall comply with the applicable requirements of this
Small WCF Design Manual and Chapter 600, Part 22 of the City of Reading Code of
Ordinances.
   2.   All Small WCFs shall be installed in and maintained in a workmanlike
manner in compliance with the National Electric Safety Code, the National
Electrical Code, the structural standards of the American Association of State
Highway and Transportation Officials, and any other industry standard
applicable to the WCF, as applicable.
   3.   All Small WCFs shall comply with the Americans with Disabilities Act
guidelines adopted by the City and all applicable requirements relating to
streets and sidewalks as established by Chapter 508 of the City Code.
   4.   All Small WCFs shall comply with applicable federal and state standards
regarding pedestrian access and movement.
   5.   All Small WCFs shall be designed and constructed in an effort to
minimize aesthetic impact to the extent Technically Feasible. All applications
for a Small WCF shall identify all design features intended to minimize
aesthetic impact.
   6.   No Small WCFs shall extend beyond the boundaries of the rights-of-way
unless approved on a case-by-case basis by the City Zoning Administrator. If a
Small WCF or any portion thereof is to be located on private property, the WCF
Applicant shall provide to the City evidence that the owner of such private
property has granted the WCF Applicant an easement or other right to construct
the Small WCF.
   7.   All Small WCFs shall be designed to withstand the effects of wind gusts
and ice to the standard designed by the American National Standards Institute
as prepared by the engineering departments of the Electronics Industry
Association and Communications Industry Association (ANSVTIA-222, as amended),
or to the industry standard applicable to the structure.
   8.   If Collocation of a Small WCF on an existing Wireless Support Structure
cannot be achieved, a Small WCF may be installed on a new or replacement
Wireless Support Structure.
SECTION III. ANTENNA AND ACCESSORY EQUIPMENT STANDARDS
   1.   Antenna Standards
      a.   Any Antenna associated with a Small WCF shall not exceed three (3)
cubic feet in volume.
      b.   The Collocation of a Small WCF on an existing Wireless Support
Structure shall not extend more than five (5) feet above the existing Wireless
Support Structure.
      c.   All pole-top Antennas shall be flush-mounted as closely to the top
of the Wireless Support Structure as Technically Feasible.
      d.   All Antennas shall be of a design, style, and color that matches the
Wireless Support Structure upon which they are attached.
      e.   Any necessary pole-top extension shall be of the minimum height
necessary to achieve separation from the existing pole attachments in
accordance with the National Electric Safety Code and any other industry
standard applicable to the WCF.
      f.   Any Antenna mounted on a lateral standoff bracket shall protrude no
more than necessary to meet clearances from the pole and existing pole
attachments in accordance with the National Electric Safety Code and any other
industry standard applicable to the WCF.
      g.   If mounted on an existing Wireless Support Structure, no Antenna
shall impair the function of said structure.
      h.   Antenna placement shall not materially impair light, air, or views
from adjacent windows.
   2.   Accessory Equipment Standards
      a.   All Accessory Equipment associated with a Wireless Support Structure
shall not exceed twenty-eight (28) cubic feet in volume. Equipment utilized
solely for mitigation of the aesthetic impact of the Small WCF or required for
utility service shall not be included in the Accessory Equipment volume
calculation.
      b.   Accessory Equipment shall be mounted flush to the side of a Wireless
Support Structure, or as near flush to the side of a Wireless Support Structure
as Technically Feasible.
      c.   Pole-mounted Accessory Equipment shall be mounted so as to provide a
minimum of fifteen (15) feet vertical clearance from ground level.
      d.   Accessory Equipment shall be of a color that matches the Wireless
Support Structure upon which such Accessory Equipment is mounted.
      e.   All Accessory Equipment shall be contained within a single equipment
shroud or cabinet. Such equipment shroud or cabinet shall be of the smallest
dimensions Technically Feasible.
      f.   All Small WCFs shall post a sign in a readily visible location
identifying the name and phone number of a party to contact in the event of an
emergency. The only other signage permitted shall be that required by the FCC
or any other federal or state agency. All signage associated with a Small WCF
shall be clearly shown in the application and shall be subject to approval by
the City Zoning Administrator.
      g.   The placement of Accessory Equipment shall not materially impair
light, air, or views from adjacent windows.
      h.   No Accessory Equipment shall feature any visible lighting, including
flashing indicator lights, unless required by state or federal law.
   3.   Wiring Standards
      a.   Exposed wiring is prohibited on any Small WCF, Accessory Equipment,
or Accessory Equipment enclosure.
      b.   Transmission, fiber, power cables and any other wiring shall be
contained within any Wireless Support Structure for which such concealment is
Technically Feasible. If such wiring cannot be contained within the Wireless
Support Structure, all wiring shall be contained within conduit or U-guard that
is flush-mounted to the Wireless Support Structure.
      c.   All wiring shall be installed tautly and without excessive slack or
extra cable storage on the Wireless Support Structure.
      d.   Any conduit or U-guard shall be of a color that matches the Wireless
Support Structure to which the Small WCF is attached.
      e.   Loops of extra wiring shall not be attached to any Wireless Support
Structure.
SECTION IV. WIRELESS SUPPORT STRUCTURE STANDARDS
   1.   Replacement Wireless Support Structures
      a.   The maximum height of any proposed replacement Wireless Support
Structure shall be fifty (50) feet above ground level.
      b.   Any replacement Wireless Support Structure shall be of comparable
materials and design to the existing Wireless Support Structure being replaced
except as otherwise required by the pole owner.
      c.   Any replacement Wireless Support Structure shall be placed within a
five (5) foot radius of the existing Wireless Support Structure being replaced.
      d.   Any replacement Wireless Support Structure shall be designed to
accommodate all uses that existed on the Wireless Support Structure being
replaced. As part of an application for a Small WCF, the applicant shall
provide documentation from a structural engineer licensed in the Commonwealth
of Pennsylvania confirming that the replacement Wireless Support Structure,
Small WCF, and prior existing uses shall be structurally sound.
   2.   New Wireless Support Structures
      a.   The maximum height of any new Wireless Support Structure shall be
fifty (50) feet above ground level.
      b.   Any new Wireless Support Structure shall be of comparable materials
and design to adjacent Wireless Support Structures except as required by the
pole owner.
      c.   Any Small WCF requiring the installation of a new Wireless Support
Structure shall be set back from any residential structure by a minimum
distance of at least 100% of the height of the proposed Small WCF.
      d.   New Wireless Support Structures shall be designed to match the
design of existing light poles within a five hundred (500) foot radius.
      e.   To the extent Technically Feasible, no new Wireless Support
Structure shall be installed:
         i.   In the Front Facade Area of any residential structure;
         ii.   Within ten (10) feet of the edge of any driveway; or
         iii.   In the public rights-of-way directly opposite any driveway.
      f.   Decorative Poles:
         i.   No Small WCF shall be permitted on an existing Decorative Pole
unless the WCF Applicant provides documentation showing that such Decorative
Pole is the only Technically Feasible location for placement and that no
suitable alternative sites exist.
         ii.   Decorative Poles shall be required:
            1.   For the replacement of any existing Decorative Pole; and
            2.   In any zoning district where all utilities are required to be
placed underground on a non-discriminatory basis.
         iii.   For any replacement Decorative Pole, the new Decorative Pole
shall match the existing Decorative Pole in shape, design, color, and material
to the extent Technically Feasible. The City shall have final approval of any
such replacement Decorative Pole.
         iv.   No Small WCF shall be permitted on an existing Decorative Pole
unless the applicant provides documentation showing that such Decorative Pole
is the only Technically Feasible location for placement and that no suitable
alternative sites exist. The WCF Applicant shall provide documentation from a
structural engineer that said Decorative Pole can support the additional loads.
SECTION V. APPROVAL; AMENDMENT.
   1.   The City Zoning Administrator shall reasonably determine whether a
proposed Small WCF design complies with the requirements of this Design Manual.
   2.   Any requests for relief from the requirements of this Design Manual
shall be considered on a case-by-case basis by the City Zoning Administrator
and shall be approved upon a determination by the City Zoning Administrator
that such relief is necessary to prevent the effective prohibition of wireless
service pursuant to the rules of the Federal Communications Commission.
   3.   Upon approval of a design for a Small WCF requiring relief from the
requirements of this Design Manual, such design shall be incorporated by
reference into this Design Manual as a Prior Approved Design.
   4.   All requirements herein shall apply to any Small WCF constructed after
the date on which the City adopts this Design Manual. The requirements of this.
Design Manual shall not apply to any Small WCF constructed prior to the date of
adoption, except that any modification, repair or replacement shall be
performed in compliance with these requirements.
   5.   This Design Manual may be amended from time to time as recommended by
the Zoning Administrator, provided that such amendments are subsequently
approved by a committee of Council. If a committee of Council does not take
action to approve or deny any such amendment within thirty (30) days of
recommendation by the Zoning Administrator, the amendment shall be deemed
approved and this Design Manual shall be so amended.
SECTION VI. PRIOR APPROVED DESIGNS
   1.   A record of Prior Approved Designs shall be kept on file at the City
Zoning Office.
   Small Wireless Communications Facility Design Checklist
The information detailed in the following checklist shall be included with any
application for a Small Wireless Communications Facility:
                                                                                                Included in
Item           Description                                                                      Application
                                                                                                ?
                                                                                                Yes No
               ·   The application shall include a cover letter detailing the location of the
               proposed site, all equipment being proposed, and a certification that the
Cover Letter   Applicant has included all information required by the City Code. The cover          
               letter shall include the name and contact information for the WCF Applicant and,
               if different, the owner of the proposed Small WCF.
               ·   Site plan shall show all proposed equipment associated with the Small WCF.
               ·   The manufacturer and model, proposed location, and physical dimensions of
               each piece of equipment should be clearly shown.
               ·   Before and after diagrams of the proposed site showing the dimensional
               changes shall be included.
               ·   If the proposed Utility Pole supports existing attachments, the site plan
Site Plan      shall show the location and dimensions of all such attachments.                      
               ·   If installation of a new or replacement Utility Pole is being proposed, the
               site plan shall include the color, dimensions, material and type of Utility Pole
               proposed.
               ·   The site plan shall include an aerial photo showing the location of any
               existing structures within five hundred (500) feet of the proposed location,
               including but not limited to residential structures, commercial structures,
               light poles, traffic signals, traffic signage, and existing Utility Poles.
               ·   Before-and-after photo simulations shall depict the Small WCF from at least
Photo          three locations near the proposed site.                                              
Simulations    ·   The photo simulations should reflect the proposed design and location of all
               Accessory Equipment associated with the Small WCF.
               ·   A written certification by a structural engineer licensed in the
               Commonwealth of Pennsylvania confirming that the proposed Small WCF and Wireless
Engineer       Support Structure are structurally sound and shall not endanger public health
Certifications and safety.                                                                          
               ·   A report by a qualified engineering expert which shows that the Small WCF
               will comply with applicable FCC regulations, including applicable standards for
               radio frequency emissions.
               ·   Accessory Equipment shall be painted a color that matches the Utility Pole
Paint          upon which such Accessory Equipment is mounted.                                      
               ·   Application shall detail the proposed painting of any Accessory Equipment
               necessary to achieve aesthetic uniformity of the site.
               ·   All proposed wires associated with the Small WCF shall be clearly shown.
Wiring         ·   A depiction and description of the concealment methods to be utilized for    
               the wiring shall be included.
               ·   No exposed wiring is permitted.
               ·   Signage shall be posted in a readily visible location and identify the
               owner's permit number and the name and phone number of a party to contact in the
Signage        event of an emergency.                                                               
               ·   If required, FCC-mandated signage is permitted. Applicant shall identify
               such signage in its application.
Certificate of ·   A certificate of insurance as required by Section                            
Insurance      600-2104A(15).
Certification  ·   A signed statement affirming the proposed WCF and WCF application's
of Compliance  compliance with the applicable requirements of Section 600-2104 of the City          
               Zoning Code and this Small WCF Design Manual.
 
Part 22
Definitions
§ 600-2201. Word usage.
   A.   Words in the present tense shall include the future tense.
   B.   "Used" or "occupied" as applied to any land or building include the
words "intended, arranged, or designed to be used or occupied."
   C.   "Should" means that it is strongly encouraged but is not mandatory.
"Shall" is always mandatory.
   D.   "Sale" shall also include rental.
   E.   Unless stated otherwise, the singular shall also regulate the plural,
and the masculine shall include the feminine, and vice-versa.
   F.   The words "such as," "includes," "including," and "specifically" shall
provide examples. These examples shall not, by themselves, limit a provision to
the examples specifically mentioned if other examples would otherwise comply
with the provision.
   G.   The word "person" includes a firm, company, corporation, partnership,
trust, organization or association, as well as an individual.
   H.   If a term is not defined by this chapter, but is defined in
Chapter 515, Subdivision and Land Development, then such SALDO definition shall
apply.
   I.   Except as provided in Subsection H above, any word, term or phrase used
in this chapter, but not specifically defined herein, shall be given its plain
and ordinary meaning within the context of the provision.
   J.   The singular shall include the plural and the plural the singular. The
present tense shall include the future tense. The word "shall" is always
mandatory.
§ 600-2202. Definitions.
The following words and phrases shall have the meanings hereinafter indicated,
unless the text clearly states an alternative or different meaning:
   ABUT or ABUTTING — Areas of contiguous lots that share a common lot line,
except not including lots entirely separated by a street, public alley open to
traffic, or a perennial waterway. See definition of "adjacent."
   ACCESSORY APARTMENT — One dwelling unit that is created within part of a
principal dwelling or above a vehicle garage on a residential lot.
   ACCESSORY BUILDING OR STRUCTURE — A building or structure detached from and
subordinate to the main building situated on the same lot and used for purposes
customarily incidental to the main building. Drive-through windows and
associate canopy, attached or detached from the main building, are an accessory
use and structure.
   ACCESSORY USE — A use separated from, subordinate to and customarily
incidental to the use of the main building and situated on the same lot.
   ADAPTIVE REUSE — The modification or conversion of an existing non-
residential building that was previously occupied by: a permitted use; a non-
conforming use; a vacant non-residential use: or any building that has been
vacated or not occupied for more than twelve (12) consecutive months. All such
buildings and/or properties shall be capable of being redeveloped, revitalized
and/or structurally altered in order to permit certain permitted uses within
the existing building plus an area for future growth and expansion. [Added 1-
13-2020 by Ord. No. 4-2020; amended 3-10-2025 by Ord. No. 16A-2025]
   ADJACENT — Two or more lots that share a common lot line or that are
separated only by a street or waterway from each other.
   ADULT BUSINESS or ADULT USE — The definition of “sexually oriented business”
in this Part shall apply.
   ADULT CARE FACILITIES [Amended 3-10-2025 by Ord. No. 15A-2025]
      A.   ADULT CARE CENTER — A use providing supervised care and assistance
to persons who need such daily assistance because of their old age or
disabilities. This use shall not include persons who need oversight because of
behavior that is criminal, violent or related to substance abuse. This use may
involve occasional overnight stays, but shall not primarily be a residential
use. The use shall involve typical stays of less than a total of 60 hours per
week per person.
      B.   ADULT CARE HOME —A building or structure, or part thereof, other
than the adult's own home, operated for profit or not for profit, in which
adult care is provided at any one time, for part of a 24-hour day, to four,
five or six adults unrelated to the operator.
   AFTER-HOURS CLUB — A use that permits the consumption of alcoholic beverages
by five or more unrelated persons between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m.
and that involves some form of monetary compensation paid by such persons for
the alcohol or for the use of the premises.
   AGRICULTURE — The use of a lot, parcel or tract of land for animal
husbandry, raising, keeping or selling of truck, field and tree crops. The term
"agriculture" does not include riding academies, liveries or boarding stables,
commercial dog kennels or the raising of fur-bearing animals.
   AIRPORT — A lot, parcel, tract or area of land used for the taking off and
landing of airplanes or similar aircraft. See airport approach definitions in §
600-2203.
   AIRPORT ELEVATION — An elevation established at 344 feet above the mean sea
level.
   ALLEY — A thoroughfare having a right-of-way width of 24 feet or less, that
primarily serves vehicle traffic and is available for use by the public, but
which is not identified as a street on the City's Official Street Mapping.
   ALLUVIAL SOILS — Soils deposited by floodwaters in the past that are
categorized as alluvial soils by the Berks County Soil Survey or successor
soils information.
   ALTERATION — A change or rearrangement in any structural part of an existing
facility, building or structure or in an exit or entrance, or an enlargement
thereof, whether by extension of a side or by an increase in height or by a
movement of any or all of a structure from one location or orientation to
another.
   ALTERNATIVE ENERGY — A source of energy generated from solar, water, wind,
geothermal or similar sources, which is capable of providing energy and
utilities for a permitted use. [Added 10-26-2015 by Ord. No. 58-2015]
   ALTERNATIVE ENERGY SYSTEM — A system capable of converting solar, water,
wind, and/or geothermal energy into viable energy sources including utilities
for a permitted use. Such facilities may include, without limitation, solar
panels, wind turbines, geothermal heat pumps, water turbines and/or other
compatible alternative energy systems. [Added 10-26-2015 by Ord. No. 58-2015]
   AMUSEMENT — All manner and form of entertainment, all forms of rides and
entertainment at fairgrounds and amusement parks, athletic contests, all other
forms of diversion, sport, recreation, pastime, shows, exhibitions, contests,
displays and games.
   AMUSEMENT ARCADE — A place where amusement devices are provided and utilized
as the principal use of the premises.
   AMUSEMENT DEVICE — A device, other than a jukebox, that is used or designed
to be used to provide amusement or entertainment to the user for a fee, and
shall include but shall not be limited to pinball machines, video display
games, billiard tables, simulated sport machines and biorhythm machines. Video
and computer game devices that permit more than two players shall be considered
one device for each two players.
   ANIMAL SHELTER and ANIMAL BREEDING FACILITY — These uses shall be considered
a type of kennel.
   APARTMENT — A dwelling unit contained in a building, structure or part
thereof that is not a semidetached dwelling, a single-family attached dwelling
or a single-family detached dwelling.
   APPLICANT — A person or entity filing an application under this chapter.
[Added 10-26-2015 by Ord. No. 58-2015]
   ASSISTED-LIVING FACILITY — This term shall have the same meaning as a
"personal care home."
   ATHLETIC CLUBS — See "recreational facilities."
   AUTO REPAIR — A use involving the repair, rebuilding or reconditioning of
motor vehicles or parts thereof, including collision service, painting and
steam cleaning of vehicles.
   AUTO SALES — A building or lot where more than two motor vehicles for sale
to the public may be parked, stored, or displayed.
   AUTO SERVICE STATION — A place where gasoline or other motor fuel or
lubricating oil or grease for operating motor vehicles are offered for sale at
retail to the public. An auto service station may also include supplying
services generally required for the operation and maintenance of vehicles,
including the sale or dispensing of gasoline or fuel, and/or sale and
installation of tires, batteries, automotive accessories and replacement items;
providing washing and lubrication services; and performing minor automotive
maintenance. Auto service stations shall not be used for painting or repair of
vehicle body parts, unless the requirements for auto repair are also met.
   AWNING/CANOPY — A temporary hood or roof-like cover, often of fabric, metal,
or glass, that projects from the wall of a building and designed and intended
for protection from weather or as a decorative element that may include a type
which can be retracted, folded or collapsed against the face of a supporting
building. [Added 12-16-2013 by Ord. No. 83-2013]
   BANQUET HALL — A facility that is rented for wedding receptions and similar
special events and which does not meet the definition of a tavern or nightclub.
This use may also occur as an accessory use to a hotel/motel.
   BARBER SHOP or BEAUTY SHOP — A type of personal service use involving the
cutting and styling of human hair and which is operated by a state-licensed
barber or cosmetologist. Such use may also include related activities,
involving nails, facials and similar personal appearance services. See §
600-1103.
   BASEMENT — A portion of a building or structure that is completely or
partially beneath the average elevation of the finished grade.
   BEAUTY SHOP — See "barber shop or beauty shop."
   BED-AND-BREAKFAST INN — An owner-occupied establishment where the public
may, for consideration, obtain sleeping accommodations and a meal served in the
guest's room or a public dining room.
   BEDROOM — Any room or space that is at least seventy (70) square feet in
size that is designated or utilized for sleeping purposes in accordance with
the City of Reading Code. [Added 10-13-2025 by Ord. No. 58-2025]
   BEST PRACTICES — Current industry standards of construction and maintenance
for a technology. Best practices are not for purposes of this chapter defined
as "state of the art," which is acknowledged to often be prohibitively
expensive and to involve standards that are constantly changing. [Added 10-26-
2015 by Ord. No. 58-2015]
   BETTING USE — A place used for lawful gambling activities including, but not
limited to, off- track pari-mutual betting and any use of electronic gambling
devices. This term shall not regulate state lottery sales or lawful small games
of chance.
   BILLBOARD — See §
600-2205.
   BOARDER, ROOMER or LODGER — One who pays a stipulated sum to a homeowner for
lodging for a definite time period.
   BOARDINGHOUSE — A building or structure used to shelter persons who are not
"relatives" of the operator, and who live in the building by prearrangement and
for definite periods of time and compensation, and which may or may not provide
meals for residents, and which does not involve individual dwelling units that
are each occupied by a "family." This term shall not include a commercial
hotel/motel that serves transient visitors to the area, a personal care home, a
nursing home, a dormitory or residence hall owned or operated by a college or
university, or a group institution.
   BOTTLE CLUB — The definition in
Chapter 127, Alcoholic Beverages, shall apply. For the purposes of this
chapter, a bottle club shall not include a restaurant in which customers bring
their own wine, provided such wine consumption is not allowed between 12:00
midnight and 6:00 a.m., and provided the primary use is the serving of food for
consumption on the premises.
   BUFFER STRIP — A continuous strip of land, either landscaped or green space,
clear of all buildings, structures and parking areas, established to protect
one type of land use from another, incompatible use.
   BUILDING — Any structure, either open or enclosed, having a roof supported
by columns, piers or walls, including but not limited to tents, trailers,
dining cars, camp cars or other structures on wheels or having other supports,
and unroofed porches, platforms and terraces having vertical faces exceeding
three feet above grade. Any structure having an independent entrance or an
independent electrical, mechanical, or heating system shall be considered a
single building. Any structure used to enclose an area, such as a wall, fence,
barricade or stockade, shall not be considered a building. [Amended 2-14-2011
by Ord. No. 8-2011]
   BUILDING AREA — The aggregate area of any and all floor area of enclosed or
roofed buildings or structures. Such area shall be computed by using outside
building or structure dimensions of the ground floor measured on a horizontal
plane.
   BUILDING COVERAGE — The percentage of a lot covered by buildings.
   BUILDING HEIGHT — The vertical dimension of a building measured from the
average elevation of the finished grade at the perimeter of the building to the
highest point of the building. See exceptions in §
600-911.
   BUILDING SETBACK LINE — A line that designates the minimum distance between
any building and the adjacent street right-of-way or property line, whichever
is closer. This line shall be measured from a point or points formed by the
intersection of a vertical building wall with the ground (or in the case of a
cantilevered building, at the vertical plane which coincides with the most
projected surface), to the property line, whichever is closer.
   BUSINESS — Any enterprise, occupation, trade or profession engaged in,
either continuously or temporarily, for remuneration or gain or the occupancy
or use of a building or premise or any portion thereof for the transaction of
business or the rendering or receiving of professional services.
   CABARET, ADULT — The definition in
Chapter 473, Sexually Oriented Businesses, shall apply.
   CANOPY — See "marquee."
   CAR WASH — A building or portion thereof used for the manual or mechanical
washing of automobiles and other similar vehicles.
   CARE FACILITY — Includes child and adult care facilities. (This use shall
not include Group- Care Facility) [Added 3-10-2025 by Ord. No. 15A-2025]
   CARTWAY — That portion of a street, alley or highway used for vehicular
traffic as specified on the City Topographical Survey.
   CENTER LINE OF STREET, ROAD, ALLEY OR HIGHWAY — A line equidistant from and
parallel to the street, road, alley or highway right-of-way lines.
   CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY — Official certification that a premises conforms
to provisions of this chapter and
Chapter 180, Construction Codes, to the best knowledge of the City staff and
may be used or occupied. Such a certificate is granted for new construction or
for alteration or additions to existing structures. Unless such a certificate
is issued, a building cannot be occupied.
   CHILD CARE FACILITIES — [Amended 3-10-2025 by Ord. No. 15A-2025]
      A.   CHILD CARE CENTERS — A building or structure, or part thereof, used
for the care, at any one time, for part of a twenty-four-hour day, of seven or
more children unrelated to the operator, as licensed and regulated by the
Pennsylvania Department of Human Services.
      B.   FAMILY CHILD CARE HOMES — A building or structure, or part thereof,
other than the child's own home, operated for profit or not for profit, in
which child day care is provided at any one time, for part of a twenty-four-
hour day, to four, five or six children unrelated to the operator, as licensed
and regulated by the Pennsylvania Department of Human Services.
       C.   GROUP CHILD CARE HOMES — A building or structure, or part thereof,
in which out of home care is provided, at any one time, for part of a twenty-
four-hour day, to more than six but fewer than 16 older school age level
children, or more than six but less than 13 children of any age level, as
licensed and regulated by the Pennsylvania Department of Human Services.
   CHURCH — A type of "place of worship."
   CINEMA, MOVIE THEATER — See "theater."
   CLEAR SIGHT TRIANGLE — An area of unobstructed vision at street
intersections defined by the center lines of the streets and by a line of sight
between points on their center lines at a predetermined distance from the
intersection of the center lines.
   CLUB, LODGE or SOCIAL BUILDING — A building or structure, or part thereof,
used to house a club or social organization not conducted for profit and which
is not an adjunct to, operated by, or in connection with a public tavern, cafe
or other public place.
   CODE OFFICIAL — The municipal official who is charged with the
administration and enforcement of this Code, or any duly authorized
representative designated by the City of Reading. [Added 10-13-2025 by Ord. No.
58-2025]
   COLLEGE or UNIVERSITY - A post-secondary educational institution accredited
by the Middle States Commission on Higher Education to award associate,
baccalaureate, or higher degrees. [Added 3-23- 2020 by Ord. No. 30-2020]
   COMMERCIAL DISTRICTS — The C-C, C-R, C-N and C-H Districts.
   CONDITIONAL USE — A use listed as a conditional use by this chapter, which
is only allowed after review by the City Planning Commission and approved by
City Council.
   CONDOMINIUM — Real estate, portions of which are designated for separate
ownership for residential purposes and the remainder of which is designated for
common ownership solely by the owners of those portions, in compliance with the
Pennsylvania Uniform Condominium Act, 68 Pa.C.S.A. § 3101 et seq., or the
Pennsylvania Planned Communities Act, 68 Pa.C.S.A. § 5101 et seq. "Real estate"
is not a condominium unless the undivided interests in the common elements
(portions of a condominium other than the residential units) are vested in the
unit owners.
   CONVENIENCE STORE — A building, structure or part thereof, containing 12,500
square feet or less floor area, which stores and sells, primarily, prepackaged
food, grocery and beverage items. Gasoline sales shall only be allowed if it is
specifically permitted in the zoning district.
   CONVERSION (RESIDENTIAL) — The alteration of existing building space to
result in a change of building space from a principal nonresidential use to one
or more dwelling units, or to increase the number of dwelling units within the
building.
   CORNER LOT — A lot fronting on two intersecting streets. On corner lots, for
the purpose of determining setback areas, the front yard shall be considered
that area which fronts on the streets; the rear yard is the area opposite the
property address.
   CUT - The removal of earthen materials for the purpose of making a lot flat
and fit for construction. [Added 7-10-2017 by Ord. No. 59-2017]
   DAY GUEST — A visitor to the short-term rental property who is neither an
overnight guest, person in charge, or owner of the property on which the short-
term rental is located. [Added 10- 13-2025 by Ord. No. 58-2025]
   DEVELOPMENT — Any man-made change to improved or unimproved land including
but not limited to buildings, structures, manufactured homes, streets, parking
lots, paving, utilities, filing, grading, excavation, mining, dredging or
drilling operations, and the subdivision of land.
   DIAMETER AT BREAST HEIGHT (DBH): The diameter of a tree trunk measured at a
point 4.5 feet above ground level. [Added 7-10-2017 by Ord. No. 59-2017]
   DISTURBANCE - Includes without limitation removing or altering vegetative
cover, excavating, filling, grading, and construction of structures, excepting
agricultural activity. [Added 7-10-2017 by Ord. No. 59-2017]
   DORMITORY, COLLEGE or UNIVERSITY - A building or portion thereof, owned and
managed by a college or university, where group sleeping accommodations are
provided in one room, or in a series of closely associated rooms, for full-time
students of the college or university. [Amended 3-23-2020 by Ord. No. 30-2020]
   DORMITORY, OTHER INSTITUTION - A building or portion thereof, owned and
managed by a medical training program or theological school, where group
sleeping accommodations are provided in one room, or in a series of closely
associated rooms for the fulltime students of the training program or school.
[Amended 3-23-2020 by Ord. No. 30-2020]
   DWELLING — Any building that is designed or used, in whole or in part, for
residential purposes.
   DWELLING UNIT — One or more rooms providing living facilities for only one
family or an individual, used or intended to be used for sleeping, cooking,
bathing and other day-to-day residential activity. Each dwelling unit shall
have: its own toilet, bath or shower, sink, sleeping and cooking facilities;
and separate access to the outside or to a common hallway or balcony that
connects to outside access at ground level. A dwelling unit shall not include
two or more separate living areas that are completely separated by interior
walls so as to prevent interior access from one living area to another. Each
dwelling unit shall only have one kitchen, except for a dwelling unit that
lawfully included a second kitchen before the enactment of this chapter.
   DWELLING, DUPLEX — A building divided horizontally into two dwelling units.
   DWELLING, MULTIPLE-FAMILY OR APARTMENTS — A building designed and used for
three or more dwelling units. See also "mid-rise apartments" and "high-rise
apartments."
   DWELLING, ONE-FAMILY ATTACHED (TOWNHOUSE or ROW HOUSE) — One dwelling unit
that is attached to two or more dwelling units, and with each dwelling unit
being completely separated from and attached to each other by unpierced
vertical fire-resistant walls. Each dwelling unit shall have its own outside
access. Side yards shall be adjacent to each end unit.
   DWELLING, ONE-FAMILY DETACHED — A single residential building containing one
dwelling unit entirely surrounded by open space on the same lot and which is
not attached to any other building.
   DWELLING, SEMI-DETACHED — A one-family dwelling unit accommodating one
family that is attached to a second one-family dwelling unit by a common
vertical wall.
   DWELLING, TWO-FAMILY DETACHED (DUPLEX) — A building designed and used for
two dwelling units and which is not attached to any other building and is not a
semidetached dwelling.
   EASEMENTS — A liberty, privilege or advantage which one has in the lands of
another for a precise and definite purpose not inconsistent with and
subordinate to the owner's general property rights.
   EFFICIENCY OR STUDIO APARTMENT — A dwelling unit which contains a complete
kitchen and complete sleeping facilities; a separate bathroom containing a
toilet, sink, and bathtub or shower; and a separate closet. [Added 1-27-2020 by
Ord. No. 5-2020]
EMPLOYEES — The highest number of workers (including both part-time and full-
time, both compensated and volunteer, and both employees and contractors)
present on a lot at any one time, other than clearly temporary and occasional
persons working on physical improvements to the site.
   ENTERTAINMENT, ACCESSORY USE — Live simulated or recorded musical and/or
theatrical performances, which are accessory to the primary use.
   ENTERTAINMENT, PRIMARY USE — Live simulated or recorded musical and/or
theatrical performances, which are the primary function and purpose of the
premises. Primary use entertainment shall be limited to nightclubs, theaters
and cinemas.
   ESSENTIAL UTILITIES — Cable television and gas, water, sanitary sewer,
telephone and electric utilities, whether owned, operated or maintained by a
private, public or municipal corporation, authority or agency, including but
not limited to all buildings, poles, wires, mains, drains, sewers, pipes,
conduits, cable, hydrants and other similar equipment and accessways associated
therewith owned, operated or maintained by said private, public or municipal
corporation, authority or agency.
   FACADE — A building's exterior surface, including doors or windows as viewed
by persons not within the building.
   FAMILY — One or more persons related by blood, marriage, adoption or foster
relationship, legal custody, guardianship or written permission of a person
with custody or are the great- grandparent, great-grandchild, grandparent,
grandchild, parent, child, brother, sister, aunt, uncle, niece, nephew, great
uncle, great aunt, great nephew or great niece, living together as a single
housekeeping unit; or a group of not more than three unrelated persons over the
age of 14 years, who are living together in a single dwelling unit and
maintaining a common household with a single cooking facility.
   A.   A roomer, boarder or lodger shall not be considered a member of the
family.
   B.   Shared housing arrangements, where the individuals are permanent or
temporary "roommates," do not constitute family arrangements.
   C.   The term "family" shall also not include the occupants of a clubhouse,
hotel, motel, student home or student housing, fraternity house, sorority house
or dormitory.
   FENCE — A barrier of wood, masonry, stone, wire, metal or other manufactured
material or combination of materials erected as an enclosure or to separate
areas of land.
   FILL - Any clean soil or rock materials used to raise the ground elevation
that complies with applicable regulations for clean fill. [Added 7-10-2017 by
Ord. No. 59-2017]
   FIRE AND RESCUE SERVICE OPERATIONS — Includes live-fire training facilities,
the educational, vehicular and administrative facilities necessary to the
initial and continuing training, qualification and accreditation of
firefighters, emergency medical and disaster responders, and their supporting
staff operated by either the City's Department of Fire and Rescue Services or
the County of Berks.
   FIRE STATION — Any building owned, occupied or managed by the City's
Department of Fire and Rescue Services, used primarily for the housing and
readiness of fire fighting and rescue vehicles and apparatus, including but not
necessarily limited to engines, ladders and ambulances. Fire stations may
include residential accommodations for on-duty personnel, when limited to 20%
of the station's total gross floor area and in compliance with applicable
building codes.
   FITNESS/HEALTH CENTERS — Facilities providing fitness, health and dietary
instruction and training by certified professionals. Aerobic, cardiovascular
and weight training instruction and equipment may be available as well as
martial arts instruction, aquatic activities, and massage and other physical
therapy.
   FLOOR AREA, GROSS — The total area of all floors of a building as measured
to the outside surfaces of exterior walls.
   FLOOR AREA, NET — The total floor area of a building excluding areas used
principally for nonpublic purposes such as storage, incidental repair,
processing or packaging of merchandise, show windows, offices incidental to the
management or maintenance of storage or buildings, rest rooms, utilities,
dressing rooms, fitting or alteration rooms as well as hallways, corridors,
stairways, elevators and entry vestibules.
   FREE STANDING ALTERNATIVE ENERGY SYSTEM — A system that is not physically
mounted, attached and/or connected (except utility and energy transfer
connections) to a permitted principal building. All such facilities shall be
considered a separate or accessory structure that has the ability to convert
and convey energy to the principal use in accordance with all pertinent zoning,
utility and building code requirements. [Added 10-26-2015 by Ord. No. 58-2015]
   FRONTAGE — That part of a lot abutting a street right-of-way (as specified
on the City's Official Street Mapping), commonly referred to in terms of "feet
of frontage." 41
   GAMING DEVICE — A slot, video, audio and/or electronic machine that provides
the participant with the opportunity to place wagers for a monetary gain or
loss. All such machines shall be authorized, licensed and regulated by the City
of Reading and Commonwealth of Pennsylvania. [Added 3-10-2025 by Ord. No. 15A-
2025]
   GAMING FACILITY — A designated area contained within a building where gaming
devices, table games and/or other lawful gambling functions are permitted as a
principal use, as authorized, licensed and regulated by the City of Reading and
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania. [Amended 3-10-2025 by Ord. No. 15A-2025]
   GARAGE, PRIVATE — A building or part thereof, whether or not enclosed, used
for the storage of vehicles or used for the convenience of the owner or
occupants of the main building and in which no business, use or service is
rendered, provided or conducted for the benefit of the general public. 42
   GAZEBO — A freestanding roofed accessory structure with mostly open sides
that shall be regulated as an accessory building.
   GEOTHERMAL HEAT PUMP — An energy system utilized for heating and cooling
purposes through a series of heat-exchanging pipes or tubes integrated into the
ground, groundwater or surface water with a heat-exchanging media that flows
through a loop system. [Added 10-26-2015 by Ord. No. 58-2015]
   GOVERNING BODY — City Council of the City of Reading.
   GRADE — The surface of the ground, lawns, walks or streets adjoining the
exterior walls of any building.
   GRADE (IN TERMS OF SLOPE) - The amount of vertical distance measured in feet
over a 100-foot horizontal distance. For example, if a slope is 18%, the slope
rises 18 feet for every 100 feet of horizontal distance. [Added 7-10-2017 by
Ord. No. 59-2017]
   GRADE, FINISHED — The completed surface of the ground, lawns, walks or
streets adjoining the exterior walls of any building.
   GROUP-CARE FACILITY — A household facility of no more than nine persons,
other than persons related by blood, marriage, adoption or legal guardianship,
who because of their physical or emotional condition or their social or
interpersonal skills otherwise would limit, inhibit or prevent their ability to
function as useful or productive members of society, are provided supportive
services and supervision through a nonprofit social service agency or other
established entity. This use is also known as a "group home." This use shall
not include a treatment center. See also §
600-1201B. [Amended 12-16-2013 by Ord. No. 83-2013]
   GROUP INSTITUTION — A facility housing 10 or more persons excluding
supervisors (not necessarily related by blood, marriage, adoption or legal
guardianship), who because their physical or emotional condition or their
social or interpersonal skills, would otherwise limit, inhibit or prevent their
ability to function as useful or productive members of society, and who are
provided supportive services and supervision through a nonprofit social service
agency or other established entity. This term shall not include a treatment
center.
   HABITABLE FLOOR AREA — The floor area within a building which is maintained
for human occupancy. The term "habitable floor area" shall not include
basements, garages or accessory building space.
   HAZARDOUS WASTE —
   A.   Any garbage, refuse, sludge from an industrial or other wastewater
treatment plant, sludge from a water supply treatment plant, or air pollution
control facility and other discarded material including solid, liquid,
semisolid or contained gaseous material resulting from municipal, commercial,
industrial, institutional, mining or agricultural operations, and from
community activities, or any combination of the above but does not include
solid or dissolved material in domestic sewage, or solid or dissolved materials
in irrigation return flows or industrial discharges which are point sources
subject to permits under the Federal Water Pollution Control Act, or source,
special nuclear, or by-product material as defined by the U.S. Atomic Energy
Act of 1954, which because of its quantity, concentration, or physical,
chemical or infectious characteristics, may:
      (1)   Cause or significantly contribute to an increase in mortality or an
increase in morbidity in either an individual or the total population.
      (2)   Pose a substantial present or potential hazard to human health or
the environment when improperly treated, stored, transported, disposed of or
otherwise managed.
   B.   The term "hazardous waste" shall not include coal refuse as defined in
the Coal Refuse Disposal Control Act, 52 P.S. § 30.51 et seq., and shall not
include treatment sludge from coal mine drainage treatment plants, the disposal
of which is being carried on pursuant to and in compliance with a valid permit
issued pursuant to the Clean Streams Law, 35 P.S. § 691.1 et seq.
   HELIPORT — An area used for helicopters to land and take off, including all
auxiliary, service and maintenance facilities related thereto.
   HIGH-RISE APARTMENTS — A building or group of buildings containing therein
three or more multifamily dwellings designed as an integrated development,
exceeding a height of 60 feet and with the dwellings therein, leased to the
occupants for a definite period of time of 30 days or more.
   HOME OCCUPATION — A routine, accessory and customary nonresidential use
conducted within or administered from a portion of a dwelling or its permitted
accessory building and that meets all of the requirements for a home occupation
provided in §
600-1006.
   A.   MAJOR HOME OCCUPATION — A home occupation that does not meet the
additional standards for a minor home occupation in §
600-1006.
   B.   MINOR HOME OCCUPATION — A home occupation that meets the additional
standards for a minor home occupation as provided in §
600-1006. Among other provisions, §
600-1006 requires that a minor home occupation not routinely involve visits to
the home occupation by customers or more than one nonresident employee at a
time. A minor home occupation also includes, but is not limited to, a use that
meets all of the requirements for a "no-impact home-based business" as provided
in the State Municipalities Planning Code, 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq. (Note: In
most cases, a minor home occupation is permitted by right, while in most cases
a major home occupation requires Zoning Hearing Board approval as a special
exception.)
      (1)   NO-IMPACT HOME-BASED BUSINESS — A type of minor home occupation
that meets the following definition as provided in the State Municipalities
Planning Code: A business or commercial activity administered or conducted as
an accessory use which is clearly secondary to the use as a residential
dwelling and which involves no customer, client or patient traffic, whether
vehicular or pedestrian, pickup, delivery or removal functions to or from the
premises, in excess of those normally associated with residential use. The
business or commercial activity must satisfy the following requirements:
         (a)   The business activity shall be compatible with the residential
use of the property and surrounding residential uses.
         (b)   The business shall employ no employees other than family members
residing in the dwelling.
         (c)   There shall be no display or sale of retail goods and no
stockpiling or inventory of a substantial nature.
         (d)   There shall be no outside appearance of a business use,
including, but not limited to, parking, signs or lights.
         (e)   The business activity may not use any equipment or process which
creates noise, vibration, glare, fumes, odors or electrical or electronic
interference, including interference with radio or television reception, which
is detectable in the neighborhood.
         (f)   The business activity may not generate any solid waste or sewage
discharge, in volume or type, which is not normally associated with residential
use in the neighborhood.
         (g)   The business activity shall be conducted only within the
dwelling and may not occupy more than 25% of the habitable floor area.
         (h)   The business may not involve any illegal activity.
   HOTEL — Establishments where the public may, for consideration, obtain
sleeping accommodations. Such establishment shall have at least 10 permanent
bedrooms for the use of guests, and may provide additional services, such as a
restaurant, meeting rooms, and recreational facilities.
   IMPERVIOUS COVERAGE — The impervious coverage is the percentage of the lot
area of a lot that is covered by building roofs, stone, concrete or asphalt,
and/or other man-made surfaces having a coefficient of runoff of 0.6 or
greater. The City Engineer shall determine whether a surface would meet this
definition.
   IMPOUNDMENT — Any body of surface water formed by the construction or
excavation of a basin or the obstruction of stream flow in such a manner as to
cause the collection of a body of water which would not have formed under
natural conditions. [Added 10-26-2015 by Ord. No. 57-2015]
   IMPROVEMENT — To excavate for or store material, machinery or equipment on a
lot in connection with the erection, construction, placement, reconstruction,
alteration, repaint, extension, replacement, restoration or conversion of any
structure, building and/or sign, except if specifically excluded by this
chapter; or to change the use, area of use, or percentage of use; or to extend
or displace the use in part or in total of any structure, building, sign and/or
land.
   INDUSTRIAL DISTRICTS — The M-C and H-M Districts.
   INSTITUTIONAL USE — An establishment, especially one of an organized society
or corporation, which is anticipated to remain in public use, including
government-owned administration buildings and offices, fire stations, public
hospitals and health care facilities, public schools, colleges and educational
research lands. Cemeteries, churches, and other religious facilities not
designated in low-density residential or low-medium-density residential are
included in this land use category. Institutional uses in residential areas
will continue as the current use. If an institutional use vacates property in
residential areas, then the property should be redeveloped as a low-density
residential use. [Added 12-16-2013 by Ord. No. 83-2013]
   JUNKYARD — A lot, building or part thereof, which is used to collect and/or
store wastepaper, rags, scrap material or discarded material, or which is used
to collect, dismantle, store or salvage machinery or vehicles which are
unlicensed and are not in operating condition, and shall also include the sale,
resale, salvage or conversion to some other use, of the parts of machinery or
vehicles.
   KENNEL — An establishment for the boarding and/or breeding of animals and
which involves the keeping of eight or more dogs age three months or older at
any one period of time.
   LAW ENFORCEMENT OPERATIONS — Includes firing ranges, accessory buildings and
activities related to firing ranges, facilities for the disposal of regulated/
controlled substances, the educational, vehicular and administrative facilities
necessary to the initial and continuing training, qualification and
accreditation of law enforcement officers and their supporting staff, operated
by the City's Department of Police.
   LIFE-CARE RETIREMENT FACILITY — A residential community developed according
to a unified plan for persons of retirement age, which shall include
residential dwelling units, and which may also include a personal care home
and/or a nursing home, and which has communal dining, recreation areas, open
space, parking and related facilities.
   LOADING SPACE — An off-street area used for loading and unloading of goods
from trucks or trailers and having a direct access to a public street or alley.
   LODGE — See "club" or "social club."
   LOT — Parcel or tract of land occupied or intended to be occupied, by
buildings, accessory buildings, uses or accessory uses as permitted by this
chapter. Existing lot sizes shall be determined by reference to any recorded
subdivision plan, deed or other record found in the office of the Berks County
Recorder of Deeds.
   LOT AREA — An area of land that is determined by the limits of the property
lines bounding that area and expressed in terms of square feet or acres. Any
portion of a street right-of-way shall not be included in determining lot area,
based upon the width of the street right-of-way that will exist after
development is completed.
   LOT COVERAGE — This term shall have the same meaning as "impervious
coverage."
   LOW-RISE APARTMENT — Buildings that have no more than 46 feet containing one
or more multi-unit family dwellings, with the dwellings therein leased to
occupants for a definite period of time of at least 30 days. [Added 12-16-2013
by Ord. No. 83-2013]
   MANUFACTURED (MOBILE) HOME — A transportable single unit usable as a
permanent dwelling, office or place of assembly, or multiple units designed to
be joined into one integral unit capable of being separated for repeated
towing, which arrives at a site complete and ready for occupancy except for
minor and incidental unpacking and assembly operations, and constructed so that
it may be used with or without a permanent foundation or attachment to
essential utilities. Manufactured homes comply with a Federal Manufactured
Housing Construction Code, as opposed to
Chapter 180, Construction Codes.
   MANUFACTURED (MOBILE) HOME PARK — A parcel of land that has been planned and
improved for the placement of mobile manufactured homes for nontransient use,
consisting of two or more mobile manufactured home lots.
   MANUFACTURING — The treatment or processing of raw products or the
production or assembly of finished products from raw or prepared materials into
new forms or qualities.
   MARQUEE — A roof-like structure which projects from and is supported by the
building to which it is attached. Marquees may project over entrances and
ground floor windows, provided there is compliance with
Chapter 180, Construction Codes, and provided that an encroachment permit is
received for any portion within a public right-of-way.
   MASSAGE PARLOR — An establishment that does not meet the requirements for a
massage therapy use but does meets all of the following criteria:
   A.   Massages are conducted involving one person using their hands and/or a
mechanical device on another person below the waist, in return for monetary
compensation, and which does not involve persons who are related to each other.
   B.   The use does not involve a person licensed or certified by the state as
a massage therapist or a health care professional or a massage therapist
certified by a recognized professional organization that requires a minimum of
80 hours of professional training. Massage therapy by such a certified
professional shall be considered personal service.
   C.   The massages are not conducted within a licensed hospital or nursing
home or an office of a medical doctor or chiropractor or as an incidental
accessory use to a permitted exercise club or high school or college athletic
program.
   D.   The massages are conducted within private or semiprivate rooms.
   MASSAGE THERAPY — A type of personal service use that meets
Chapter 364, Massage Therapists, of the Code of the City of Reading. See also §
600-1103B.
   MEDICAL/DENTAL CLINIC — Building, or a part thereof, containing the offices
of licensed physicians or dentists and limited to outpatient treatment.
   MID-RISE APARTMENTS — A building or group of buildings containing therein
one or more multifamily dwellings, originally designed as an integrated
development, limited to a height of 60 feet, with the dwellings therein leased
to the occupants for a definite period of time of at least 30 days. [Amended 2-
14-2011 by Ord. No. 8-2011]
   MOBILE HOME — See "manufactured home."
   MODERATELY STEEP SLOPE - A slope that has a grade of at least 15%, but less
than 25%. [Added 7-10-2017 by Ord. No. 59-2017]
   MODULAR HOME — A dwelling unit made of one or more prefabricated sections
and erected on a permanent foundation, the essential utilities for which may be
either prefabricated or installed on-site, and which is constructed to comply
with
Chapter 180, Construction Codes.
   MOTEL — Establishments where the public may, for consideration, obtain
sleeping accommodations, having at least eight permanent bedrooms for the use
of guests and on-site, off-street parking.
   MUNICIPAL BUILDING — A building owned, used or managed by the City of
Reading or an agency of a municipality.
   MUNICIPAL or MUNICIPALITY — Of or pertaining to the County or City
government, or an agency thereof and/or a City-authorized fire company.
   MUNICIPALITIES PLANNING CODE or STATE PLANNING CODE — The Pennsylvania
Municipalities Planning Code, as reenacted and amended, 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
   NIGHTCLUB — An establishment that offers amplified music after 12:00
midnight, sells alcoholic beverages primarily for on-site consumption, includes
hours open to patrons after 12:00 midnight, has a building capacity of over 150
persons, and has less than 20% of its total sales in food and nonalcoholic
beverages.
   NONCONFORMING BUILDING — A type of "nonconforming structure" which is a
building.
   NONCONFORMING LOT — A lot, parcel, or tract of land which does not conform
to the dimensional requirements of the zoning district in which said lot,
parcel, or tract is situated. To be considered nonconforming, the lot, parcel,
or tract of land shall also have predated the implementation of zoning in the
City of Reading or was lawfully conforming prior to the enactment of zoning
regulations that resulted in the nonconformity.
   NONCONFORMING STRUCTURE — A structure or portion thereof which, in its
design or location upon a lot, does not conform to the zoning regulations for
the district in which it is situated. To be considered nonconforming, the use
shall also have predated the implementation of zoning in the City of Reading or
was lawfully conforming prior to the enactment of this chapter.
   NONCONFORMING USE — Any use of a lot, parcel, tract, building, structure or
part thereof which does not conform to the use requirements of the zoning
district in which said lot, parcel, tract, building, structure or part thereof
is situated. To be considered nonconforming, the use shall also have predated
the implementation of zoning in the City of Reading or was lawfully conforming
prior to the enactment of zoning regulations that resulted in the
nonconformity. A use approved by a use variance shall not be considered to be a
nonconforming use.
   NURSING HOME — A facility licensed by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania as a
nursing home.
   OCCUPANCY — Use of a building or lot for a specific purpose.
   OCCUPIED BUILDING — A building located on a parcel of land utilized as a
permitted use in accordance with the provisions of the City of Reading Zoning
Ordinance. [Added 10-26-2015 by Ord. No. 58-2015]
   OFFICE — A commercial establishment or use involving clerical, professional
or administrative work, which may include the provision of customer services.
No storage or display of goods and products for sale shall be permitted in any
office.
   OFF-STREET PARKING AREA, PRIVATE — An area on private property designed and
used for the parking or storage of one or more passenger vehicles as an
accessory use. Private off- street parking areas shall include private garages,
carports and improved accessory parking spaces.
   OFF-STREET PARKING AREA, PUBLIC — An open space, other than a street or
other public right-of-way, designed and used by the general public for the
parking of vehicles.
   OVERNIGHT GUEST— Any individual lodging overnight at a short-term rental for
a period of thirty (30) consecutive days or less. [Added 10-13-2025 by Ord. No.
58-2025]
   OWNER — Any person, agent, firm or corporation having any legal, equitable
or leasehold interest in property.
   PARKING SPACE — An area designed and used for the parking of a motor
vehicle, exclusive of passageways, driveways and accessways appurtenant
thereto.
   PAWN SHOP — An establishment engaged in retail sales of secondhand
merchandise and that offers personal loans secured by consumer goods, jewelry
and other personal property held by the pawn shop. See the record-keeping
requirements of the State Pawnbrokers License Act, 68 P.S. § 281-1 et seq.
   PERFORMING ARTS FACILITY — Any facility, whether or not operated for profit,
primarily engaged in providing live theatrical performances.
   PERMANENT VEGETATIVE COVER - A minimum uniform perennial vegetative cover,
with a density capable of resisting accelerated erosion and sedimentation.
[Added 7-10-2017 by Ord. No. 59-2017]
   PERMIT, BUILDING — A certificate issued by the Building Inspector for the
construction, reconstruction, remodeling, alteration or repair of a building,
structure or part thereof.
   PERMIT, SPECIAL EXCEPTION — A certificate issued by the Zoning
Administrator, after approval by the Zoning Hearing Board, for the conduct of a
special exception use, which indicates thereon that the requirements governing
special exceptions in this chapter and all other applicable zoning requirements
have been met.
   PERMIT, TEMPORARY USE — A certificate issued by the Zoning Administrator,
for the conduct of a use for a limited time period indicating the duration of
the permit and indicating that all special requirements governing such use and
all other applicable zoning requirements have been met.
   PERMIT, ZONING — A certificate issued by the Zoning Administrator stating
that the purpose for which a building or land is to be used is in conformity
with all requirements of this chapter for the zoning district in which the use
is situated.
   PERMITTED USE — A use of a lot, parcel, tract, building, structure, sign or
part thereof which is permitted as of right in a particular zoning district.
   PERSON — Any natural person, association, partnership, corporation or other
similar entity.
   PERSONAL-CARE HOME — A facility licensed as such or as an "assisted-living
facility" by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
   PERSONAL SERVICE — An establishment that provides a service oriented to
personal needs of the general public and which does not involve primarily
retail or wholesale sales or services to businesses. Personal services include
barber and beauty shops, photography studios, travel agencies, shoe repair
shops, household appliance repair shops, massage therapists, and other similar
establishments, but shall not include any "adult uses," as herein defined.
   PET SHOP — A type of retail store that is approved by the City as a pet shop
and which involves the retail sales of animals to the public, but which does
involve the on-site breeding of dogs or the boarding of dogs, unless the
requirements for a kennel are also met. See requirements in state law for
keeping of exotic wildlife.
   PETS — Any number of animals traditionally found in a household for the
enjoyment, companionship and/or protection of the family. "Pets" means an
animal legally obtained, such as from a licensed pet dealer. Livestock,
including but not limited to, horses, cows, goats, chickens and other poultry
and fowl, indigenous or exotic wild animals such as opossums, skunks, raccoons,
squirrels, and endangered, threatened and protected species, are strictly
prohibited. See
Chapter 141, Animals, of the Code of the City of Reading.
   PLACE OF WORSHIP — A building or group of buildings that is primarily used
for regularly scheduled public assembly for religious purposes.
   PLANNING COMMISSION — The Planning Commission of the City of Reading, unless
otherwise stated.
   PRINCIPAL BUILDING — The building in which the principal or main use of a
lot is conducted.
   PRIVATE CLUB — Any building which serves as a meeting place for a selected
membership together with any recreation and dining facilities located therein.
   PRIVATE ENERGY AND UTILITY PROVIDER — A principal use owned, operated and/or
maintained by a private or independent utility company for the purpose of
providing energy within a defined service area or grid system in accordance
with the provisions established by the Public Utility Commission and the Public
Utility Code. [Added 10-26-2015 by Ord. No. 58-2015]
   PRIVATE SURFACE PARKING FACILITY — Privately owned and operated parking
facility with spaces available for short-term and long-term lease.
   PROPERTY — A lot.
   PROPERTY LINE — The perimeter line of a lot.
   PUBLIC NOTICE — Notice given in accordance with the provisions of this
chapter and of the Municipalities Planning Code, as amended, 53 P.S. § 10101 et
seq.
   PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY — Land dedicated to and accepted by a municipality for
street or roadway purposes and for the installation of public utilities as
specified on the City topographical survey. A public right-of-way shall include
the cartway and all sidewalk areas, paved or not.
   PUBLIC STREET — Any right-of-way intended for use as a means of vehicular
and pedestrian circulation and to provide access to more than one lot, as shown
on official street mapping of the City of Reading.
   PUBLIC USES — Uses conducted by a municipality, an agency of a municipality,
a public utility, a commonwealth agency or a federal agency.
   PUBLIC UTILITY — Any use that is owned, operated or managed by a public
utility regulated by the Public Utilities Commission or by a municipal
authority.
   RECEPTION FACILITY — Shall have the same meaning as "banquet hall." [Added
2-14-2011 by Ord. No. 8-2011]
   RECREATIONAL FACILITY, PRIVATE — Any privately owned and operated athletic
facility, whether or not operated for profit, such as health and fitness
centers, tennis clubs, gymnastic training centers and the like, and any private
membership organization holding a current club license from the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania Liquor Control Board. This category does not include commercially
operated game rooms, video arcades and the like, although such amusement
devices may be located on the premises when they are clearly incidental to the
primary use.
   RECREATIONAL FACILITY, PUBLIC — Any public park or playground. Any activity
center, gymnasium, natatorium or similar athletic facility owned and operated
by a public body.
   RECREATIONAL FACILITY, SEMIPUBLIC — Any facility, operated by a nonprofit
club licensed by the Commonwealths of Pennsylvania or by any organization
granted tax-exempt status by the United States of America Internal Revenue
Service, which clearly has as its primary purpose athletic activity and
physical exercise. This category also includes neighborhood centers operated by
religious or civic associations and which offer a program of instruction and
which are not operated for profit. The category does not include amusement
centers such as game rooms, video arcades, or the like, although such amusement
devices may be located on the premises when they are clearly incidental to the
primary use.
   RECREATIONAL VEHICLE — A vehicle or piece of equipment, whether self-powered
or designed to be pulled or carried, intended primarily for leisure time or
recreational use. Recreational vehicles include travel trailers, truck-mounted
campers, motor homes, folding tent campers and automobiles, buses or trucks
adapted for vacation use, snowmobiles, minibikes, all- terrain vehicles, go-
carts and boat trailers, and other vehicles not suitable for daily conventional
family transportation on City streets and highways.
   RECYCLING OPERATIONS — Includes facilities for the collection and
organization of recyclable materials, and/or the composting of organic
materials. It may include collection events for the general public, where
sufficient loading and staging areas are delineated operated by either the
City's Department of Public Works or the Berks County Solid Waste Authority.
   RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS — The R-1, R-1A, R-2, R-3 and R-PO Districts. [Amended
8-26-2013 by Ord. No. 35-2013]
   RESTAURANT — Any establishment at which food is sold for consumption on the
premises. The term "restaurant" shall not include any snack bar at a public or
community playground, play field, park or swimming pool operated by a
governmental agency or municipal agency for the convenience of the patrons of
those facilities.
   RESTAURANT, DRIVE-IN OR DRIVE-THROUGH — An establishment where patrons are
served food, soft drinks, ice cream and similar confections for principal
consumption off the premises or in automobiles parked upon the premises.
   RIGHT-OF-WAY — A strip of land occupied, or intended to be occupied by a
street, crosswalk, railroad, road, electric transmission line, oil or gas
pipeline, water main, sanitary or storm sewer main, shade trees, or by another
public or semipublic use.
   RIPARIAN BUFFER — A permanently vegetated open space, including at least 20%
trees and shrub cover, on graded and stabilized slopes, extending along and
adjacent to a watercourse or impoundment that is managed to protect stability
of banks and edges; improve water quality; to reduce the effects of erosion,
flash flooding and contaminated runoff; and to act as a transitional zone
between upland and aquatic habitat. [Added 10-26-2015 by Ord. No. 57-2015]
   RIPARIAN BUFFER MAINTENANCE PLAN — A landscape management and maintenance
plan that provides best management practices for the establishment of permanent
vegetation and property maintenance in riparian buffers, including mulching,
mowing, weed control, selection and restoration of herbs, shrubs and trees, and
protection of stability and integrity of banks and edges of the watercourse or
impoundment. [Added 10-26-2015 by Ord. No. 57-2015]
   RIPARIAN BUFFER SETBACK — The measured distance from the edge of the banks
of a watercourse or impoundment which is required to be maintained as a
riparian buffer, as required for the zoning district in which said watercourse
is located. [Added 10-26-2015 by Ord. No. 57-2015]
   ROOF — Structural covering of any material, being supported by columns,
piers, metal rods, walls or cantilevered from a principal structure.
   ROOMMATE HOUSEHOLDS — A shared housing arrangement where at least two, and
no more than three persons not related by blood, marriage, adoption or foster
relationship, or are not the great-grandparent, great grandchild, grandparent,
grandchild, parent, child, brother, sister, aunt, uncle, niece, nephew, great
uncle, great aunt, great nephew or great niece, of each other, live together in
a single dwelling unit and/or a single housekeeping unit on a permanent or
temporary arrangement. Any exception to this definition in number of persons in
the occupancy arrangement requires approval as a special exception review by
the Zoning Hearing Board. Said definition or arrangement shall not include any
such use that falls within the definition of residential care home or student
home.
   SCHOOL — PRIMARY OR SECONDARY — An institution for the education of children
between kindergarten and 12th grade, inclusive; which shall be limited to:
      A.   Schools operated by or under the authority of the Reading School
District;
      B.   Private academic schools which are accredited by an accrediting
association approved by the State Board of Education and/or licensed by the
State Board of Private Academic Schools;
      C.   Nonpublic schools which are sponsored by a bona fide religious
institution and registered with the Department of Education; or
      D.   Schools for the blind or deaf receiving Commonwealth appropriations.
[Added 1-13-2020 by Ord. No. 3-2020]
SCHOOL - TRADE, VOCATIONAL OR HOBBY — An educational facility for the teaching
of a trade or skill, which is carried on as a business, which does not meet the
definition of primary or secondary school, and which meets any applicable state
licensing or registration requirements. [Added 1-13-2020 by Ord. No. 3-2020]
   SCREENING — The formation of a visual or acoustical barrier using such
materials as dense evergreen shrubbery or solid fencing of durable wood or
masonry construction.
   SETBACK — The required minimum horizontal distance between the building line
and the related front, side, or rear property line or right-of-way line.
   SETBACK LINE — A line designating the minimum setback from a particular lot
boundary or right-of-way line.
   SEWER — A public or private utility system designed to collect, centrally
treat and dispose of sewage from customers, in compliance with Pennsylvania
Department of Environmental Protection regulations or regulations of the City,
whichever is more stringent.
   SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS — An adult arcade, adult bookstore or adult video
store, adult cabaret, adult motel, adult motion-picture theater, adult theater,
escort agency, nude model studio, spa or sexual encounter center, as each term
is defined in
Chapter 473, Sexually Oriented Businesses, of the Code of the City of Reading.
This term shall also regulate a "massage parlor" as defined by this chapter.
Massage therapy performed by a certified massage therapist under
Chapter 364, Massage Therapists, of the Code of the City of Reading is not
included in this definition. The term "sexually oriented business" and "adult
use" shall have the same meaning.
   SHED — A building that is used for indoor storage but is not used for
storage of motor vehicles or hazardous or toxic materials, other than fuel for
lawnmowers and appliances. [Added 2-14-2011 by Ord. No. 8-2011]
   SHORT-TERM RENTAL — Any conforming residential dwelling unit that is
permitted and utilized as a residential dwelling, which is rented for the
purpose of overnight lodging for a maximum period of time that does not exceed
thirty (30) consecutive days. [Added 10-13-2025 by Ord. No. 58-2025]
   SIGNS — See definitions in §
600-2205.
   SITE PLAN — A drawing of a building, structure and/or lot, showing
information including, but not limited to, lot and building size and coverage,
setbacks, landscaping and uses. Architectural elevations and floor plans are
sometimes included.
   SITE PLAN REVIEW — A review of proposed development plan by the Zoning
Administrator, City Planning Commission or City Council, or all, that is
necessary before permission to commence or complete a project can be given.
   SOCIAL CLUB (PLCB LICENSED) — Any organization, not conducted for profit,
which has a membership defined by its charter bylaws, and is a licensee of the
Pennsylvania Liquor Control Board.
   SOCIAL CLUB OR ASSOCIATION (NON-PLCB LICENSED) — Any organization, not
conducted for profit, which has a membership defined by its charter bylaws, and
is not a licensee of the Pennsylvania Liquor Control Board. No alcoholic
beverages are to be sold, stored or consumed on the premises, unless the
requirements for a BYOB use are met. For any use that also meets the definition
of a BYOB,
Chapter 127, Part 3 (§§
127-301 to 127-308), and §
127-202 shall also be met.
   SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEM — A system that converts solar energy into thermal or
electrical energy, where the solar energy is collected through solar cells,
film, modules and/or panels and then transferred to a battery or an inverter
(DC to AC power), which can be utilized as an electrical source or transferred
into the utility grid system. [Added 10-26-2015 by Ord. No. 58-2015]
   SOLID WASTE — Any waste including, but not limited to, municipal, residual
or hazardous waste, including solid liquid, semisolid or contained gaseous
materials. The term "solid waste" does not include coal ash or drill cuttings.
   SOLID WASTE DISPOSAL — The incineration, deposition, injection, dumping,
spilling, leaking or placing of solid wastes into or on the land or water in a
manner that the solid waste or a constituent of the solid waste enters the
environment, is emitted into the air or is discharged to the waters of the
municipality.
   SOLID WASTE OR SANITARY LANDFILL — A tract, parcel or lot used for the
disposal of garbage, refuse or ashes by depositing them in layers of controlled
depth and width in trenches or depressions and covering each layer promptly on
all sides with a compact layer of clean earth and other inorganic material of
sufficient thickness to exclude rodents and to prevent the escape of odors or
outbreak of fires.
   SOLID WASTE STORAGE — The containment of any waste on a temporary basis in
such a manner as not to constitute disposal of such waste. The containment of
any waste in excess of one year constitutes disposal.
   SOLID WASTE TREATMENT — Any method, technique or process, including
neutralization, designed to change the physical, chemical, biological,
character or composition of any waste so as to neutralize such waste or so as
to render such waste nonhazardous, safer for transport, suitable for recovery,
suitable for storage, or reduced in volume. The term "solid waste treatment"
includes any activity or processing designed to change the physical form or
chemical composition of waste so as to render it neutral or nonhazardous.
   STATE — The government of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
   STEEP SLOPE OVERLAY DISTRICT - Any property that contains slopes with at
least a 15% grade. [Added 7-10-2017 by Ord. 59-2017]
   STORMWATER RUNOFF — Drainage runoff from the surface of the land resulting
from precipitation or snow or ice melts.
   STORY — That part of a building between the surface of any floor and the
next floor above it, or in its absence, then the finished ceiling or roof above
it. A split-level story shall be considered a second story if its floor level
is six feet or more above the level of the line of the finished floor next
below it, unless the next lower floor is a basement. Any floor under a sloping
roof with a ridge pole extending more than seven feet in height above the floor
shall also be considered as a story.
   STREET — A thoroughfare primarily for vehicle traffic which has been or will
be dedicated or deeded to the public for public uses and includes, but is not
limited to, roads and highways as specified on the City's Official Street
Mapping, or that has been approved by the City as a private street, but not
including an alley.
   STRUCTURE — Any man-made object, including a building, radio or television
tower, fences, walls, carports, porches and decks, and permanent signs,
constructed or erected on or in the ground or water or upon another structure
or building and having an ascertainable stationary location. The term
"structure" shall not include walks, sidewalks or driveways.
   STUDENT — For the purposes of regulating a student home, this term shall
mean an individual who is enrolled at a university, college or trade school and
whose primary occupation is as a student or who is on a semester or summer
break from studies at a college, university or trade school or any combination
of such persons. The term "student" shall not apply to students who have
completed a bachelor or equivalent degree or persons enrolled in a single
course at a time. The residents of a student home may or may not live and cook
as a single housekeeping unit.
   STUDENT HOME — A living arrangement for at least two students, up to a
maximum of three students (as defined in this chapter) and who are unrelated to
each other by blood, marriage or legal adoption. The term "student home" shall
not include dormitories owned or operated by an institution of higher
education, fraternity house, or sorority house. The term "student home" shall
be used interchangeably with the term "student housing." This term shall not
include one or more students living in the same dwelling as their parent. This
term shall not be used to regulate residential uses owned or operated by a
college or university within the Institutional Overlay Zone.
   STUDENT HOUSING — Shall have the same meaning as a "student home."
   SUBDIVISION — The division or redivision of a lot, tract or parcel of land
by any means into two or more lots, tracts, parcels or other divisions of land,
including changes in existing lot lines for the purpose, whether immediate or
future, of lease transfer of ownership or building or lot development.
   SUPERMARKET — A store occupying in excess of 12,500 square feet which sells
fresh and prepackaged food, groceries, housewares and toiletries, but not
clothing except as incidental items, and is designed to provide the full range
of products customarily required to provide sustenance for a household.
   SWIMMING POOL, ACCESSORY — An artificially constructed body of water and any
lake or pond maintained for bathing by the residents of the property and their
invited guests, located on a lot as an accessory use. A wading pool, with a
depth of less than 24 inches shall not be regulated by this chapter as a
swimming pool. A portable pool, located above ground level, with an area of
less than 125 square feet and a water depth of less than two feet, temporary in
character and constructed of a material other than concrete or masonry, capable
of being moved from one place to another, shall not be regulated by this
chapter as a swimming pool.
   SWIMMING POOL AS A PRINCIPAL USE — An artificially constructed pool or any
lake or pond maintained by a club or public agency for the use of club members
and guests or the general public. A wading pool owned by a club or public
agency, with a depth of less than 24 inches shall not be regulated by this
chapter as a swimming pool. A portable pool owned by the association or public
agency, located above ground level, with an area of less than 125 square feet
and a water depth of less than three feet, temporary in character and
constructed of a material other than concrete or masonry, capable of being
moved from one place to another, shall not be regulated by this chapter as a
swimming pool.
   TATTOO PARLOR — A use that involves permanent marking of human skin with
words or designs.
   TAVERNS (INCLUDES BUT IS NOT LIMITED TO BARS AND PUBS) — Reputable,
Pennsylvania Liquor Control Board licensed establishments primarily engaged in
the retail sale and the on-site consumption of alcoholic beverages by
consenting adults. This definition includes, but is not limited to, beer
gardens, cocktail lounges, saloons and taprooms. Restaurants that serve
alcoholic beverages but are primary engaged in the retail sale of prepared food
are not included in this definition. See also "nightclub."
   TEMPORARY SHELTER — A facility operated by a nonprofit agency providing
temporary lodging, with or without meals, for persons of limited income with no
ordinary or regular residence or to persons who need such shelter to avoid an
abusive situation or because of a sudden event, such as fire, flood, domestic
violence, condemnation, or court-ordered eviction.
   THEATER — An enclosed building used for the presentation of live
performances or motion pictures. Included in this definition are cinemas, other
venues for the projection of film, dinner theaters, and theaters with stages
for live theatrical, musical performances, as well as circuses and ceremonies,
such as graduation and awards.
   TOWNHOUSE — See "dwelling, one-family attached."
   TRACT, TOTAL AREA OF THE — The total lot area of a single lot(s) in common
ownership or common equitable ownership at the time of submittal for
subdivision, land development or planned residential development approval. The
total area of the tract shall not include areas within the existing rights-of-
way of existing streets, but may include portions of the lot proposed for new
streets or proposed for new common open space or recreation land.
   TREATMENT CENTER —
   A.   A use involving any one or a combination of the following:
      (1)   A use (other than a prison or a hospital) providing housing for
three or more unrelated persons who need specialized housing, treatment and/or
counseling because of:
         (a)   Criminal rehabilitation, such as a criminal halfway house.
         (b)   Current addiction to a controlled substance that was used in an
illegal manner or alcohol.
         (c)   A type of mental illness or other behavior that causes a person
to be a threat to the physical safety of others.
      (2)   A methadone treatment facility, which shall be defined as a
facility licensed by the Pennsylvania Department of Health to use the drug
methadone in the treatment, maintenance or detoxification of persons.
      (3)   A lot upon which resides two or more persons who are required to
register their place of residence with the Pennsylvania State Police as a
requirement of the Pennsylvania Megan's Law II, or its successor law, as
amended, 42 Pa.C.S.A. § 9791 et seq.
   B.   See standards in §
600-1203. Also, a group home that exceeds the number of residents allowed by
this chapter within a group home shall be regulated as a treatment center,
unless approved otherwise under §
600-1201B.
   USE — Includes the phrases "arranged," "designed" and "intended to be used"
and shall mean a specific purpose for which land, buildings or structures are
designed, arranged, intended, occupied or maintained, or any activity,
occupation, business or operation which may be conducted at a given location.
   UTILITY — Equipment or facilities for producing, generating, transmitting,
distributing or furnishing natural or artificial gas, electricity or steam for
the production of light, heat or power to or for the public for compensation;
diverting, developing, pumping, pounding and distributing or furnishing water
to or for the public for compensation; transporting passengers or property as a
common carrier; equipment or facilities for use as a canal, turnpike, tunnel,
bridge, wharf and the like for the public for compensation; transporting or
conveying natural or artificial gas, crude oil, gasoline or petroleum products,
materials for refrigeration or oxygen or nitrogen or other fluid substance by
pipeline or conduit for the public for compensation; conveying or transmitting
messages or communications by telephone or telegraph or domestic public land
mobile radio service including, but not limited to, point-to-point microwave
radio service for the public for compensation; and sewage collection treatment
or disposal for the public for compensation. See also "essential services."
   VARIANCE — A written authorization, from the Zoning Hearing Board for a
particular property to depart from the literal requirements of one or more
specific zoning regulations.
   VERY STEEP SLOPE - A slope that has a grade of 25% or higher. [Added 7-10-
2017 by Ord. No. 59-2017]
   WALL — A structure which permanently or temporarily prohibits or inhibits
travel between properties or portions of properties or between the street or
public right-of-way and a property.
   WASTEWATER TREATMENT OPERATIONS — Includes all infrastructure, equipment and
activities related to the collection, conveyance, treatment, monitoring,
sampling and discharge of wastewater, regardless of its source, including, but
not necessarily limited to, the pipes, manholes, junction boxes, valves, pumps,
grinders, grit chambers, screening facilities, presses, centrifuges,
clarifiers, settling tanks, physical, biological and chemical treatments,
laboratories, vehicular and administrative facilities necessary to consistently
remediate wastewater according to current regulatory standards operated by the
City's Department of Public Works.
   WATERCOURSE — A channel or conveyance of surface water having defined bed
and banks, whether natural or artificial, with perennial or intermittent flow,
including, without limitation, streams and stream systems, brooks, ponds,
waterways, creeks and any other such channel or collection point for flowing or
standing water. [Added 10-26-2015 by Ord. No. 57-2015]
   WATER POWER — The generation of electricity or mechanical energy by the use
of water motion, which may include overshot or undershot waterwheels, turbines,
and other devices, including all associated equipment/facilities. [Added 10-26-
2015 by Ord. No. 58-2015]
   WIND TURBINE — A wind energy conversion system that converts wind energy
into electricity through the use of a generator, which may include a nacelle
(shroud/cover), rotor, tower, transformer pad, blades, spirals, helixes and/or
supporting energy apparatus. [Added 10-26-2015 by Ord. No. 58-2015]
   YARD, FRONT — A space between the building restriction line, or front main
wall of a building, and the closer of the front street right-of-way or lot
boundary. The front yard of a property located at the corner of two
intersecting streets shall be considered the area fronting both streets.
   YARD, REAR — The space between the rear building restriction line and the
closer of any street right-of-way or lot boundary. The rear yard of a property
located at the corner of two intersecting streets shall be considered the area
opposite the street containing the property address.
   YARD, SIDE — The space between the side building restriction line and the
closer of any street right-of-way or lot boundary.
   ZONING ADMINISTRATOR and ZONING INSPECTOR — The person or persons who are
charged by the City with enforcement of this chapter. The terms "Zoning
Administrator" and "Zoning Inspector" shall have the same meaning as "Zoning
Officer."
   ZONING HEARING BOARD — The Reading Zoning Hearing Board, as established by
Part 4 of this chapter.
41.   Editor's Note: The original definition "floodplain," which immediately
followed this definition, was repealed 6-11-2012 by Ord. No. 64-2012.
42.   Editor's Note: Former definition, "garage, public," which immediately
followed this definition, was repealed 2-14-2011 by Ord. No. 8-2011.
§ 600-2203. Airport Zone definitions.
The following words and phrases shall be used to interpret Part 19 and Part 20
of this chapter, as it specifically applies to Airport and Heliport Zones;
otherwise, the general definitions given in §
600-2202 shall apply:
   APPROACH SURFACE — A surface longitudinally centered on the runway center
line, extending outward and upward from the end of the primary surface and at
the same slope as the approach zone height limitation slope as the perimeter of
the approach surface shall coincide with the perimeter of the approach zone.
   APPROACH ZONE — That area of land and air in and about approach surface.
   CONICAL SURFACE — The surface extending outward and upward from the
periphery of the horizontal surface at a slope of 20 to one for a horizontal
distance of 4,000 feet.
   CONICAL ZONE — That area located at 150 feet above the airport elevation at
the intersection with the horizontal zone and extending thereafter 20 feet
horizontal for each. The conical zone extends outward from the periphery of the
horizontal zone a horizontal distance of 4,000 feet.
   HAZARD TO AIR NAVIGATION — A building, structure, part thereof or
obstruction determined to have a substantial adverse effect on the safe and
efficient use of the navigable airspace.
   HORIZONTAL SURFACE — A horizontal plane 150 feet above the established
airport elevation, the perimeter of which coincides with the perimeter of the
horizontal zone.
   HORIZONTAL ZONE — The area of 150 feet above the airport elevation
established by swinging arcs of 5,000 feet radii for all runways designated
utility or, visual and 10,000 feet radii for all other runways from the center
of each end of the primary surface of each runway and connecting the adjacent
arcs by drawing lines tangent to those arcs. This zone specifically does not
include the approach and transitional zones.
   LARGER THAN UTILITY RUNWAY — A runway that is constructed for and intended
to be used by propeller-driven aircraft of greater than 12,500 pounds gross
weight and by jet-powered aircraft.
   NON-PRECISION INSTRUMENT APPROACH — An approach and landing of an aircraft
using air navigation facilities with only horizontal guidance or area type
navigation equipment.
   NON-PRECISION INSTRUMENT RUNWAY — A runway used by aircraft utilizing a non-
precision instrument approach.
   OBSTRUCTION — Any structure, growth or object, whether or not fixed to the
ground, which exceeds the maximum height prescribed by the regulations of a
particular zoning district.
   PRECISION INSTRUMENT APPROACH — An approach and landing of an aircraft using
an Instrument Landing System (ILS) or Precision Approach Radar (PAR).
   PRECISION INSTRUMENT RUNWAY — Runway which requires or will require the use
of an Instrument Landing System (ILS) or Precision Approach Radar (PAR).
   PRIMARY SURFACE — Especially prepared hard surface longitudinally centered
on a runway extending 200 feet beyond the end of the runway, having a width of
and an elevation equal to the elevation of the runway center line.
   RUNWAY — A defined area designed and used for the taking off and landing of
aircraft.
   TRANSITIONAL SURFACE — A surface extending outward at a ninety-degree angle
to the runway center line with the runway center line extended at a slope of
seven feet horizontal for each foot vertical from the sides of the primary and
approach surfaces to where they intersect the horizontal and conical surfaces.
With respect to precision approach surfaces, transition surfaces project
through (and beyond) the limits of the conical surface, extending a distance of
5,000 feet measured horizontally from the edge of the approach surface and at
ninety-degree angles to the extended runway center line.
   TRANSITIONAL ZONE — A zone consisting of the areas beneath the transitional
surfaces. This zone begins at the sides of and at the same elevation as the
primary surface and approach surface extending seven feet horizontal for each
foot vertical and extending to a height of 100 feet above the airport elevation
and extending to the intersection with the conical surface.
   UTILITY RUNWAY — A runway designed and used by propeller-driven aircraft of
12,500 pounds gross weight or less.
   VISUAL RUNWAY — A runway designed and used by aircraft using visual approach
procedures.
§ 600-2204. (Reserved)43
§ 600-2205. Sign definitions.
The following words and phrases shall be used to interpret Part 17 of this
chapter, as it specifically applies to signs; otherwise, the general
definitions given in §
600-2202 shall apply:
   BACK-TO-BACK SIGN — A sign with two parallel faces oriented in opposite
directions and located not more than 10 feet apart. A back-to-back sign shall
constitute one outdoor advertising sign.
   BANNER SIGN — A sign made of fabric or any nonrigid material with no
enclosing framework.
   BILLBOARD — A nonidentity sign, exceeding 32 square feet in surface area,
which advertises goods, products or services which are not sold, manufactured,
offered or provided on or from the premises on which the sign is located.
   BUILDING LINE — A line formed by the intersection of a vertical wall with
the ground at average grade level. In case of a cantilevered building, the
vertical plane will coincide with the most projected surface. A building line
shall not be closer to the lot line the required yard requirements.
   BUILDING OCCUPANCY — That portion of a building occupied by one specific
tenant, measured by floors inhabited.
   BUILDING PERIMETER — The horizontal linear measures, at grade, of all the
walls of a building.
   BUILDING WALL — The horizontal lineal measures at grade of a single building
wall. When the permitted surface area of a sign is related to building frontage
or building wall, only the wall which is parallel to the sign face shall be
used in computing sign area. If the sign face is not parallel to a wall, the
wall to which it is more nearly parallel shall be used in computing sign area.
   CODE — The City of Reading Zoning Ordinance [this chapter] or any section
thereof.
   CURB or CURBLINE — The line in a public right-of-way, constructed or
proposed, which separates the portion of the right-of-way dedicated to
vehicular traffic from that dedicated to pedestrian traffic. The official City
Map, on file in the Office of the Department of Public Works, shall be the
final authority on the location of curblines, should a dispute arise.
   DIRECTIONAL SIGN — An incidental sign designed to guide or direct pedestrian
or vehicular traffic.
   DOUBLE-FACED SIGN — A sign with two adjacent faces oriented in the same
direction and not more than 10 feet apart at the nearest point between the two
faces. A double-faced sign may be referred to as a side-by-side or stacked
sign. A double-faced sign shall constitute one outdoor advertising sign.
   EAVELINE — See "roof line."
   FREESTANDING SIGN — A permanent sign which is supported by one or more
columns, uprights or braces in or upon the ground and not attached to any
building, and that does not exceed a total of 20 feet in height above grade,
unless a differing height is specified in this chapter.
   FRONT PROPERTY LINE — See "street property line."
   GRADE — The lowest point of elevation of the finished surface of the ground
between a point directly below or at the sign location and any point five feet
distant from the sign location, or, if the sign, or any projection thereof, is
less than five feet distant from the property line, the lowest point of
elevation of the finished surface of the ground between a point directly below
or at the sign location and the property line. In case the sign or any
projection thereof is within five feet of a public sidewalk, alley or other
public way, the grade shall be the elevation of the sidewalk, alley or public
way.
   GRAPHIC ELEMENT — A word, an abbreviation, a symbol, a geometric shape, or a
person's or firm's initials or logo containing up to seven letters. Punctuation
marks are not counted in computing the number of graphic elements.
   GROUND-MOUNTED SIGN — A type of freestanding sign which is anchored to the
ground similar to a pylon, but which has a monolithic or columnar line and
which maintains essentially the same contour from grade to top.
   HEIGHT or HEIGHT OF SIGN — The vertical distance from the grade to the
highest point of a sign or any vertical projection thereof.
   IDENTITY OR IDENTIFICATION SIGN — A sign which carries only the firm name,
major enterprise or principal product or service situated or furnished on the
premises on which the sign is located.
   ILLUMINATED SIGN — A sign with an artificial light source incorporated
internally or externally for the purpose of illuminating the sign.
   IMPROVEMENT — Any of the following acts: to excavate for or store material,
machinery or equipment on a lot in connection with the erection, construction,
placement, reconstruction, alteration, repair, extension, replacement,
restoration or conversion of any structure, building and/or sign, except if
specifically excluded by this chapter; or to change the use, area of use, or
percentage of use; or to extend or displace the use in part or in total of any
structure, building, sign and/or land.
   LOCATION or SIGN LOCATION — A lot, premises, building, wall or any place
whatsoever upon which a sign is erected, constructed or maintained.
   LOT OF RECORD — A parcel of land, the dimensions of which are shown on a
recorded subdivision plan on file with the Recorder of Deeds of Berks County,
Pennsylvania, and which actually exists as so shown; or, if no recorded
subdivision exists, land which is described in a deed legally recorded with the
Recorder of Deeds and which actually exists as so described.
   MAINTAIN — To allow to exist or continue.
   MAINTENANCE — The cleaning, painting, repair, or replacement of defective
parts of a sign in a mariner that does not alter the basic display area, design
or structure of the sign.
   MARQUEE SIGN — Any flat wall identity sign painted on, attached to or
constructed in a marquee, provided the sign shall be contained entirely within
the limits of the marquee surface to which it is attached and provided further
that the sign is in the same plane as such surface.
   NAMEPLATE — A sign which contains only the name and occupation of the
occupant of a building and does not exceed 1 1/2 square feet in size.
   NONCONFORMING SIGN — A sign or sign display area that was erected legally
but does not conform to the regulations of this chapter nor of the zone in
which it is located.
   OCCUPANCY AREA — The first floor occupancy area for a one-story building
shall extend from the sidewalk or grade line to three feet above the roof line
at the wall line or to the top of the parapet wall, whichever is higher. For
buildings which are two or more floors in height, the first floor occupancy
shall extend to three feet above the second floor line. The second and
subsequent floor occupancies shall extend from three feet above the occupied
story floor line to three feet above the floor line of the story above, or to
three feet above the roof line at the wail line or to the top of the parapet
wall, whichever is higher.
   OFF-PREMISES SIGN — A sign which directs attention to a business, industry,
profession, commodity, service or entertainment not sold or offered upon the
premises where the sign is located.
   OUTLET STORE — A retail store which sells merchandise directly from the
manufacturer, often at reduced or discounted prices.
   PERMIT or SIGN PERMIT — A certificate issued by the Zoning Administrator for
the erection of replacement of any sign in the City except as otherwise
specified in this chapter. Regulations governing sign permits, penalties,
nonconformity, appeals and other administrative matters are found in this
section and in other sections.
   POLE SIGN — A sign shall have the same meaning as a "freestanding sign."
   PORTABLE SIGN — Any sign that is not attached to a structure or structures,
is intended, by design, use, or construction, to be used by resting upon the
ground for support and may be easily moved or relocated for reuse. This shall
include signs mounted upon or designed to be mounted upon a trailer or a
wheeled carrier as well as A-frame signs.
   PROJECTING SIGN — A sign which uses as its main source of support a building
wall or anything attached thereto and which, for signs located entirely more
than eight feet six inches above the sidewalk or grade, projects more than 18
inches, or which, for signs located less than eight feet six inches above the
sidewalk or grade, projects more than four inches. Such projection always shall
be measured from the building wall itself.
   PROJECTION — The maximum distance between any part of a sign and the wall to
which it is attached.
   PROPERTY — A lot.
   PROPERTY LINE — The perimeter line of a lot.
   PUBLIC PROMENADE — An outdoor open space devoted to public pedestrian
traffic only. Such open space may contain open-air cafes, kiosks, bazaars,
benches, statuary, fountains, telephone booths, and vendor or information
structures not exceeding 200 square feet of ground coverage.
   ROOF SIGN — A sign erected upon or above a roof or roofline of a building
and which is wholly or partially supported by such building or roof. A sign
attached to a parapet wall shall not be considered a roof sign as long as no
part of the sign projects above the top of the parapet wall. If a building
contains several roofs at varying grades, the roof supported by the vertical
surface upon which the sign is attached shall be used to determine whether or
not such sign is a roof sign.
   ROOFLINE — The lowest point of any part of a roof or the point on any
vertical surface of a building which is closest to the lowest point of any part
of a roof.
   SIGN — Any permanent or temporary structure or part thereof, or any device
attached, painted or represented directly or indirectly on or in a structure or
other outdoor surface that shall display or include any letter, word, insignia
or representation used as, or which is in the nature of, an advertisement,
announcement, visual communication, direction, or is designed to bring the
subject to the attention of the public. The term "sign" shall not include the
flag of any public, semipublic, civic, charitable or religious group.
   SIGN AREA or SIGN DISPLAY AREA —
   A.   "Sign area" shall include all lettering, wording and accompanying
designs and symbols, together with related background areas on which they are
displayed. One "freestanding sign" may include several signs that are all
attached to one structure, with the total "sign area" being the area of a
common geometric form that could encompass all signs.
   B.   The "sign area" shall not include any structural supports that do not
include a message.
   C.   Where the sign consists of individual letters or symbols attached to or
painted directly on a building or window, other than an illuminated background
that is a part of the sign, the sign area shall be the smallest rectangle that
includes all of the letters and symbols.
   D.   The maximum sign area of sign shall be for each of two sides of a sign,
provided that only one side of a sign is readable from any location.
   E.   The two-dimensional area included on one side of a sign, which includes
the frame or edge of the sign, if any. For measurement purposes, the sign
display area shall be deemed the smallest two-dimensional square, rectangle,
triangle, circle or combination thereof which will encompass the entire side of
the sign.
   F.   Unless otherwise specified, all square footages in regards to signs are
maximum sizes.
   SIGN STRUCTURE — Any structure which supports or is capable of supporting
any sign, as defined in this Part. A sign structure may or may not be an
integral part of the building.
   STREET, ROADWAY or TRAVELED WAY — A public thoroughfare which has been or
will be dedicated or deeded to the public for public uses. As used in this
section, a street, roadway or traveled way is that portion of the right-of-way
located between curblines. The topographic survey, located in the Department of
Public Works office, shall be the final authority should the existence or
location of any street be disputed.
   STREET FRONTAGE — The linear measure of the street property line.
   STREET PROPERTY LINE — That portion of a lot line that is coincident with
the public right- of-way.
   TRAFFIC ROUTES — The following streets shall be considered traffic routes
only where they occur within the City of Reading as described below, and only
where located in the C-H and H- M and MU Zones:
   A.   North Front Street (Business U.S. Route 222) north of Amity Street to
the City boundary line. [Amended 2-14-2011 by Ord. No. 8-2011]
   B.   Warren Street By-Pass (Route 12) north of Wayne Avenue.
   C.   Lancaster Avenue (Business U.S. Route 222) from Morgantown Road to
Funston Avenue.
   D.   West Shore By-Pass (U.S. Route 422).
   E.   McKnight Street. [Amended 2-14-2011 by Ord. No. 8-2011]
   F.   Meade Street. [Amended 2-14-2011 by Ord. No. 8-2011]
   G.   Noble Street. [Amended 2-14-2011 by Ord. No. 8-2011]
   H.   West Robeson Street. [Amended 2-14-2011 by Ord. No. 8-2011]
   I.   Hancock Boulevard. [Amended 2-14-2011 by Ord. No. 8-2011]
   J.   River Road. [Amended 2-14-2011 by Ord. No. 8-2011]
   K.   Lincoln Street. [Amended 2-14-2011 by Ord. No. 8-2011]
   L.   Car Tech Road. [Amended 2-14-2011 by Ord. No. 8-2011]
   M.   Marion Street. [Amended 2-14-2011 by Ord. No. 8-2011]
   N.   Weisser Street. [Amended 2-14-2011 by Ord. No. 8-2011]
   O.   Gerry Street east of Hancock Boulevard. [Amended 2-14-2011 by Ord. No.
8-2011]
   P.   Liggest Avenue east of Hancock Boulevard. [Added 2-14-2011 by Ord. No.
8-2011]
   TRIM — The moldings, battens, cappings, nailing strips, latticing and
platforms that are attached to the sign structure.
   UNDER-MARQUEE SIGN — An identification sign displayed below a marquee.
   V-SHAPED SIGN — Any sign having two or three faces in the shape of the
letter "V" or in the shape of a triangle when viewed from above, with the faces
oriented in different directions and located not more than 10 feet apart at the
closest points. A "V-type" sign shall constitute one outdoor advertising sign.
   WALL SIGN or FLAT WALL SIGN — Any sign painted upon or attached to or
erected against the wall of a building or structure with the exposed face of
the sign in a plane parallel to the plane of such wall and projecting not more
than 12 inches, for signs located entirely more than eight feet six inches
above the sidewalk or grade line, or not more than four inches for signs
located less than eight feet six inches above the sidewalk or grade line. A
sign on a window or porch awning shall be considered a flat wall sign.
43.   Editor's Note: Former § 27-2204, Flood zone definitions, was repealed 6-
11-2012 by Ord. No. 64-2012.
§ 600-2206. Telecommunications definitions.
[Amended 4-24-2023 by Ord. 41-2023]
The following words and phrases shall be used to interpret Part 21 of this
chapter, as it specifically applies to telecommunications towers; otherwise,
the general definitions given in § 600-2202 shall apply:
   ACCESSORY EQUIPMENT — Any equipment serving or being used in conjunction
with a Wireless Communications Facility or Wireless Support Structure,
including but not limited to utility or transmission equipment, power supplies,
generators, batteries, cables, equipment buildings, cabinets and storage sheds,
shelters or similar structures.
   ANTENNA — An apparatus designed for the purpose of emitting radio frequency
(RF) radiation, to be operated or operating from a fixed location pursuant to
Federal Communications Commission authorization, for the provision of wireless
service and any commingled information services.
   ANTENNA STRUCTURE — Includes, but not limited to, towers, poles, brackets
and similar devices used to hold and support antenna(s) and/or dish(es).
   CITY — City of Reading, Berks County, Pennsylvania.
   COLLOCATION — The mounting of one or more WCFs, including Antennas, on a
pre-existing structure, or modifying a structure for the purpose of mounting or
installing a WCF on that structure.
   COMMUNICATIONS EQUIPMENT CABINET/BUILDING — Any unmanned, accessory building
or structure, on the same lot as a tower or antenna structure, housing
equipment to allow the facility to perform its intended function.
   EQUIPMENT COMPOUND — An area surrounding or adjacent to a Wireless Support
Structure within which base stations, power supplies, or Accessory Equipment
are located.
   FAA — Federal Aviation Administration
   FCC — Federal Communications Commission.
   HEIGHT — When referring to a WCF or Wireless Support Structure, means the
distance measured from the finished grade of the parcel to the highest point on
the tower or other structure, including the base pad and any antenna(s).
   MODIFICATION OR MODIFY — The improvement, upgrade or expansion of existing
Wireless Communications Facilities or base stations on an existing Wireless
Support Structure or the improvement, upgrade, or expansion of the Wireless
Communications Facilities located within an existing Equipment Compound, if the
improvement, upgrade, expansion or replacement does not Substantially Change
the physical dimensions of the Wireless Support Structure.
   NON-TOWER WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS FACILITY (NON-TOWER WCF) — Wireless
Communications Facilities that are Collocated on existing structures, such as,
but not limited to buildings, water towers, electrical transmission towers,
utility poles, light poles, traffic signal poles, flag poles and other similar
structures that do not require the installation of a new tower.
   REPLACEMENT OF A WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS FACILITY (REPLACEMENT OF A WCF) —
The replacement of existing Wireless Communications Facilities on an existing
Wireless Support Structure or within an existing Equipment Compound due to
maintenance, repair or technological advancement with equipment composed of the
same wind loading and structural loading that is substantially similar in size,
weight and height as the Wireless Communications Facilities initially installed
and that does not substantially change the physical dimensions of the existing
Wireless Support Structure.
   ROOF — The exterior surface on the top of a building or structure.
   SMALL WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS FACILITY — A Wireless Communications Facility
that meets the following criteria:
   A.   The Wireless Support Structure on which Antenna facilities are mounted:
      (1)   Is 50 feet or less in height;
      (2)   Is no more than 10 percent taller than other adjacent structures;
or
      (3)   Is not extended to a height of more than 50 feet or by more than 10
percent above its height prior to the Collocation of any WCF as a result of the
Collocation of new Antenna facilities; and
   B.   Each Antenna associated with the deployment (excluding the Accessory
Equipment) is no more than three cubic feet in volume; and
   C.   All Accessory Equipment associated with the Wireless Support Structure
including the wireless equipment associated with the Antenna and any pre-
existing associated equipment on the Wireless Support Structure, is
cumulatively no more than 28 cubic feet in volume.
   D.   The Wireless Communications Facility does not require Antenna structure
registration under 47 CFR Part 17;
   E.   The Wireless Communications Facility is not located on Tribal lands, as
defined under 36 CFR 800.16(x); and
   F.   The Wireless Communications Facility does not result in human exposure
to radio frequency radiation in excess of the applicable safety standards
specified in 47 CFR 1.1307(b).
   STEALTH TECHNOLOGY — Camouflaging methods applied to Wireless Communications
Facilities and Accessory Equipment which render them more visually appealing or
blend the proposed facility into the existing structure or visual backdrop in
such a manner as to render it minimally visible to the casual observer. Such
methods include, but are not limited to, architecturally screened roof-mounted
Antennas, building-mounted Antennas painted to match the existing structure and
facilities constructed to resemble trees, shrubs, and light poles.
   STRUCTURAL CAPACITY — The physical ability of a tower and associated
antennas to withstand design loading without collapsing.
   SUBSTANTIAL CHANGE — A modification substantially changes the physical
dimensions of an support structure if it meets the criteria established by 47
CFR § 1.6100.
   TOWER-BASED WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS FACILITY (TOWER-BASED WCF) — Any
structure that is used for the primary purpose of supporting one or more
Antennas, including, but not limited to, self-supporting lattice towers, guy
towers and monopoles, and the accompanying Antenna and Accessory Equipment.
   WBCA — Pennsylvania Wireless Broadband Collocation Act (53 P.S. § 11702.1
et. seq.).
   WIRELESS — Transmissions through the airwaves including, but not limited to,
infrared line of sight, cellular, PCS, microwave, satellite, or radio signals.
   WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS FACILITY (WCF) — An Antenna facility or a Wireless
Support Structure that is used for the provision of wireless service, whether
such service is provided on a stand-alone basis or commingled with other
wireless communications services.
   WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS FACILITY APPLICANT (WCF APPLICANT) — Any person that
applies for a Wireless Communications Facility building permit, zoning approval
and/or permission to use the public ROW or other City-owned or third party land
or property.
   WIRELESS SUPPORT STRUCTURE — A pole, tower, base station, or other building,
whether or not it has an existing Antenna facility, that is used or to be used
for the provision of wireless service (whether on its own or comingled with
other types of services).
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/6541e9c0b130f7197f9155a8a6441bb6dc5ca83c/
IMAGES/0-0-0-74.png]
Chapter A610
ANNEXATION OF TERRITORY
§
A610-101.   Annexation of territory.
[Below is a listing of ordinances adopted by the City of Reading regarding the
annexation of territory. Full copies of said ordinances can be found in the
City Clerk's Office.]
§ A610-101. Annexation of territory.
Ord. No. Date Subject
Ord. No. Date       Subject
                    Annexing a portion of Cumru Township adjoining the City on
45-1914  9-16-1914  the south and southwest, beginning at a point on the west
                    side of the Schuylkill River, containing 1,114.5 acres,
                    more or less.
31-1915  12-24-1915 Annexing a portion of the Township of Bern.
                    Annexing a portion of Lower Alsace Township adjoining the
50-1917  9-12-1917  City on the east beginning at a point, a marble stone, in
                    the southern building line of Oley Street and the present
                    City line.
83-1934  11-24-1934 Annexing a portion of Cumru Township.
74-1935  12-31-1935 Annexing a portion of Cumru Township.
18-1962  9-3-1962   Annexing portions of Alsace Township, Lower Alsace and
                    Muhlenburg Township.
47-1966  9-21-1966  Annexing a portion of Cumru Township.
30-1967  10-18-1967 Annexing portions of Cumru Township, Muhlenburg Township
                    and Lower Alsace Townships.
Chapter A611
BOND ISSUES AND LOANS
§
A611-101.   Bond issues and loans.
[Below is a listing of ordinances adopted by the City of Reading regarding the
issuance of bonds and loans. Full copies of said ordinances can be found in the
City Clerk's Office.]
§ A611-101. Bond issues and loans.
Ord. No. Date Description
Ord. No.     Date       Description
10-1914      5-20-1914  Increasing the indebtedness in the amount of $175,000
                        for the purpose of paving the streets.
                        Increasing the indebtedness in the amount of $50,000
55-1914      9-9-1914   for the purpose of constructing a house sewage
                        filtration bed and appurtenances on Fritz's Island.
                        Increasing the indebtedness in the amount of $1,300,000
73-1914      9-23-1914  for a new City hall and site, for the construction of a
                        storage reservoir and for laying of water lines and
                        other acquisitions.
13-1915      3-10-1915  Increasing the indebtedness in the amount of $77,000
                        for capital improvements.
                        Increasing the indebtedness in the amount of $150,000
20-1916      4-5-1916   for paving of streets, establishing a municipal
                        hospital and motorizing fire apparatus.
47-1916      6-7-1916   Amending Ord. No. 20-1916.
                        Increasing the indebtedness in the amount of $200,000
                        for the purpose of purchasing Nicols Street properties
20-1917      5-23-1917  in settlement of and elimination of flood damage
                        claims, widening railroad tracks, and capital
                        improvements.
                        Increasing the indebtedness in the amount of $100,000
10-1919      4-2-1919   for the purpose of repairing, paving and improving
                        streets.
23-1919      6-25-1919  Increasing the indebtedness in the amount of $210,000
                        for capital improvements.
30-1919      6-30-1919  Amending Ord. No. 10-1919.
56-1919      12-31-1919 Increasing the indebtedness in the amount of $1,000,000
                        for the purpose of capital improvements.
23-1920      6-2-1920   Increasing the indebtedness in the amount of $1,000,000
                        for capital improvements.
                        Increasing the indebtedness in the amount of $740,000
1-1921       1-5-1921   for the purpose of constructing and equipping public
                        comfort station, for constructing house sewer trunk
                        lines and improved street paving.
6-1921       2-23-1921  Increasing the indebtedness in the amount of $175,000
                        for purchasing various pieces of real estate.
30-1924      5-7-1924   Increasing the indebtedness in the amount of $400,000
                        for improved street paving.
                        Increasing the indebtedness in the amount of $110,000
                        for the real estate and equipment required to construct
47-1925      9-30-1925  an asphalt plant, for the purpose of paying the damages
                        and obligations of the City for land condemned for
                        public park purposes.
103-1926     8-25-1926  Increasing the indebtedness in the amount of $850,000
                        for street and sewer improvements.
                        Increasing the indebtedness in the amount of $222,000
109-1927     9-21-1927  for the purchase of part of the plant and water supply
                        system of Angelica Water and Ice Company.
                        Increasing the indebtedness in the amount of $750,000
41-1928      5-29-1928  for the purpose of purchasing and acquiring land and
                        the erecting of a municipal building.
95-1928      8-22-1928  Issuing bonds to increase the indebtedness in the
                        amount of $100,000 for park and playground purposes.
                        Issuing bonds to increase the indebtedness in the
115-1928     10-31-1928 amount of $1,050,000 for the purpose of providing funds
                        for various capital improvements.
                        Increasing the bonded indebtedness in the amount of
6-1930       2-19-1930  $600,000 for the purpose of providing funds for various
                        capital improvements.
                        Increasing the bonded indebtedness in the amount of
9-1931       3-4-1931   $200,000 for providing funds for various capital
                        projects.
24-1931      3-25-1931  Amending Ord. No. 9-1931.
                        Increasing the bonded indebtedness in the amount of
110-1931     1-20-1931  $100,000 for the purpose of administrative charity and
                        for support of the poor.
40-1932      5-25-1932  Increasing the bonded indebtedness in the amount of
                        $500 for sewer construction on certain streets.
                        Increasing the bonded indebtedness in the amount of
1-1933       2-8-1933   $300,000 for the purpose of providing funds to fund
                        outstanding floating indebtedness.
                        Increasing the bonded indebtedness in the amount of
50-1933      12-27-1933 $1,850,000 for the purpose of providing funds with
                        which to improve, enlarge and construct a water supply
                        system for the City.
                        Increasing the bonded indebtedness in the amount of
19-1934      4-18-1934  $300,000 for the purpose of providing funds for the
                        payment of operating expenses of the City.
37-1936      9-9-1936   Issuing bonds in the amount of $500,000 for the purpose
                        of providing funds for various capital improvements.
36-1938      9-21-1938  Issuing bonds in the amount of $500,000 for the purpose
                        of providing funds for various capital improvements.
                        Issuing bonds to increase the indebtedness in the
1-1947       1-15-1947  amount of $1,500,000 for providing funds for various
                        capital projects.
                        Issuing bonds to increase the indebtedness in the
                        amount of $155,000 for the purposes of providing funds
21-1949      6-8-1949   to fund certain judgments outstanding against the City
                        and to fund certain floating debt upon which the City
                        has become liable.
                        Declaring that the purpose for which a portion of the
                        loan of $1,500,000 authorized by ordinance of City
49-1949      10-11-1949 Council has proved to be inadvisable and changing said
                        purpose so as to provide additional funds in the amount
                        of $20,000 for the purpose of construction, equipping
                        and furnishing a fire house.
                        Issuing bonds to increase the indebtedness in the
15-1951      3-28-1951  amount of $500,000 for the purpose of providing funds
                        for the modernization, repair and improvement of the
                        sewage system.
                        Issuing bonds to increase the indebtedness in the
                        amount of $84,000 for the purpose of providing funds to
37-1952      1-2-1952   fund certain judgments outstanding against the City;
                        and to fund certain floating debt upon which the City
                        has become liable.
                        Issuing bonds to increase the indebtedness in the
53-1952      12-3-1952  amount of $3,000,000 for the purpose of providing funds
                        for various capital projects.
                        Issuing bonds to increase the indebtedness in the
17-1953      7-8-1953   amount of $750,000 for the purpose of providing funds
                        for various capital projects.
                        Issuing bonds to increase the indebtedness in the
46-1955      10-13-1955 amount of $500,000 for the purpose of providing funds
                        for various capital projects.
                        Issuing bonds to increase the indebtedness in the
45-1956      9-19-1956  amount of $4,500,000 for the purpose of providing funds
                        for various capital projects.
                        Issuing bonds to increase the indebtedness in the
22-1957      5-22-1957  amount of $350,000 for the purpose of providing funds
                        for various capital projects.
                        Issuing bonds to increase the indebtedness in the
29-1958      10-1-1958  amount of $300,000 for the purpose of providing funds
                        for various capital projects.
                        Issuing a note in the principal amount of $200,000 for
33-1960      11-16-1960 the purpose of providing funds for various capital
                        projects.
                        Issuing bonds to increase the indebtedness in the
1-1961       1-18-1961  amount of $1,830,000 for the purpose of providing funds
                        for various capital projects.
23-1961      9-6-1961   Issuing bonds to increase the indebtedness in the
                        amount of $400,000 for various capital projects.
                        Issuing bonds to increase the indebtedness in the
19-1962      7-18-1962  amount of $750,000 for the purpose of providing funds
                        for various capital projects.
                        Issuing a note in the principal amount of $150,000 for
33-1963      12-18-1963 the purpose of providing funds for various capital
                        projects.
                        Issuing bonds to increase the indebtedness in the
11-1965      3-3-1965   amount of $1,100,000 for the purpose of providing funds
                        for various capital projects.
                        Issuing a note in the principal amount of $850,000 for
16-1967      5-31-1967  the purposes of providing funds for various capital
                        projects.
                        Issuing bonds to increase the indebtedness in the
25-1968      6-12-1968  amount of $4,700,000 for the purpose of providing funds
                        for various capital projects.
                        Signifying a desire to issue bonds to increase the
                        indebtedness in the amount of $580,000 for the purpose
                        of providing funds for the construction of branch
30-1971      9-22-1971  libraries for the Reading Public Library and the
                        calling of a public election for the purpose of
                        obtaining assent of the electors to such increase of
                        debt.
                        Issuing bonds to increase the indebtedness in the
46-1972      11-8-1972  amount of $580,000 for the purpose of providing funds
                        for various capital projects.
                        Issuing bonds to increase the indebtedness in the
35-1973      7-25-1973  amount of $8,000,000 for the purpose of providing funds
                        for various capital projects.
                        Issuing bonds to increase the indebtedness in the
30-1977      8-10-1977  amount of $8,000,000 for the purpose of refunding lease
                        rental debt by the Reading Parking Authority.
21-1980      4-23-1980  Issuing a note in the principal amount of $425,000 with
                        proceeds thereof to be used for sundry purposes.
57-1980      12-17-1980 Issuing a note in the principal amount of $750,000 with
                        proceeds thereof to be used for sundry purposes.
                        Issuing bonds to increase the indebtedness in the
66-1981      12-30-1981 amount of $765,000 for the purpose of providing funds
                        for various capital projects.
                        Issuing bonds to increase the indebtedness in the
25-1982      6-9-1982   amount of $5,400,000 for the purpose of financing
                        various capital projects.
2-1983       1-19-1983  Issuing bonds to increase the indebtedness in the
                        amount of $5,945,000.
13-1984      2-17-1984  Incurring lease rental debt in the amount of
                        $8,530,000.
                        Issuing bonds to increase the indebtedness in the
32-1984      3-28-1984  amount of $1,250,000 for the purpose of financing
                        various capital projects.
                        Issuing bonds to increase the indebtedness in the
10-1985      2-6-1985   amount of $3,230,000 for the purpose of financing
                        various capital projects.
                        Issuing bonds to increase the indebtedness in the
93-1985      12-7-1985  amount of $10,620,000 for the purpose of financing
                        various capital projects.
                        Issuing bonds to increase the indebtedness in the
86-1986      11-1-1986  amount of $14,145,000 for the purpose of financing
                        various capital projects.
                        Issuing bonds to increase the indebtedness in the
93-1986      12-3-1986  amount of $20,715,000 for the purpose of financing
                        various capital projects.
103-1986     12-29-1986 Amending §§ 5, 7 and 19 of Ord. No. 93-1986.
40-1988      4-27-1988  Incurring lease rental debt in the amount of
                        $6,892,478.10.
91-1988      7-13-1988  Incurring lease rental debt in the amount of
                        $14,850,000.
                        Issuing bonds to increase the indebtedness in the
30-1989      5-22-1989  amount of $5,000,000 for the purpose of financing
                        various capital projects.
80-1989      7-12-1989  Incurring lease rental debt in the amount of
                        $9,000,000.
81-1989      7-20-1989  Incurring lease rental debt in the amount of
                        $14,850,000.
                        Issuing bonds to increase the indebtedness in the
112-1989     11-22-1989 amount of $10,000,000 for the purpose of financing
                        various capital projects.
                        Issuing a note (Series A of 1990) in the principal
                        amount of $20,000,000 for the purpose of providing
24-1990      3-7-1990   funds for various capital projects; and issuing a note
                        (Series B of 1990) in the principal amount of
                        $20,740,000 for the purpose of providing funds for
                        various capital projects.
105-1990     8-8-1990   Incurring lease rental debt in the amount of
                        $18,940,000.
                        Issuing a revenue note in the principal amount of
127-1991     12-6-1991  $19,290,000 for the purpose of providing funds for
                        various capital projects.
                        Issuing bonds to increase the indebtedness in the
35-1992      4-15-1992  amount of $30,330,000 for the purpose of financing
                        various capital projects.
83-1992      7-22-1992  Amending Ord. No. 35-1992 of April 15, 1992.
                        Issuing bonds to increase the indebtedness in the
88-1992      8-5-1992   amount of $66,150,000 for the purpose of financing
                        various capital projects.
                        Issuing a revenue note in the principal amount of
98-1992      9-11-1992  $580,000 for the purposes of providing funds for
                        various capital projects.
3-1993       1-20-1993  Amending Ord. No. 88-1992.
46-1993      4-21-1993  Incurring lease rental debt in the amount of
                        $30,303,026.35.
                        Issuing bonds to increase the indebtedness in the
128-1995     12-6-1995  amount of $10,975,000 for the purpose of financing
                        various capital projects.
30-1997      11-10-1997 Incurring lease rental debt in the amount of
                        $6,469,500.
                        Issuing bonds to increase the indebtedness in the
6-1998       3-9-1998   amount of $30,100,000 for the purpose of financing
                        various capital projects.
                        Issuing bonds to increase the indebtedness in the
19-1998      5-26-1998  amount of $21,975,000 for the purpose of financing
                        various capital projects.
                        Issuing bonds to increase the indebtedness in the
35-1998      11-9-1998  amount of $66,150,000 to provide funds to finance a
                        certain refunding project.
                        Authorizing and directing the incurrence of lease
33-2002      7-22-2002  rental debt, in an aggregate principal amount of
                        $3,300,000.
                        Authorizing and directing the incurrence of lease
36-2002      8-5-2002   rental debt, in the maximum principal amount of
                        $13,758,390.
15-2003      5-12-2003  Bond ordinance for the Parking Authority.
                        Authorizing and directing the incurrence of lease
22-2003      6-16-2003  rental debt, in the maximum principal amount of
                        $4,160,000.
                        Authorizing and directing the incurrence of lease
47-2004      11-29-2004 rental debt, in the maximum aggregate principal amount
                        of $10,000,000 to finance certain capital projects.
                        Issuing a series of general obligation notes, series of
54A-2005     9-12-2005  2005 of the City, in the aggregate principal amount of
                        $15,8000,000 to refund certain prior debt.
                        Issuing a general obligation note, series of 2006 of
94-2005      12-12-2005 the City, in the aggregate principal amount of
                        $8,000,000 to fund certain capital improvements.
                        Authorizing and directing incurring of nonelectoral
                        debt through the issuance of general obligation bonds
96A-2005     12-12-2005 of the City of Reading in the aggregate principal
                        amount of not to exceed $25,000,000 to fund certain
                        capital improvements.
                        Authorizing and directing the incurrence of lease
49-2006      6-26-2006  rental debt in the maximum principal amount of
                        $1,570,000 to fund certain capital projects.
82-2006      11-30-2006 Issuing general obligations bonds, series of 2008, of
                        $50,000,000 to fund certain projects.
                        Authorizing the lease of certain real property to the
                        Redevelopment Authority of the City of Reading pursuant
                        to a lease agreement; declaring the guaranty of said
                        Authority's federally taxable guaranteed lease revenue
                        note for the benefit of the City of Reading to be a
83-2006      11-27-2006 project of the City for which lease rental debt is to
                        be incurred; stating the realistic estimated useful
                        life of the facility relating to the note; determining
                        to incur lease rental debt in an aggregate principal
                        amount not to exceed $7,000,000 in respect of said
                        project.
                        Issuing line of credit general obligations note, series
84-2006      11-30-2006 of 2006, in the aggregate principal amount of
                        $25,000,000 to fund certain capital projects of the
                        City.
                        Authorizing issuing a series of federally taxable
88-2006      11-27-2006 general obligation bonds, series of 2006, of the City
                        in an aggregate principal amount of not to exceed
                        $55,000,000.
                        Setting forth intent to issue a series of general
10A-2008     1-28-2008  obligation bonds of the City in the aggregate principal
                        amount not to exceed $5,900,000.
                        Setting forth intent to issue a general obligation
38-2008      5-27-2008  note, Series B of 2008, of the City in the aggregate
                        principal amount not to exceed $6,750,000.
                        Setting forth intent to issue a series of general
52-2008      8-11-2008  obligation bonds, Series E of 2008, of the City in the
                        aggregate principal amount of not to exceed
                        $14,000,000.
                        Setting forth intent to issue two series of general
53-2008      8-11-2008  obligation notes, designated as Series C of 2008 and
                        Series D of 2008, of the City in the aggregate
                        principal amount of not to exceed $40,000,000.
                        Amending an ordinance of the City previously enacted on
                        November 30, 2006, that authorized the incurrence of
68-2008      10-27-2008 nonelectoral debt through the issuance of a series of
                        general obligation bonds of the City in the aggregate
                        principal amount of $50,000,000.
                        Authorizing and approving a project of the authority;
73-2008      11-24-2008 authorizing and directing the incurrence of lease
                        rental debt, in the aggregate principal amount of
                        $8,635,000.
                        Authorizing and directing the incurrence of lease
49-2009      8-24-2009  rental debt, in an aggregate principal amount of
                        $6,550,000.
                        Amending an ordinance of the City previously enacted on
                        December 12, 2005, that authorized the incurrence of
50-2009      8-24-2009  nonelectoral debt through the issuance of a series of
                        general obligation bonds of the City in the aggregate
                        principal amount of $25,000,000.
                        Setting forth intent to issue a federally taxable
72-2009      12-28-2009 general obligation note, series of 2010, of the City in
                        the aggregate principal amount of $3,250,000.
                        Setting forth its intent to issue two series of general
15-2010      4-26-2010  obligation notes of the City in the aggregate principal
                        amount not to exceed $24,400,000.
                        Setting forth its intent to issue a series of general
93-2010      11-8-2010  obligation bonds of the City in the aggregate principal
                        amount not to exceed $20,000,000.
                        Setting forth its intent to issue a series of general
7-2011       2-14-2011  obligation notes of the City in the aggregate principal
                        amount not to exceed $16,000,000.
                        Setting forth its intent to issue a series of general
17-2012      2-27-2012  obligation bonds of the City in the aggregate principal
                        amount not to exceed $5,000,000.
                        Setting forth its intent to issue a series of general
28-2012      3-12-2012  obligation notes in the aggregate principal amount not
                        to exceed $2,647,000.
                        Setting forth its intent to issue a federally taxable
66-2012      6-25-2012  general obligation note in the aggregate principal
                        amount of $3,111,000.
                        Setting forth its intent to issue a federally taxable
75-2012      7-9-2012   general obligation note in the aggregate principal
                        amount not to exceed $15,000,000.
                        Setting forth its intent to issue a guaranteed sewer
80-2012      8-13-2012  revenue note in the aggregate principal amount of
                        $10,013,950.
13-2013      3-11-2013  Setting forth its intent to issue promissory notes in
                        the aggregate principal amount of $1,380,013.91.
                        Authorizing the Mayor to execute any and all documents
                        to effectuate the consent to the transfer of certain
20-2013      3-25-2013  real estate and the related assumption of the
                        associated loan obligation between Goggle Works
                        Ventures, L.P., and Goggle Works, LLC.
                        Setting forth its intent to issue a series of federally
75-2014      10-13-2014 taxable general obligation bonds in the aggregate
                        principal amount not to exceed $41,530,000.
                        Setting forth its intent to issue two series of general
12-2015      3-9-2015   obligation bonds in the aggregate principal amount not
                        to exceed $64,710,000.
                        Increasing the indebtedness of the City of Reading by
62-2015      10-26-2015 the issue of two guaranteed revenue notes in the
                        aggregate maximum principal amount of $121,800,519.
                        Increasing the indebtedness of the City of Reading by
61-2016      11-28-2016 the issue of two guaranteed revenue notes in the
                        aggregate maximum principal amount of $148,908,317.
                        Setting forth intent to issue a series of general
69-2016      12-12-2016 obligation bonds in the aggregate principal amount not
                        to exceed $30,000,000.
                        Authorizing and directing the issuance of non-electoral
94-2017      10-23-2017 debt through the issuance of general obligation bonds
                        in the maximum aggregate principal amount of
                        37,000,000.
                        Setting forth intent to issue a series of general
36-2019      9-23-2019  obligation bonds in the aggregate principal amount not
                        to exceed $13,500,000.
                        Authorizing and approving the incurrence of
Res. 39-2020 2-24-2020  indebtedness in the maximum principal amount of
                        $55,000,000.
                        Setting forth intent to issue a series of general
38-2020      4-13-2020  obligation bonds in the aggregate principal amount not
                        to exceed $40,000,000.
                        Setting forth intent to issue one or more series of
69-2020      10-26-2020 general obligation bonds in the aggregate principal
                        amount not to exceed $45,000,000.
                        Setting forth intent to issue one or more series of
70-2024      11-12-2024 general obligation bonds in the aggregate principal
                        amount not to exceed $17,000,000.
 
Chapter A612
FRANCHISE AND SERVICES
§
A612-101.   Franchises and services.
[Below is a listing of ordinances adopted by the City of Reading regarding
franchises and services. Full copies of said ordinances can be found in the
City Clerk's Office.]
§ A612-101. Franchises and services.
Ord. No. Date Description
Ord. No.       Date       Description
                          Executing an agreement between the City and the
48-1914        7-29-1914  Reading Transit and Light Company relative to paving
                          Franklin Street
                          Granting Reading Steam Heat and Power Company the
59-1914        9-2-1914   right to lay mains and lines of pipe on various
                          streets
23-1915        5-5-1915   Granting G.H. Delp and Company the right to construct
                          a single-track railroad siding
                          Granting to the City of Reading Passenger Railway
34-1915        6-9-1915   Company the privilege of constructing a curve to
                          connect other tracts of said Company
13-1917        4-11-1917  Granting the Reading Transit and Light Company the
                          privilege of extending its line and laying tracks
                          Granting the Reading City Passenger Railway Company
18-1917        5-2-1917   the privilege of constructing a curve to connect
                          tracks
                          Granting the Philadelphia and Reading Railway
25-1917        7-3-1917   Company, lessee of the Schuylkill and Lehigh
                          Railroad, the right to construct and operate a
                          single-track railroad siding
                          Granting the Philadelphia and Reading Railway Company
42-1917        8-1-1917   the privilege to construct, maintain and operate a
                          single-track railroad siding
                          Granting the Philadelphia and Reading Railway Company
48-1917        8-22-1917  the privilege to construct, maintain and operate an
                          additional single-track railroad siding
                          Authorizing the American Telegraph and Telephone
21-1918        7-31-1918  Company to occupy and use the underground works of
                          the Bell Telephone Company
                          Entering into an agreement between the City and the
67-1922        12-6-1922  Reading Transit and Light Company for the temporary
                          abandonment of the exercise of the franchise of the
                          Company on Nineteenth Street
                          Permitting the Hamburg Gas and Electric Company, on
17-1923        4-4-1923   certain conditions, to place and maintain poles on
                          property of the City in Ontelaunee Township for
                          serving electric current
                          Granting the American District Telegraph Company of
26-1923        5-29-1923  Pennsylvania a franchise to operate a signal system
                          in the City
                          Permitting the Metropolitan Edison Company to erect
58-1923        10-17-1923 towers and cross property of the City on Fritz's
                          Island with overhead wires
                          Permitting Metropolitan Edison Company to lay an
24-1924        3-19-1924  underground conduit for the purpose of supplying the
                          prison with electric current
                          Granting Northeastern Street Railway Company to
28-1924        5-14-1924  construct, maintain and operate a single-track
                          electric railway
                          Extending the time for the American District
10-1926        2-10-1926  Telegraph Company to begin operations to avail itself
                          of the privilege granted to it by Ord. No. 26-1923
31-1928        3-28-1928  Executing a contract with William B. Sheidy for the
                          collection of garbage
                          Executing a contract with Metropolitan Edison Company
35-1928        4-11-1928  to provide lighting of a section of Mineral Spring
                          Road
                          Executing a contract with Metropolitan Edison Company
39-1928        4-25-1928  to provide lighting of a section of the Eighteenth
                          Ward
                          Executing a contract between the City and
159-1928       12-26-1928 Metropolitan Edison Company to furnish electric
                          streetlighting service to the City for a term of 5
                          years
                          Executing a contract between the City and
6-1929         1-23-1929  Metropolitan Edison Company to furnish electric
                          streetlighting service to the City for a term of 5
                          years
                          Executing a lease between the City and Metropolitan
63-1929        8-21-1929  Edison Company providing for the leasing of the City
                          a duct in the conduit system owned and maintained by
                          the company together with the cable therein
                          Permitting the Reading City Passenger Railway Company
84-1929        10-30-1929 upon surrender and relinquishing of all its franchise
                          rights to remove its existing easterly single track
                          of the double track now maintained
                          Executing a lease between the City and Metropolitan
86-1929        10-30-1929 Edison Company providing for the leasing of the City
                          a duct in the conduit system owned and maintained by
                          the company together with the cable therein
                          Granting the Reading Company the privilege to
51-1930        7-16-1930  construct, operate and maintain a single-track
                          railroad siding
                          Executing a contract between the City and
66-1930        8-20-1930  Metropolitan Edison Company to provide streetlighting
                          for a portion of the City for a term of 10 years
                          Executing a contract between the City and
82-1930        10-22-1930 Metropolitan Edison Company to provide lighting of
                          the underpass under the railroad tracks of the
                          Reading Company
                          Executing a contract between the City and
87-1930        11-19-1930 Metropolitan Edison Company to provide lighting for a
                          section of the Eighteenth Ward
                          Executing a contract between the City and
94-1930        12-3-1930  Metropolitan Edison Company to provide lighting for a
                          section of the City for 10 years
                          Executing a contract between the City and
2-1931         1-21-1931  Metropolitan Edison Company to provide lighting for a
                          section of the City for 10 years
                          Executing a contract between the City and
14-1931        2-18-1931  Metropolitan Edison Company to provide lighting for a
                          section of the City
                          Declaring that the Reading and Southwestern Street
31-1931        4-29-1931  Railway Company has forfeited and abandoned its
                          franchise and right to occupy with its tracks
                          Executing a contract between the City and
54-1931        7-1-1931   Metropolitan Edison Company for supplying electricity
                          to the Old City Hall Building
                          Executing a contract between the City and
53-1933        12-13-1933 Metropolitan Edison Company to provide lighting for a
                          section of the City
                          Executing a contract between the City and
20-1934        3-21-1934  Metropolitan Edison Company to provide lighting for a
                          section of the City
                          Granting to the Reading Coach Company the franchise
66-1934        9-26-1934  to operate motor bus passenger transportation for
                          hire over and along public ways of the City
                          Executing an agreement with the Pennsylvania Railroad
15-1936        2-26-1936  Company for placing storm sewer pipe lines across the
                          tracks and property of the Pennsylvania Railroad
18-1936        3-25-1936  Amending an agreement with the Reading Coach Company
48-1939        10-11-1939 Amending an agreement with the Reading Coach Company
                          Amending Ord. No. 40-1940 to extend contract between
45-1940        8-28-1940  the City and Metropolitan Edison Company from 8 years
                          and 9 months to 10 years
49-1940        10-11-1940 Amending Ord. No. 66-1934
                          Executing a contract between the City and
57-1940        11-27-1940 Metropolitan Edison Company to provide lighting for a
                          section of the City for 10 years
23-1942        7-8-1942   Amending Ord. No. 66-1934 and Ord. No. 49-1940
                          Executing a contract between the City and
20-1947        7-23-1947  Metropolitan Edison Company to provide lighting for a
                          section of the City for one year
                          Executing a contract between the City and
21-1947        7-23-1947  Metropolitan Edison Company to provide lighting for a
                          section of the City for 1 year
                          Executing a contract between the City and
8-1948         3-24-1948  Metropolitan Edison Company to provide lighting for a
                          section of the City for 10 years
                          Executing a contract between the City and
29-1948        7-14-1948  Metropolitan Edison Company to provide lighting for a
                          section of the City for 1 year
                          Executing a contract between the City and
30-1948        7-14-1948  Metropolitan Edison Company to provide lighting for a
                          section of the City for 1 year
                          Executing a contract between the City and
29-1949        6-29-1949  Metropolitan Edison Company to provide lighting for a
                          section of the City for 10 years
                          Executing a contract between the City and
34-1949        7-25-1949  Metropolitan Edison Company to provide lighting for a
                          section of the City for 1 year
                          Executing a contract between the City and
35-1949        7-25-1949  Metropolitan Edison Company to provide lighting for a
                          section of the City for 1 year
                          Regulating the form of contracts between the City and
29-1957        7-24-1957  the Electric Light and Power Company having the right
                          to furnish streetlighting and types of electric light
                          and power services
                          Granting a nonexclusive franchise to Berks T.V. Cable
32-1963        12-24-1963 Company to operate and maintain a community
                          television system in the City
                          Granting a nonexclusive franchise to T.V. Service
22-1966        5-25-1966  Company to operate and maintain a community
                          television system in the City
                          Granting a nonexclusive franchise to Suburban T.V.
30-1966        6-15-1966  Cable Company to operate and maintain a community
                          television system in the City
                          Granting a nonexclusive and revocable franchise to
                          Comcast of New Mexico/Pennsylvania LLC, for a period
                          of 15 years, replacing a cable franchise agreement
5-2007         1-22-2007  that the City entered into with Berks Cable on
                          December 24, 1985 and is subject to City Ord. No.
                          101-85, entitled "City of Reading Cable Television
                          Ordinance"
                          Authorizing the Mayor to execute the agreement
45-2007        6-25-2007  between the City of Reading and Berks Community
                          Television for the provision of an annual
                          appropriation
                          Authorizing the Mayor to execute the agreement
16-2011        3-28-2011  between the City of Reading and Exide Technologies,
                          allowing Exide Technologies to enter onto and to
                          remediate Bernhart Park
                          Authorizing the Mayor to execute the lease between
21-2011        4-25-2011  the City of Reading and the Reading Area Fire
                          Fighters Museum, Inc.
                          Authorizing the Mayor to execute the agreement
30A-2011       7-11-2011  between the City of Reading and the County of Berks
                          for premises for the development, erection and
                          operation of a public safety radio system
                          Authorizing the Mayor to execute the agreement of
                          cooperation between the City of Reading and the
33-2011        7-25-2011  Reading School District for the joint support of a
                          recreational and education program and creation of
                          the Reading Recreational Commission
                          Authorizing the Mayor to execute all documents
                          required to effectuate the transfer of ownership of
                          premises known as 516 Gordon Street, 722 Lance Place,
39-2011        8-8-2011   1709 Mineral Spring Road, 818 Muhlenberg Street, 108
                          Plum Street, 112 Plum Street, 454 Schuylkill Avenue
                          and 456 Schuylkill Avenue from Lobos Ten Properties
                          to the City of Reading
                          Authorizing the Mayor to execute a lease between the
44-2011        2-27-2011  City of Reading and the Olivet's Boys and Girls Club
                          for a portion of the real estate situate in Pendora
                          Park
                          Authorizing the Mayor or the Purchasing Coordinator
48-2011        9-26-2011  to enter into an agreement with Municibid (online
                          government auctions) to list various City property
                          items for public sale online to the highest bidder
                          Authorizing the Mayor to execute the memorandum of
50-2011        10-24-2011 understanding between the Reading Berks Association
                          of Realtors and the City of Reading for the creation
                          of the CORE Program within Reading
                          Authorizing the Mayor to execute a lease agreement
                          between the City of Reading and ATV Bakery, Inc.,
                          which will allow the City to lease 203 Franklin
59-2011        10-24-2011 Street, 205 Franklin Street, and 207 Franklin Street,
                          and a lease agreement with the Reading Redevelopment
                          Authority to allow the City to lease 201 Franklin
                          Street, which together will be converted into a
                          community garden by the Entrepreneur's Connection
31-2012        3-26-2012  Amending the lease agreement between the City of
                          Reading and the Reading Area Water Authority
                          Authorizing the Mayor to execute a third amendment to
122-2012       12-10-2012 the revised and restated lease agreement between the
                          City of Reading and Reading Baseball LP
                          Authorizing the Mayor to execute a first amendment to
                          the agreement of cooperation between the City of
35-2014        4-14-2014  Reading and the Reading School District to change
                          both the number of scheduled meetings per year and
                          the month of the organizational meeting for the
                          Reading Recreation Commission
                          Authorizing the Mayor to execute a termination and
1-2017         1-9-2017   mutual release agreement re the redevelopment project
                          of properties situated on Penn Street between Fourth
                          and Fifth Streets
2-2017         1-9-2017   Repealing Bill No. 22-2016 dissolving the Reading
                          Area Water Authority
                          Authorizing the Mayor to execute a stormwater
                          easement agreement between the City of Reading and
16-2017        2-27-2017  the Schuykill Valley School District, conveying a
                          non-exclusive perpetual easement and right-of-way
                          upon that portion of premises shown and designated as
                          the easement area, described in legal description
                          Authorizing the Mayor to execute a stormwater
                          easement agreement - rain garden, between the City of
                          Reading and the Schuykill Valley School District,
17-2017        2-27-2017  conveying a non-exclusive perpetual easement and
                          right-of-way upon that portion of premises shown and
                          designated as the easement area, described in legal
                          description
                          Authorizing the Administration to enter into a
31-2017        3-27-2017  commercial lease agreement with the County of Berks
                          for the use of premises to operate emergency radio
                          services
                          Authorizing the Mayor to execute the lease between
48-2017        5-22-2017  Alvernia University and the City of Reading for
                          certain property to be used for activities related to
                          the Reading Police Academy
                          Repealing and replacing the lease agreement with the
51-2017        6-12-2017  Reading Area Water Authority and all addendums with
                          this new lease agreement
                          Authorizing the creation of the Mt. Penn Preserve
                          Partnership Council of Government (MP3 COG) to foster
8-2018         2-26-2018  a cooperative effort to implement components from the
                          Mt. Penn Master Plan and implement other regional
                          initiatives that will improve the area
                          Authorizing the Adopt-a-Trail agreement between the
49-2018        8-13-2018  City of Reading and Pennsylvania State University
                          Berks College
                          Approving the first amendment tot he lease agreement
55-2018        8-27-2018  with the Reading Area Water Authority approved on
                          June 12, 2017
                          Authorizing the Mayor to execute the memorandum of
Res. 123-2019  12-9-2019  understanding for animal control services with Berks
                          Animal Rescue League for a three year term
                          Authorizing the Managing Director to sign and submit
Res. 71-A-2021 7-26-2021  a Traffic Signal Maintenance Agreement to the
                          Department of Transportation on behalf of the city.
                          Entering into an agreement with Berks Community
Res. 121-2023  12-4-2023  Television (BCTV) to provide and manage community
                          access channel services.
                         
 
Chapter A613
GOVERNMENTAL AND INTERGOVERNMENTAL AFFAIRS
§
A613-101.   Governmental and intergovernmental affairs.
[Below is a listing of ordinances adopted by the City of Reading regarding
governmental and intergovernmental affairs. Full copies of said ordinances can
be found in the City Clerk's Office.]
§ A613-101. Governmental and intergovernmental affairs.
Ord. No. Date Description
Ord.   Date Description
No.
       12-
17a    24-  Prescribing the form of warrants for the City Treasury
       1913
       12-
23a    31-  Creating the Bureau of Accounts and establishing the office of accountant
       1913
       1-
32a    21-  Permitting City Council to exercise the powers of the Board of Health
       1914
       2-
44a    18-  Designating the Purchasing Agent as the City paymaster
       1914
14-    3-3- Directing the Department of Accounts and Finance and the City Controller to
1915   1915 cancel all uncalled for warrants made out against House Sewer District No. 1
            account and transferring any unused balance in said account to Bureau of Sewers
56-    9-
1915   22-  Declaring abandoned the work undertaken by the Metropolitan Electric Company
       1915
37-    4-   Entering into an agreement between the City and the Reading Transit and Light
1916   26-  Company relating to the paving and repairing of certain streets
       1916
52-    7-   Granting the Charles Evans Cemetery Company permission to erect a retaining
1916   19-  wall in consideration of the Company laying a cement or brick sidewalk on
       1916 Robeson Street
54-    8-2- Granting Belt Railroad privilege to erect and maintain an overhead bridge
1916   1916 across River Road
64-    10-  Granting permission to the Carpenter Steel Company to erect a railway siding on
1916   4-   River Road
       1916
       3-   Revising certain elevations on the topographical survey of the City to conform
7-1917 14-  with the plans and profiles on file in the Office of the City Engineer
       1917
31-    5-   Entering into an agreement between the City and Reading Transit and Light
1917   23-  Company concerning paving of certain streets
       1917
62-    12-  Revising certain elevations on the topographical survey of the City to conform
1917   19-  with the plans and profiles on file in the Office of the City Engineer
       1917
       1-   Abolishing the position of messenger in the Bureau of Law, Department of Public
2-1918 16-  Affairs
       1918
16-    6-6- Granting Reading Iron Company the privilege to erect and maintain overhead pipe
1918   1918 across South Street, 288 feet west of main line of Philadelphia and Reading
            Railway
25-    8-   Executing an agreement between the City and the Pennsylvania Railroad Company
1918   14-  for the purpose of setting back the up river abutment of the bridge across the
       1918 Lancaster Turnpike in the Eighteenth Ward
31-    10-  Permitting H.R. Epler and Son to lay and construct at its own expense and under
1918   16-  certain conditions a 3-inch steam pipe into a new building for heating purposes
       1918
15-    4-9- Granting the Philadelphia and Reading Railway Company the right to renew the
1919   1919 bridge now carrying its railroad tracks and to construct, operate and maintain
            railroad tracks
24-    6-   Executing an agreement between the City and the County of Berks for providing
1919   25-  payment of property damages to be incurred by the widening of Bingaman Street
       1919 and other street improvements
       5-   Permitting the Reading Transit and Light Company to use the rails in track
25-    21-  construction during the year 1919 under certain conditions and providing for
1919   1919 street paving incident to such construction and along the right-of-way of said
            company
41-    8-   Permitting the Carpenter Steel Company to lay and construct at its own expense
1919   29-  and under certain conditions a 2.5-inch steam line
       1919
46-    10-  Signifying the desire to increase indebtedness in the amount of $1,000,000 for
1919   1-   extensions and improvements and authorizing the submission of the question of
       1919 said increase of indebtedness to a vote of qualified electors in the City
57-    12-  Revising certain elevations on the topographical survey of the City to conform
1919   3-   with the plans and profiles on file in office of the City Engineer
       1919
63-    12-  Permitting the Carpenter Steel Company to erect and construct a tram track
1919   24-  crossing under certain conditions
       1919
71-    12-
1919   31-  Abolishing the position of assistant health officer in the Bureau of Health
       1919
74-    12-
1919   31-  Abolishing the position of general foreman in the Bureau of Parks
       1919
       3-   Granting Dives, Pomeroy and Stewart the privilege of constructing an
6-1920 17-  underground conduit
       1920
15-    3-
1920   29-  Abolishing the position of Clerk, Bureau of Health (laboratory service)
       1920
17-    3-   Granting the Curtis & Jones Company the right under certain conditions to
1920   29-  construct and maintain a bridge to carry a railroad track
       1920
31-    6-2- Reimbursing the General Fund for the amount of expenditures made in the
1920   1920 construction of lateral house sewers
43-    7-   Reconstructing of the superstructure of the Front Street Bridge over the
1920   21-  Lebanon Valley Railroad
       1920
       9-   Signifying the desire to increase indebtedness in the amount of $1,940,000 for
61-    27-  the construction and equipment of public comfort stations and authorizing the
1920   1920 submission of the question of said increase of indebtedness to a vote of
            qualified electors in the City
65-    12-  Granting permission to the Pennsylvania Railroad Company to construct
1920   22-  industrial sidings across Bingaman Street under certain conditions
       1920
15-    3-   Constructing a bridge over Angelica Creek to Fritz's Island and making
1921   23-  appropriations to pay
       1921
18-    3-   Constructing a storage building on City highway yards and making appropriations
1921   30-  to pay
       1921
28-    4-
1921   27-  Constructing fences on City highway yards and making appropriations to pay
       1921
46-    5-   Approving the survey and plan submitted by the City Engineer on June 16, 1920,
1920   18-  Ord. No. 46-1920
       1921
55-    10-  Appropriating $6,000 from unappropriated revenues of the General Fund as
1921   26-  follows: $2,000 to temporary employees, Department of Highways; $2,000 to
       1921 highway materials; $2,000 to Bureau of Sewers
58-    11-  Executing an agreement between the City and the County of Berks to provide
1921   16-  payment of the sum of $6,500 by the County of Berks to the City to assist the
       1921 City in the construction of a comfort station at Penn's Common
       1-   Revising the topographical survey of the City to conform with the plans and
5-1922 25-  profiles on file in the Office of the City Engineer
       1922
15-    3-   Permitting the Philadelphia and Reading Railway Company to construct, maintain
1922   22-  and operate a single-track railroad siding
       1922
26-    4-   Directing the Reading City Passenger Railway Company and Reading Transit and
1922   26-  Light Company to remove their tracks and facilities and releasing the companies
       1922 from the duty of paving, repaving and repairing Bingaman Street
59-    11-  Granting the Philadelphia and Reading Railroad Company the right to construct,
1922   15-  operate and maintain a single-track railroad siding
       1922
71-    12-  Revising certain lines and grades on the topographical survey to conform with
1922   30-  the plans and profiles on file in the office of the City Engineer
       1922
10-    2-7- Reducing the number of Patrolmen, Class B, from 20 to 18 in the Bureau of
1923   1923 Police
20-    5-2- Granting the Philadelphia and Reading Railway Company the right to construct
1923   1923 and operate a single-track railroad siding
37-    6-   Providing for street paving along the right-of-way of the Reading Transit and
1923   20-  Light Company for the payment of the cost of such paving and for the
       1923 disposition of moneys received by the City
68-    12-  Granting C.K. Whitner Co. the right under certain conditions to construct and
1923   19-  maintain a bridge across Cherry Street connecting store properties
       1923
       1-   Permitting Clinton Costchall to lay and construct a 6-inch steam pipe for
5-1924 30-  heating
       1924
7-1924 3-5- Changing part of the topographical survey
       1924
14-    2-
1924   27-  Abolishing the position of assistant Chief Inspector, Bureau of Water
       1924
20-    4-9- Changing the topographical survey in the Eighteenth Ward
1924   1924
28-    4-2- Abolishing the position of Park Sergeant, Bureau of Parks
1924   1924
29-    4-9- Abolishing the position of purchasing agent
1924   1924
31-    4-9- Designating the City Clerk as City Paymaster, providing for the drawing of all
1924   1924 warrants in payment of salaries and wages due officials and employees
47-    6-4- Assigning the duties of purchasing agent to the Superintendent of the
1924   1924 Department of Parks and Public Property
52-    7-   Granting consent to the relocation by the Reading & Southwestern Street Railway
1924   16-  Company and its present lessee, Reading Transit & Light Company, of a portion
       1924 of the track or route and appurtenant operation system
53-    7-9- Granting the Reading & Southwestern Street Railway Company and its present
1924   1924 lessee, Reading Transit & Light Company, the right and privilege to construct,
            maintain and operate a second track
65-    7-   Permitting the Kissinger Market House Company to lay and construct 6-inch steam
1924   23-  feed pipe and 4-inch steam return pipe
       1924
102-   1-   Constructing a retaining wall, concrete steps and cistern cover on the property
1924   14-  of Mary Ann Boyer estate
       1924
       1-   Fixing the time from which owners of real estate bounding and abutting Hoskins
4-1925 14-  Place shall be chargeable with interest upon the assessment made upon them for
       1925 costs and expenses of grading, guttering and paving the street
       1-   Fixing the time from which owners of real estate bounding and abutting Forest
5-1925 14-  Street shall be chargeable with interest upon the assessment made upon them for
       1925 costs and expenses of grading, guttering and paving the street
35-    7-1- Providing for the street, sidewalk and property improvements, surface and
1925   1925 subsurface necessary to accomplish the physical widening of Perkiomen Avenue
44-    8-   Entering an agreement with the Reading & Southwestern Street Railway Company,
1925   12-  and its present lessee, Reading Transit & Light Company, for the removal for a
       1925 period not to exceed 50 years of the street railway tracks
            Signifying a desire to increase the indebtedness of the City in the amount of
49-    9-   $2,457,000 for street improvements; for the enlargement of the sewage pumping
1925   30-  station and disposal plant; for house and storm sewers; and authorizing the
       1925 submission of the question of said increase of indebtedness to a vote of the
            qualified electors
       9-   Signifying a desire to increase the indebtedness of the City in the amount of
52-    30-  $750,000 for the purchase and acquisition of land and the erection of a
1925   1925 municipal building and authorizing the submission of the question of said
            increase of indebtedness to a vote of the qualified electors
49-    3-   Revising certain lines and grades on the topographical survey of the City to
1926   24-  conform with the plans and profiles on file in the office of the City Engineer
       1926
100-   7-   Granting Reading Transit Company the privilege of constructing a curve at the
1926   27-  intersection of Centre Avenue and Spring Street upon certain conditions
       1926
165-   9-   Signifying the desire to increase indebtedness in the amount of $2,000 for
1926   15-  water plant improvements and submitting the question of said increase to a vote
       1926 of the qualified electors
166-   9-   Signifying the desire to increase indebtedness in the amount of $1,405 for
1926   15-  sewerage pumping station and disposal plant improvements and submitting the
       1926 question of said increase to a vote of the qualified electors
25-    2-   Authorizing the payment of additional gratuities to the fire companies in the
1927   16-  Bureau of Fire for the year 1927
       1927
34-    2-   Revising certain lines and grades on the topographical survey of the City to
1927   23-  conform with the plans and profiles on file in the office of the City Engineer
       1927
69-    6-   Granting consent to the Reading Passenger Railway Company to permanently
1927   15-  abandon a portion of the tract or route and the appurtenant operating system
       1927
80-    6-   Granting to the Reading City Passenger Railway Company the right and privilege
1927   15-  to construct, maintain and operate a double-track branch-off terminating in a
       1927 single track
90-    7-
1927   20-  Authorizing the Reading Company to maintain 6 telephone poles
       1927
110-   8-   Signifying a desire to increase the indebtedness in the amount of $750,000 for
1927   31-  improvements to the water plant and water supply system and submitting the
       1927 question to a vote of the qualified electors
126-   9-   Permitting David Schein, Samuel R. Rosenberg, Benjamin Sher, George A. Rick,
1927   28-  John Rick and Paul Rick to lay heavy cast iron pipe conduits
       1927
182-   12-
1927   7-   Destating the construction and installation of topographical survey monuments
       1927
14-    1-   Amending an agreement between the City and the First Presbyterian Church to
1928   25-  extend the provisions of said agreement to the addition built to the City Hall
       1928
27-    3-   Entering into a contract between the Manufacturers' Appraisal Company and the
1928   14-  City for the rendering of assistance to the City Assessor in the assessment of
       1928 all property for municipal purposes
29-    3-   Providing an amicable settlement of damages and the transfer of title to the
1928   21-  City of real estate of Mark E. Paff situated in Maidencreek Township
       1928
45-    5-9- Executing an agreement employing Alexander F. Smith as architect for the work
1928   1928 to be done in and about the building situate on the northeast corner of Eighth
            Street and Washington Street
51-    5-   Permitting F.S. Wertz & Son. Inc., to construct, lay and maintain a conveyor
1928   23-  underground
       1928
63-    6-   Permitting Farmers-Kissinger Market House Company, Inc., to construct, lay and
1928   13-  maintain a conduit for steam supply
       1928
93-    8-8- Authorizing the Reading Company to relocate and remove tracts from its
1928   1928 westernmost tracks
113-   9-   Authorizing the Reading Company to relocate and remove tracts from its
1928   12-  westernmost tracks
       1928
131-   10-  Authorizing the Mayor and City Clerk to petition the Court of Quarter Sessions
1928   31-  for the vacating of certain roads
       1928
11-    2-   Placing the Detective Bureau of the City under the supervision and Control of
1929   27-  the Chief of Police and abolishing the position of Captain of Detectives
       1929
12-    2-
1929   27-  Authorizing the Brading Company to construct a platform
       1929
40-    6-   Permitting the Kaufmann Furniture Company to construct and maintain certain
1929   12-  lantern-type floodlights on cast iron standards at the curbline in front of
       1929 said property
48-    7-3- Granting the Reading Transit Company the privilege of removing present
1929   1929 northwestward tract branch-off
77-    10-  Granting the Reading Transit Company the privilege of removing the existing
1929   16-  northwestward curve in its track
       1929
90-    11-  Executing an agreement between the Secretary of Highways and the City for the
1929   20-  performance of work on certain streets in the City
       1929
       11-  Executing a contract between the City and the Reading City Passenger Railway
92-    27-  Company, Reading Traction Company and Reading Transit Company for the removal
1929   1929 for a period not exceeding 50 years of certain rails, ties and overhead
            facilities
57-    7-   Permitting Susquehanna Pipe Line Company to lay a 6-inch seamless steel pipe of
1930   23-  welded construction underground for the purpose of conveying gasoline
       1930
63-    8-6- Amending Ord. No. 57-1930
1930   1930
83-    10-  Executing a contract between the City and the County of Berks concerning the
1930   27-  Buttonwood Street Bridge
       1930
86-    11-  Permitting the Reading Company to construct, operate and maintain a railroad
1930   19-  tract or industrial siding
       1930
90-    12-  Permitting the Pennsylvania Railroad to extend its existing tracks for a
1930   17-  distance of about 140 feet
       1930
100-   12-  Permitting Liberty Dye Works, Inc., to lay, construct, maintain and operate a
1930   24-  4-inch wrought iron fuel oil pipeline subsurface from the center of the street
       1930 to the building line
107-   1-7- Abolishing the position of chief truck operator, Bureau of Highways
1930   1931
20-    3-   Executing a lease between the City and the Metropolitan Edison Company to lease
1931   11-  a duct, together with a cable, in the conduit owned and maintained by the
       1931 company
25-    4-1- Giving the consent of the City to the Commissioners of the County of Berks to
1931   1931 proceed with the construction of the proposed Buttonwood Street Bridge
42-    5-   Executing an agreement between the City and the Secretary of Highways for
1931   13-  street paving
       1931
46-    5-   Executing an agreement between the City and the Secretary of Highways for
1931   27-  street paving
       1931
72-    8-   Executing an agreement between the City and the Muhlenberg trustees for
1931   12-  settlement of damages on account of opening North Fifth Street through the
       1931 property of the trustees
77-    9-2- Executing an agreement between the City and the Reading for settlement of
1931   1931 damages on account of opening North Fifth Street through the property of the
            company
108-   12-  Executing a contract between the City, Reading Street Railway Company, Reading
1931   30-  Traction Company and the Reading & Southwestern Street Railway Company for the
       1931 abandonment of their franchises and removal of certain rails
117-   12-  Entering an agreement between the City and the Trustees of Exeter Monthly
1931   31-  Meeting of the Society of Friends for the planting of a private hedge,
       1931 construction of 2 gateways and a stone annex to the school house
3-1932 1-7- Abolishing the office of lieutenant of detectives of the
       1932 Department of Public Affairs
4-1933 4-5- Ratifying and confirming an agreement made 10-25-1932 between the Commonwealth
       1933 of Pennsylvania and the City for the construction of a roadway
13-    8-2- Providing payment to the J.R. Howarth Paper Company in the amount of $1,500 in
1933   1933 full satisfaction of its claim against the City
35-    9-   Signifying the desire to increase indebtedness in the amount of $1,850,000 to
1933   13-  improve water supply system pending the outcome of question posed in the
       1933 general election
37-    9-   Fixing the time and place for holding an election of the proposed increase of
1933   13-  indebtedness
       1933
40-    9-   Providing payment to the Windsor Service of the sum of $1,378.66 for the
1933   27-  construction of bituminous penetration wearing service on Mount Penn Boulevard
       1933
41-    11-  Executing an agreement between the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania and the City
1933   8-   for the construction of reinforced concrete roadway and appurtenances
       1933
17-    3-   Executing a contract between the City and the United States for the purchase
1934   14-  par value of the first maturities of the authorized issue of water loan bonds
       1934
38-    6-
1934   13-  Executing an agreement between the City and the Reading Company
       1934
59-    8-   Entering into an agreement with the Secretary of Highways providing for the
1934   29-  relocation of a section of State Highway Route 06124
       1934
73-    11-  Executing an agreement between the City and the Commonwealth providing for the
1934   28-  paving and improving of North Fifth Street
       1934
93-    1-2- Adopting certain agreements between the City with Angelica Water Company
1934   1935
95-    12-
1934   31-  Approving a grant agreement between the City and the United States of America
       1934
50     1-
(1932) 16-  Abolishing the position of policewoman
       1935
       1-
2-1935 16-  Executing a supplemental agreement between the City and the Reading Company
       1935
       3-   Executing an agreement between the City and the Board of trustees of the First
8-1935 13-  Presbyterian Church for placing and using a fire alarm striker in the tower of
       1935 the church for $100 per annum
33-    7-3- Entering an agreement between the City and the trustees of the Exeter Monthly
1935   1935 Meeting of the Society of Friends providing for the construction of 4 gateways
            and a stone annex
36-    8-7- Executing a lease between the City and the Metropolitan Edison Company
1935   1935
54-    11-
1935   20-  Amending Ord. No. 36-1935
       1935
64-    12-  Granting Delp-Knoll Grocery Company the right to use and maintain a single-
1935   18-  track railroad siding
       1935
73-    12-  Executing an agreement between the City and Commonwealth of Pennsylvania for
1935   26-  the maintenance of certain highways
       1935
8-1936 2-5- Amending Ord. No. 73-1935
       1936
26-    5-
1936   27-  Amending Ord. No. 73-1935
       1936
32-    7-
1936   15-  Amending Ord. No. 73-1935
       1935
40-    9-2- Authorizing the Chief Engineer of the Bureau of Water to extend the contract
1936   1936 with C.W. Good, contractor
51-    10-  Authorizing Works Progress Administration Project No. 6809 for the construction
1936   7-   of a municipal airport and making appropriations
       1936
65-    10-  Authorizing the Works Progress Administration to improve the forest in the
1936   21-  Antietam watershed area
       1936
70-    10-  Authorizing the Works Progress Administration for the improvement of the
1936   28-  playground at Drenkle Field, Mt. Penn Reservation
       1936
71-    10-  Authorizing the Works Progress Administration Project OP#2152, WP #3970 for the
1936   28-  improvement of playground at Fourteenth and Buttonwood Street
       1936
72-    10-  Authorizing the Works Progress Administration Projects OP#2819, WP #3975 for
1936   28-  the improvement of the parks by treating the trees
       1936
73-    10-  Authorizing the Works Progress Administration Projects OP#3456, WP #3982 for
1936   28-  the improvement of the playground on Sherman tract, Mt. Penn Reservation
       1936
74-    10-  Authorizing the Works Progress Administration Projects OP#4479, WP #3987 for
1936   28-  the improvement of Pendora Park
       1936
75-    10-  Authorizing the Works Progress Administration Projects OP#5871, WP #5005 for
1936   28-  the improvement of Schlegel Park
       1936
76-    10-  Authorizing the Works Progress Administration Projects OP#5815, WP #5961 for
1936   28-  preparation of the roadway and the laying of the stone base in Angora Road, Mt.
       1936 Penn Reservation
77-    11-
1936   4-   Amending Ord. No. 40-1936
       1936
82-    11-  Authorizing the Works Progress Administration to operate W.P.A. project
1936   25-  sponsor's proposal no. 24 P. & S., surveying and valuing all property of the
       1936 Bureau of Water
83-    11-  Authorizing Works Progress Administration to operate O.P. 165-23-4060 for the
1936   25-  construction of 6-inch water main on Bernville Road
       1936
15-    4-7- Authorizing Works Progress Administration Project for the improving and
1937   1937 equipping of playground, Drenkle Field, Mt. Penn Reservation
16-    4-   Authorizing Works Progress Administration Project OP#1237, WP #10962 for the
1937   21-  repairing of Twelfth and Union Streets
       1937
29-    6-   Transferring the supervision of the construction and development of the
1937   16-  municipal airport in Bern Township from the Department of Streets and Public
       1937 Improvements to the Department of Public Affairs
43-    7-   Authorizing Works Progress Administration Project for the purpose of improving
1937   21-  Penn's Common by removing old jail waits
       1937
56-    9-   Expressing the desire to increase indebtedness in the amount of $4,750,000 for
1937   29-  purpose of acquiring a electric generating plant and authorizing an election to
       1937 obtain the assent of the electors
58-    9-   Authorizing a settlement of a suit brought by Christian G. Bergendahl against
1937   29-  the City
       1937
72-    12-  Authorizing W.P.A. project for the purpose of improving and equipping
1937   8-   playground at Baer Park
       1937
75-    12-  Executing an agreement between the City and the Borough of West Reading to
1937   22-  provide the services of Plumbing Inspectors and examining board of the City to
       1937 the Borough
76-    12-  Recognizing the Historical Society of Berks County and Reading Museum and Art
1937   29-  Gallery
       1937
82-    1-1- Reassigning the Bureau of Water from the Department of Public Safety to the
1937   1938 Department of Parks and Public Property
2-1938 2-9- Authorizing Works Progress Administration Project for the purpose of improving
       1938 Neversink Playground
4-1938 3-2- Authorizing the Works Progress Administration Project for the construction and
       1938 placing of permanent-type park benches in various City parks and playgrounds
       3-   Improving the playgrounds at Front and Schiller Streets and on South Street
7-1938 23-  south of Pine Street
       1938
23-    7-6- Authorizing the National Youth Administration Project for the improvement of
1938   1938 Mt. Penn Reservation and other parks and recreational areas
25-    7-   Determining to eliminate unsafe or unsanitary dwelling units in the City,
1938   27-  approving a form of contract with the Reading Housing Authority and authorizing
       1938 the execution of said contract
43-    10-  Permitting the American Chain and Cable Co., Inc., to lay and construct at its
1938   5-   own expense a 2-inch oxygen pipe line across Bayonne Street
       1938
46-    10-  Constructing a branch library, making an appropriation and establishing a
1938   26-  construction account
       1938
47-    10-  Constructing a band shell in Penn's Common, making an appropriation and
1938   26-  establishing a construction account
       1938
48-    10-  Constructing a new park administration building, making an appropriation and
1938   26-  establishing a construction account
       1938
49-    10-  Constructing an observation tower on Mt. Penn Reservation, making an
1938   26-  appropriation and establishing a construction account
       1938
50-    10-  Constructing a fire house for the Junior Fire Company, making an appropriation
1938   26-  and establishing a construction account
       1938
52-    11-  Constructing a reservoir, making an appropriation and establishing a
1938   2-   construction account
       1938
53-    11-
1938   9-   Amending Ord. No. 43-1938
       1938
56-    11-  Constructing a concession building at the municipal airport, making an
1938   30-  appropriation and establishing an account
       1938
73-    12-  Authorizing Works Progress Administration Project for the providing of a water
1938   28-  supply from the Angelica Dam to the Garbage Disposal Plan
       1938
       2-   Approving the provisions of a proposed contract between the City and the
5-1939 15-  Reading Housing Authority with respect to municipal aid for low-rent housing
       1939 project
13-    3-8- Requiring the bonding of certain officials
1939   1939
30-    6-
1939   28-  Amending Ord. No. 13-1939
       1939
17-    4-   Executing an agreement between the City and Albert W. and Mary Golden for the
1940   17-  privilege of constructing a concrete conduit to carry electrical wires
       1940
47-    10-
1940   7-   Amending Ord. No. 13-1939
       1940
51-    10-
1940   30-  Amending Ord. No. 83-1939
       1940
35-    7-   Executing an agreement between the City and E. Richard Meining Company to
1941   23-  permit said Company to construct an 18-inch thromo tile standard conduit to
       1941 carry steam pipes
46-    9-   Limiting the liability of the City for workmen's compensation for members of
1941   24-  the volunteer fire department
       1941
5-1942 2-4- Amending Ord. No. 13-1939
       1942
11-    4-   Executing an underground sidewalk vault agreement between the City and
1942   29-  Metropolitan Edison Company
       1942
13-    5-6- Authorizing emergency suspension of City building, electrical, plumbing, water
1942   1942 regulations and house sewer ordinances to meet the shortages created by the war
            program
14-    5-6- Executing an underground sidewalk vault agreement between the City and
1942   1942 Metropolitan Edison Company
45-    10-  Transferring $2,800 from Bureau of Police to Recreation Board for the continued
1942   21-  operation of community centers, school gymnasium classes and small maintenance
       1942 crew
50-    1-2- Providing for the payment of bonuses to certain officers and employees of the
1942   1943 City for the duration of the present war emergency and 6 months thereafter
56-    1-2- Executing an agreement between the City and Wilson Products, Inc., granting the
1942   1943 privilege of Wilson Products, Inc., to construct and maintain a concrete-
            incased tile conduit to carry steam lines under Washington Street
       11-  Providing for the payment of a bonus to the superintendent of nurses, parochial
29-    17-  school nurse, venereal disease nurse, 14 nurses and Clerk to superintendent of
1943   1943 nurses of the Bureau of Health for the duration of the war emergency and 6
            months after
38-    12-  Providing for payment of an additional bonus to certain officers and employees
1943   29-  of the City for the duration of the war emergency and 6 months after
       1943
28-    11-  Providing for full settlement and discharge of the Reading Street Railway
1944   20-  Company from all duties and liability in respect to repairing certain streets
       1944 in the City
34-    12-
1944   27-  Amending Ord. No. 50-1942
       1944
35-    12-
1944   27-  Amending Ord. No. 38-1943
       1944
36-    12-  Providing for the payment of a 3rd additional bonus to certain officers and
1944   27-  employees of the City during the present water emergency and 6 months after
       1944
3-1945 3-7- Relating to future abandonments of the street railway lines owned by Reading
       1945 Street Railway Company
27-    10-  Executing an agreement between the City and Wertz Engineering Company granting
1945   10-  the company the privilege of constructing and maintaining a concrete-incased
       1945 tile conduit to carry steam lines under North Second Street
41-    1-2- Transferring the Bureau of City Planning from the Department of Accounts and
1945   1946 Finance to the Department of Streets and Public Improvements
42-    1-2- Amending Ord. No. 13-1939
1945   1946
       1-   Extending the liability of the City for the benefit of firemen of the volunteer
2-1946 23-  fire department of the City
       1946
3-1946 2-6- Granting Wilson Products Company, its successors and assigns the right under
       1946 certain conditions to construct and maintain a bridge across Thorn Street
45-    9-4- Executing an agreement between the City and Wilson products, Inc., to permit
1946   1946 Wilson Products, Inc., to construct and maintain 2 concrete-incased tunnels
            under Thorn Street
54-    11-  Granting Lincoln Tanning Company the privilege of extending their railroad
1946   13-  siding on the western sidewalk of Canal Street
       1946
       1-   Executing an agreement between the City and the Berks Home Building, Inc., to
3-1947 29-  grant the privilege of constructing and maintaining steel pipe heating lines in
       1947 transit pipe ducts
30-    10-  Approving and establishing grades, drainage structures and all other structures
1947   1-   appearing on the plan of the Department of Highways
       1947
37-    12-  Abolishing the Bureau of Planning and assigning its duties to the Bureau of
1947A  17-  Engineering
       1947
12-    4-   Granting Earle Hardware Manufacturing Company the right under certain
1948   28-  conditions to construct and maintain a bridge over and across Gregg Avenue
       1948
17-    6-   Approving and establishing grades, drainage structures and all other structures
1948   30-  appearing on the plan of the Department of Highways
       1948
12-    5-4- Granting G.H. Delp Co. the right to use and maintain a single-track railroad
1949   1949
22-    6-8- Rejecting the provisions of House Bill No. 1216 of the General Assembly
1949   1949
25-    6-   Granting the Polymer Corporation permission to construct and maintain a 3-inch
1949   15-  steel electric conduit and a 1-inch galvanized iron air pipe encased in 4-inch-
       1949 radius concrete
26-    6-   Authorizing payment by the Treasurer of the City the sum of $7,500 to the City
1949   15-  Bank and Trust Company from the City general and water improvement loan 1947
       1949 for consideration or release of damages by the City Bank and Trust
       3-   Accepting of certain payments in lieu of taxes from Reading Housing Authority
6-1950 15-  and approving a form of contract
       1950
13-    4-   Granting permission to the Parish Pressed Steel Company to construct and
1950   26-  maintain a 24-inch-by-18-inch underground reinforced concrete pipe trench under
       1950 the surface of the street
32-    9-6- Desiring to increase indebtedness in the amount of $700,000 for the
1950   1950 construction and erection of a new garbage disposal plant and calling an
            election for the purpose of obtaining the assent of the electors
33-    9-   Desiring to increase indebtedness in the amount of $500,000 for sewage disposal
1950   20-  plant improvements and calling an election for the purpose of obtaining the
       1950 assent of the electors
34-    9-   Permitting the Seaboard Paper Company to construct and lay beneath the surface
1950   20-  an existing tunnel a 1.25-inch oil feed pipe, 1-inch steel oil return pipe and
       1950 3/4 steel steam pipe
35-    9-   Desiring to increase indebtedness in the amount of $400,000 for water plant
1950   20-  improvements and calling an election for the purpose of obtaining the assent of
       1950 the electors
       2-
9-1952 13-  Requiring surety bonds for all persons holding any position in the City
       1952
       9-   Signifying the desire to increase the indebtedness in the amount of $3,000,000
45-    24-  for the purpose of funds to repairs and improvements and replacements to the
1952   1952 water system and calling an election for the purposes of obtaining the assent
            of electors
30-    10-  Authorizing the Treasurer to furnish insurance protection against losses
1953   21-  through fire, burglary, larceny, theft, robbery or forgery
       1953
38-    12-  Permitting Parish Pressed Steel Company permission to construct and maintain an
1953   23-  underground reinforced concrete pipe trench under surface of Weiser Street to
       1953 connect buildings
47-    10-  Declaring that the large dead tree on the east side of Weiser Street is a
1955   19-  public nuisance and a dangerous structure and authorizing the City Solicitor to
       1955 give notice to remove
67-    12-  Authorizing an excavation contract with the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania to
1955   28-  provide for certain improvements to Warren Street
       1955
10-    2-   Signifying the desire to increase the indebtedness in the amount of $4,500,000
1956   29-  for the purpose of funds for sewer improvements and calling an election for the
       1956 purposes of obtaining the assent of electors
42-    7-   Establishing a motor license fund for the deposit of monies received from the
1956   25-  Commonwealth and establishing use for the fund
       1956
            Executing a contract between the City and Carpenter Steel Company to provide a
23-    9-3- protected walkway for pedestrians; and a private roadway for emergency access
1958   1958 and relocation of existing telephone lines along proposed walk and roadway to
            carry the City's fire alarm system
25-    8-   Revising an agreement between the City and the Borough of Mt. Penn. for the
1958   13-  discharge of sewage into the sewage system
       1958
38-    1-7- Prescribing the number and compensation of the officers and employees of the
1958   1959 City
3-1959 4-1- Renewing the agreement between the City and G.H. Delp Co. for the right to use
       1959 and maintain a single-tract railroad siding
10-    3-2- Signifying the desire to increase the indebtedness in the amount of $950,000
1960   1960 for the purpose of funds for capital improvements and calling an election for
            the purposes of obtaining the assent of electors
10-    3-5- Reappointing Florin H. Monasmith as Fire Marshal for the City
1969   1969
54-    12-
1970   2-   Entering into a management contract with the Reading Parking Authority
       1970
56-    12-  Accepting the provisions of the Act of June 26, 1931, P.L. 1379, as amended,
1970   23-  respecting to the assessment of property within the City, for City and school
       1970 purposes commencing for the fiscal year 1972
19-    5-   Appointing the American Bank and Trust Co. of PA, Bank of Pennsylvania and
1971   19-  National Central Bank as depositories for the establishment of escrow accounts
       1971 under the Rent Withholding Act
47A-   1-
1971   19-  Authorizing the establishing of a firemen's pension fund
       1972
21-    5-4- Establishing a position of special counsel to independent boards and
1972   1972 commissions in the City
12-    3-7- Amending an agreement between the City and the Borough of Laureldale concerning
1973   1973 sewage disposal
13-    3-7- Amending an agreement between the City and the Borough of Mount Penn concerning
1973   1973 sewage disposal
15-    4-4- Establishing a business improvement district
1973   1973
16-    3-   Revoking the privilege to the Reading Steam Heat and Power Company to lay and
1973   21-  occupy mains or lines of pipes
       1973
41-    9-5- Authorizing the sale of housing permit listing, minus the phone numbers, as
1973   1973 prepared by the Data Processing Center
43-    8-   Executing an agreement between the City, Temple Borough Municipal Authority and
1973   15-  the Borough of Temple concerning sewage disposal
       1973
65-    12-  Waiving any type of legal prohibition pertaining to a compulsory arbitration
1973   31-  award with Firefighters Local 1803 in excess of a 1-year period and further
       1973 agreeing to the retroactivity of said award to January 1, 1974
20-    5-   Designating as the basis for paying for sidewalk improvements within the Penn
1975   14-  Square Business Improvement District as an assessment against all properties
       1975 benefitting from the improvements
39-    8-   Approving the award by the Reading Parking Authority of certain contracts in
1975   27-  connection with the construction of a surface parking facility
       1975
       2-   Levying and assessing the costs and expenses for the construction of sidewalks
9-1976 18-  and other improvements in the business improvement district known as "Penn
       1976 Square Improvement District"
       10-  Authorizing proper City officials to enter into a joint purchasing agreement
35-    20-  with the Townships of Lower Alsace, Exeter and Bern or between any political
1976   1976 subdivisions for the purpose of purchasing materials, supplies, services and/or
            equipment
38-    11-
1976   10-  Naming Berks County Trust Company as depository for the motor license fund
       1976
       8-   Approving a report submitted to City Council pursuant to § 206 of the Local
29-    10-  Government Unit Debt Act with respect to proceedings to qualify certain lease
1977   1977 rental debt of the City which is subject to exclusion from the appropriate debt
            limit of the City as self-liquidating debt
32-    8-   Establishing a business improvement district known as "Downtown East Business
1977   24-  Improvement District No. 1"
       1977
       4-   Entering into an agreement with the Reading Municipal Airport Authority
15-    25-  terminating the lease agreement between the Authority and the City for the
1979   1979 property of the Airport Authority in Bern Township to guarantee a loan of
            $500,000 by the Authority from National Central Bank
35-    7-9- Supplementing an appropriation for the purchase of capital assets consisting of
1980   1980 motor vehicles and other motorized equipment which shall be derived from sums
            received from the sale of a general obligation note of the City
       7-   Supplementing an appropriation for urban park and recreation recovery program
40-    30-  which shall be derived from sums received from the United States Department of
1980   1980 Interior, Heritage Conservation and Recreation Service for the development of a
            park and recreation recovery plan for the City
            Supplementing an appropriation for the media program which shall be derived
41-    7-   from sums received from the public committee for the humanities of
1980   30-  Pennsylvania, the community development block grant, outside contributions and
       1980 the City for the development of multimedia program to promote historic
            appreciation and preservation values for the City
       10-  Supplementing an appropriation for regulatory and warning sign program which
49-    22-  shall be derived from sums received from the Federal Highway Administration
1980   1980 under the Federal Aid Highway Act of 1976 and the City for the upgrading of
            regulatory and warning signs
       11-  Supplementing an appropriation for adaptive refuse study for the purpose of
54-    12-  conducting a feasibility study of endangered buildings in the City which shall
1980   1980 be derived from sums received from the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania Office of
            Historic Preservation, community development block grant and the City
       11-  Supplementing an appropriation of the feasibility study at Lake Ontelaunee Dam
55-    12-  in connection with the proposed hydroelectric development project which shall
1980   1980 be derived from proceeds of the loan agreement form the United States
            Department of Energy
13-    4-   Supplementing an appropriation for highway safety program which shall be
1981   29-  derived from sums received from the Federal Highway Administration for the City
       1981
34-    6-   Prescribing the number and compensation of the bargaining unit employees of
1981   19-  Local #1303 of I.A.F.F., Bureau of Fire Protection
       1981
41-    8-
1983   31-  Appointing Andrea J. Andrus to the position of patrol aid
       1983
50-    9-   Finalizing the 9th-year community development program budget for the period
1983   21-  from September 1, 1983, to August 31, 1984
       1983
76-    12-
1983   21-  Establishing and creating neighborhood opportunity areas
       1983
80-    12-
1983   28-  Transferring various personnel to various bureaus
       1983
83-    1-4- Creating a fund to provide for the potential contingency expenditure of sums of
1983   1984 money for the maintenance, repair and cost of replacement or updating parts of
            the sewage treatment system, including the treatment plant
       1-
4-1984 18-  Amending Ord. No. 80-1983
       1984
10-    2-8- Creating a checking account to provide for the potential expenditures of sums
1984   1984 of money for the refund of overcollected prior years' business privilege taxes
31-    3-   Establishing a separate account for the deposit of Pennsylvania Department of
1984   21-  Community Affairs funds for enterprise development area program
       1984
54-    5-   Appointing Michael N. Mavreles to Deputy Director of Accounts and Finance for
1984   30-  the period of time that Councilman Thomas W. Gajewski, as Director of Accounts
       1984 and Finance, is unavailable to perform his duties
55-    5-
1984   30-  Appointing Richard I. Boyer as First Deputy Fire Chief
       1984
56-    5-3- Appointing Michael J. Moyer as Second Deputy Fire Chief
1984   1984
92-    9-   Finalizing the 10th-year community development budget for the period of
1984   26-  September 1, 1984, to August 31, 1984
       1984
106-   11-
1984   14-  Approving the 1984 revision to the codified ordinances
       1984
77-    9-   Finalizing the 11th-year community development program budget for the period of
1985   18-  September 1, 1985 to August 31, 1986
       1986
88-    11-  Approving the editing and inclusion of certain legislation as parts of the
1985   6-   various component codes of the codified ordinances
       1985
92-    11-  Amending the 11th-year community development program budget for the year
1985   27-  September 1, 1985 to August 31, 1986
       1985
10-    2-5- Establishing a separate account for the deposit of Pennsylvania Department of
1986   1986 Community Affairs funds for the enterprise development area program
       2-   Levying and assessing the costs and expenses for the construction of certain
13-    12-  pedestrian areas, fountains, plants and landscaped areas, public walkways.
1986   1986 plazas, sidewalks, artwork and other improvements in the business improvement
            district known as "Downtown East Business Improvement District No. 1"
31-    4-   Establishing separate accounts for the fund for revitalization and economic
1986   16-  development, the housing development account and program income
       1986
79-    10-  Finalizing the 12th-year community development program budget for the period
1986   1-   September 1, 1986 to August 31, 1987
       1986
112-   12-
1986   31-  Appointing Dolores A. Lorah as Fire Marshal
       1986
       1-
5-1987 28-  Creating a facade improvement program
       1987
       2-   Electing Warren H. Haggerty, Jr. as Mayor for the term ending the first Monday
8-1987 18-  in January, 1988
       1987
       2-   Electing James A. Pollock to Council for the term ending the first Monday in
9-1987 18-  January, 1988
       1987
56-    8-5- Reinstating 2 Fire Drivers, Jeffrey S. Nein and Kerry E. Miller, from
1987   1987 suspension
61-    8-   Amending the 12th-year community development budget for the period of September
1987   12-  1, 1986, to August 31, 1987
       1987
68-    9-2- Establishing a separate account for the enterprise zone for revitalization and
1987   1987 economic development loan program
70-    9-9- Establishing a separate account for the facade improvement program
1987   1987
77-    9-   Finalizing the 13th-year community development program budget for period
1987   23-  September 1, 1987, to August 31, 1987
       1987
89-    11-  Appointing Steven E. Orlosky as Fire Training Officer in the Department of
1987   25-  Public Safety
       1987
91-    11-  Amending the 13th-year community development program budget for the period
1987   25-  September 1, 1987, to August 31, 1988
       1987
96-    12-  Amending 13th-year community development program budget for the period
1987   9-   September 1, 1987, to August 31, 1988
       1987
32-    4-
1988   13-  Increasing the bond amounts of various employees
       1988
53-    6-   Amending 13th-year community development program budget for the period
1988   15-  September 1, 1987, to August 31, 1988
       1988
57-    6-   Appointing Frank J. Nefos, Jr., to the position of Fire Driver I, Bureau of
1988   29-  Fire, Department of Public Safety
       1988
58-    6-   Appointing John R. Diehm to the position of Fire Driver I, Bureau of Fire,
1988   29-  Department of Public Safety
       1988
59-    6-   Appointing Timothy E. Swartz to the position of Fire Driver I, Bureau of Fire,
1988   29-  Department of Public Safety
       1988
60-    6-   Appointing William T. Stoudt, Jr., to the position of Fire Driver I, Bureau of
1988   29-  Fire, Department of Public Safety
       1988
61-    6-   Appointing Frederick S. Kellenberger to the position of Fire Driver I, Bureau
1988   29-  of Fire, Department of Public Safety
       1988
62-    6-   Appointing Gary A. Mogel to the position of Fire Driver I, Bureau of Fire,
1988   29-  Department of Public Safety
       1988
63-    6-   Appointing Scot I. Landis to the position of Fire Driver I, Bureau of Fire,
1988   29-  Department of Public Safety
       1988
64-    6-   Appointing David H. Whitmoyer to the position of Fire Driver I, Bureau of Fire,
1988   29-  Department of Public Safety
       1988
66-    6-   Appointing Raymond E. Wertz, Jr., to the position of Fire Driver I, Bureau of
1988   29-  Fire, Department of Public Safety
       1988
67-    6-   Appointing Stephen J. Serba to the position of Fire Driver I, Bureau of Fire,
1988   29-  Department of Public Safety
       1988
68-    6-   Appointing Keith D. Moyer to the position of Fire Driver I, Bureau of Fire,
1988   29-  Department of Public Safety
       1988
72-    7-6- Appointing James D. Howe, Jr., to the position of Patrolman Trainee, Bureau of
1988   1988 Police, Department of Public Affairs
73-    7-6- Appointing Mark A. Garrett to the position of Patrolman Trainee, Bureau of
1988   1988 Police, Department of Public Affairs
74-    7-6- Appointing Elizabeth M. Nester to the position of Patrolman Trainee, Bureau of
1988   1988 Police, Department of Public Affairs
75-    7-6- Appointing Todd E. Trupp to the position of Patrolman Trainee, Bureau of
1988   1988 Police, Department of Public Affairs
76-    7-6- Appointing Scott J. Anuszewski to the position of Patrolman Trainee, Bureau of
1988   1988 Police, Department of Public Affairs
78-    7-6- Appointing Joseph M. Walsh to the position of Patrolman Trainee, Bureau of
1988   1988 Police, Department of Public Affairs
79-    7-6- Appointing Christina L. Mayberry to the position of Patrolman Trainee, Bureau
1988   1988 of Police, Department of Public Affairs
80-    7-6- Appointing Nelson Oritz to the position of Patrolman Trainee, Bureau of Police,
1988   1988 Department of Public Affairs
81-    7-6- Appointing Roberto Fontanez to the position of Patrolman Trainee, Bureau of
1988   1988 Police, Department of Public Affairs
86-    7-6- Dismissing David L. Kramlich from the position of Patrolman III, Bureau of
1988   1988 Police
106-   9-7- Dismissing Alphonso Powers from position of Patrolman III, Bureau of Police
1988   1988
107-   9-
1988   14-  Amending the facade improvement program
       1988
113-   9-   Finalizing the 14th-year community development program budget for the period
1988   28-  September 1, 1988, to August 31, 1989
       1988
117-   10-  Amending the 14th-year community development program budget for the period
1988   19-  September 1, 1988, to August 31, 1989
       1988
22-    3-8- Amending the 14th-year community development program budget for the period of
1989   1989 September 1, 1988, to August 31, 1989
28-    3-   Dismissing Timmy S. Killian from the position of Patrolman III, Bureau of
1989   29-  Police
       1989
44-    5-
1989   24-  Appointing Timothy D. Raun to the position of Police Officer Trainee
       1989
45-    5-
1989   24-  Appointing Todd A. Graeff to the position of Police Officer Trainee
       1989
46-    5-
1989   24-  Appointing Robert P. Heiden to the position of Police Officer Trainee
       1989
47-    5-
1989   24-  Appointing Jeffrey A. Arroyo to the position of Police Officer Trainee
       1989
48-    5-
1989   24-  Appointing Craig Christman to the position of Police Officer Trainee
       1989
49-    5-
1989   24-  Appointing Francis P. Colosimo to the position of Police Officer Trainee
       1989
51-    5-
1989   24-  Appointing Barbara A. Conrad to the position of Police Officer Trainee
       1989
52-    5-
1989   24-  Appointing Ken A. Moyer to the position of Police Officer Trainee
       1989
53-    5-
1989   24-  Appointing Brenda L. Moore to the position of Police Officer Trainee
       1989
54-    5-
1989   24-  Appointing Edwin Santiago, Jr., to the position of Police Officer Trainee
       1989
55-    5-
1989   24-  Appointing Dale J. DeWald to the position of Police Officer Trainee
       1989
56-    5-
1989   24-  Appointing Edward D. Helm to the position of Police Officer Trainee
       1989
57-    5-
1989   24-  Appointing Jack E. Frey to the position of Police Officer Trainee
       1989
61-    5-
1989   30-  Appointing Michelle A. Groff to the position of Police Officer Trainee
       1989
62-    5-
1989   30-  Appointing Tracy L. Hoffman to the position of Police Officer Trainee
       1989
63-    5-
1989   30-  Appointing Joseph T. Cafoncelli to the position of Police Officer Trainee
       1989
69-    6-   Appointing Ronald E. Wentzel, Jr., to the position of Fire Driver I, Bureau of
1989   21-  Fire
       1989
70-    6-
1989   21-  Appointing Michael C. Welsh to the position of Fire Driver I, Bureau of Fire
       1989
71-    6-
1989   21-  Appointing Keith J. Eschleman to the position of Fire Driver I, Bureau of Fire
       1989
98-    10-  Finalizing the 15th-year community development program budget for the period of
1989   4-   September 1, 1989, to August 31, 1990
       1989
11-    2-   Amending the 15th-year community development program budge for the period of
1990   14-  September 1, 1989, to August 31, 1990
       1990
39-    4-   Amending the 15th-year community development program budget for the period of
1990   18-  September 1, 1989, to August 31, 1990
       1990
45-    5-9- Approving the editing and inclusion of certain ordinances as parts of various
1990   1990 component codes of the codified ordinances
49-    5-   Amending the 15th-year community development program budget for the period of
1990   23-  September 1, 1989, to August 31, 1990
       1990
50-    5-   Amending the 15th-year community development program budget for the period of
1990   23-  September 1, 1989, to August 31, 1990
       1990
51-    5-   Amending the 15th-year community development program budget for the period of
1990   30-  September 1, 1989, to August 31, 1990
       1990
55-    6-6- Dismissing Dale DeWald from his position of Patrolman Trainee
1990   1990
56-    6-6- Appointing Mark A. George as Fire Driver I, Bureau of Fire
1990   1990
57-    6-6- Appointing Donald R. Sassaman, Jr., as Fire Driver I, Bureau of Fire
1990   1990
58-    6-6- Appointing Gene A. Spotts as Fire Driver I, Bureau of Fire
1990   1990
66-    6-
1990   27-  Appointing Walter F. Balkiewicz as Police Officer Trainee
       1990
67-    6-
1990   27-  Appointing Bobby L. Moser as Police Officer Trainee
       1990
68-    6-
1990   27-  Appointing Edwin A. Leon as Police Officer Trainee
       1990
69-    6-
1990   27-  Appointing Philip N. Bentz as Police Officer Trainee
       1990
70-    6-
1990   27-  Appointing David K. Harer as Police Officer Trainee
       1990
71-    6-
1990   27-  Appointing Harold T. Shenk as Police Officer Trainee
       1990
72-    6-
1990   27-  Appointing Guy S. Lehman, Jr., as Police Officer Trainee
       1990
73-    6-
1990   27-  Appointing David A. Shilling as Police Officer Trainee
       1990
74-    6-
1990   27-  Appointing Craig M. Ziemba as Police Officer Trainee
       1990
75-    6-
1990   27-  Appointing John M. Pontician as Police Officer Trainee
       1990
76-    6-
1990   27-  Appointing Timothy M. Kelly as Police Officer Trainee
       1990
77-    6-
1990   27-  Appointing James Bolton as Police Officer Trainee
       1990
78-    6-
1990   27-  Appointing Judith K. Long as Police Officer Trainee
       1990
79-    6-
1990   27-  Appointing Luis A. Gonzales as Police Officer Trainee
       1990
80-    6-
1990   27-  Appointing William F. Strickler as Police Officer Trainee
       1990
81-    6-
1990   27-  Appointing Todd M. Iaeger as Police Officer Trainee
       1990
82-    6-
1990   27-  Appointing Robert G. Lombardo as Police Officer Trainee
       1990
83-    6-
1990   27-  Appointing Andrea J. Andrus as Police Officer Trainee
       1990
84-    6-
1990   27-  Appointing John P. Wasilko as Police Officer Trainee
       1990
85-    6-
1990   27-  Appointing Barry L. Rambo as Police Officer Trainee
       1990
86-    6-
1990   27-  Appointing Wendy L. Tag as Police Officer Trainee
       1990
87-    6-
1990   27-  Appointing Edward H. Winters as Police Officer Trainee
       1990
125-   10-
1990   3-   Appointing Nelson S. Berrios as Police Officer Trainee
       1990
126-   10-
1990   3-   Appointing John W. Rohrbach, Jr., as Police Officer Trainee
       1990
127-   10-
1990   3-   Appointing Frederick S. Brossman as Police Officer Trainee
       1990
128-   10-
1990   3-   Appointing Jodi B. Royer as Police Officer Trainee
       1990
129-   10-
1990   3-   Appointing Ivan R. Martinez-Rosa as Police Officer Trainee
       1990
130-   10-
1990   3-   Appointing Gerardo Vega as Police Officer Trainee
       1990
131-   10-
1990   3-   Appointing Salvatore Olivier as Police Officer Trainee
       1990
132-   10-
1990   3-   Appointing James D. Gresh as Police Officer Trainee
       1990
133-   10-
1990   3-   Appointing James M. Frank as Police Officer Trainee
       1990
134-   10-
1990   3-   Appointing Richard B. Dixon, Jr., as Police Officer Trainee
       1990
135-   10-
1990   3-   Appointing Jose A. Colon as Police Officer Trainee
       1990
171-   11-  Approving the editing and inclusion of certain ordinances as parts of various
1990   21-  component codes of the codified ordinances
       1990
178-   12-
1990   19-  Appointing George T. Kellenberger as First Deputy Fire Chief
       1990
179-   12-
1990   19-  Appointing Jeffrey L. Squibb as First Deputy Fire Chief
       1990
180-   12-
1990   19-  Appointing John M. Sands as Second Deputy Fire Chief
       1990
181-   12-
1990   19-  Appointing Nicholas E. Amicone as Second Deputy Fire Chief
       1990
50-    6-
1991   19-  Appointing Michele Ann Saranchak as Police Officer Trainee
       1991
51-    6-
1991   19-  Appointing Troy C. Heiser as Police Officer Trainee
       1991
52-    6-
1991   19-  Appointing Marc A. Pentheny as Police Officer Trainee
       1991
53-    6-
1991   19-  Appointing Michael P. Mullen as Police Officer Trainee
       1991
54-    6-
1991   19-  Appointing Barry L. Whitmoyer as Police Officer Trainee
       1991
55-    6-
1991   19-  Appointing Michael E. Kalin as Police Officer Trainee
       1991
56-    6-
1991   19-  Appointing Angel Cecilio as Police Officer Trainee
       1991
57-    6-
1991   19-  Appointing Felix L. Mateo as Police Officer Trainee
       1991
58-    6-
1991   19-  Appointing Timothy Jay Williams as Police Officer Trainee
       1991
59-    6-
1991   19-  Appointing Cory P. Dierolf as Police Officer Trainee
       1991
60-    6-
1991   19-  Appointing Michael A. Fizz as Police Officer Trainee
       1991
61-    6-
1991   19-  Appointing Eric T. Hartman as Police Officer Trainee
       1991
62-    6-
1991   19-  Appointing John W. Gooch as Police Officer Trainee
       1991
63-    6-
1991   19-  Appointing Nicholas P. Apostolou as Police Officer Trainee
       1991
64-    6-
1991   19-  Appointing Christopher L. Santoro as Police Officer Trainee
       1991
65-    6-
1991   19-  Appointing Gregory A. Harwell as Police Officer Trainee
       1991
79-    8-7- Retaining Frederick R. Mogel, Esquire, as special counsel to the Zoning Hearing
1991   1991 Board
85-    8-   Authorizing acting duty pay for Marsha L. VanGoethem to acting purchasing agent
1991   28-  during the absence of the Purchasing Agent
       1991
96-    10-  Amending the 16th-year community development program budget for the period of
1991   9-   September 1, 1990, to August 31, 1991
       1991
98-    10-  Amending the 16th-year community development program budget for the period of
1991   16-  September 1, 1990, to August 31, 1992
       1991
101-   10-  Finalizing the 17th-year community development program budget for the period of
1991   6-   September 1, 1991, to August 31, 1992
       1991
108-   11-  Approving the editing and inclusion of certain ordinances as parts of various
1991   6-   component codes of the codified ordinances
       1991
113-   11-
1991   20-  Appointing Christopher A. Loftus as Police Officer Trainee
       1991
114-   11-
1991   20-  Appointing William Santana, Jr., as Police Officer Trainee
       1991
115-   11-
1991   20-  Appointing Stephen D. Powell as Police Officer Trainee
       1991
116-   11-
1991   20-  Appointing Marc A. Pontician as Police Officer Trainee
       1991
117-   11-
1991   20-  Appointing Kyle D. Olinger as Police Officer Trainee
       1991
118-   11-
1991   20-  Appointing Kevin A. Berkel as Police Officer Trainee
       1991
119-   11-
1991   20-  Appointing Stuart M. Banser as Police Officer Trainee
       1991
120-   11-
1991   20-  Appointing Roger K. Lehman as Police Officer Trainee
       1991
123-   12-  Retaining the services of Anthony D. Giannascoli, Esquire, as an independent
1991   18-  contractor to research, analyze and litigate tax assessment appeals for
       1991 properties currently designated as tax exempt
11-    2-
1992   12-  Designated James F. Pfleger as ADA Coordinator
       1992
25-    3-   Appointing Robert W. Jacobs to serve as an intern in the office of Mark J.
1992   25-  Smolkowicz, Director of Public Safety
       1992
28-    3-
1992   25-  Transferring Michael J. Kurtz from Criminal Investigator to Sergeant
       1992
54-    6-
1992   10-  Appointing Jorge Alexsis Gonzalez as Police Officer Trainee
       1992
55-    6-
1992   10-  Appointing Kelly Kenneth Bagdon as Police Officer Trainee
       1992
56-    6-
1992   10-  Appointing Michael Mathew Bean as Police Officer Trainee
       1992
57-    6-
1992   10-  Appointing Arnold Paul Labella as Police Officer Trainee
       1992
58-    6-
1992   10-  Appointing John Michael Solecki as Police Officer Trainee
       1992
59-    6-
1992   10-  Appointing Felix Elmer Carr, Jr., as Police Officer Trainee
       1992
72-    7-8- Appointing Christoper B. Wade as Fire Driver I, Bureau of Fire
1992   1992
73-    7-8- Appointing Kent A. Born as Fire Driver 1, Bureau of Fire
1992   1992
74-    7-8- Appointing Quentin P. Englehart as Fire Driver I, Bureau of Fire
1992   1992
76-    7-8- Appointing Thomas J. Rehr as Fire Driver I, Bureau of Fire
1992   1992
78-    7-8- Authorizing acting duty pay for Marsha L. VanGoethem to acting purchasing agent
1992   1992 during the absence of the Purchasing Agent
84-    8-5- Appointing Robert J. Stichter as Fire Driver I, Bureau of Fire
1992   1992
85-    8-5- Appointing Merlin J. Planer as Fire Driver I, Bureau of Fire
1992   1992
86-    8-5- Appointing Timothy A. O'Brien as Fire Driver I, Bureau of Fire
1992   1992
94-    9-2- Amending the 17th-year community development program budget for the period of
1992   1992 September 1, 1991, to August 31, 1992
107-   10-  Finalizing the 18th-year community development program budget for the period of
1992   7-   September 1, 1991, to August 31, 1992
       1992
137-   12-  Electing Frank D. McCracken to fill the vacancy on Council created by the
1992   9-   resignation of Mark J. Smolkowicz
       1992
6-1993 2-3- Appointing Mark E. Kulp as Fire Driver I, Bureau of Fire
       1993
7-1993 2-3- Appointing Joseph J. DeCisco as Fire Driver I, Bureau of Fire
       1993
8-1993 2-3- Appointing Luis R. Rolon as Fire Driver I, Bureau of Fire
       1993
9-1993 2-3- Appointing David P. Doerrman as Fire Driver I, Bureau of Fire
       1993
10-    2-3- Appointing David R. Kochel as Fire Driver I, Bureau of Fire
1993   1993
11-    2-3- Appointing Thomas A. Leszczynski as Fire Driver I, Bureau of Fire
1993   1993
12-    2-3- Appointing James G. Stoudt as Fire Driver I, Bureau of Fire
1993   1993
13-    2-3- Appointing Richard I. Grauf as Fire Driver I, Bureau of Fire
1993   1993
14-    2-3- Appointing Ronald P. Banks as Fire Driver I, Bureau of Fire
1993   1993
15-    2-3- Appointing Kevin C. Petersen as Fire Driver I, Bureau of Fire
1993   1993
16-    2-3- Appointing Brian L. Sayers as Fire Driver I, Bureau of Fire
1993   1993
17-    2-3- Appointing Mark J. Ammon as Fire Driver I, Bureau of Fire
1993   1993
21-    2-   Approving the editing and inclusion of certain ordinances as parts of various
1993   10-  component codes of the codified ordinances
       1993
31-    3-
1993   10-  Appointing David D. Anderson as Police Officer Trainee
       1993
32-    3-
1993   10-  Appointing Eddie A. Campos as Police Officer Trainee
       1993
33-    3-
1993   10-  Appointing Jeffrey S. Parr as Police Officer Trainee
       1993
34-    3-
1993   10-  Appointing Jeffrey M. Reichart as Police Officer Trainee
       1993
35-    3-
1993   10-  Appointing Robert Bickham as Police Officer Trainee
       1993
60-    6-   Permitting Betty Drey who returned to City employment after resigning and
1993   22-  withdrawing her contribution to the pension fund to purchase her time prior to
       1993 her resignation although more than 1 year has elapsed since her employment
63-    6-
1993   30-  Appointing Richard I. Boyer as Fire Commissioner/Chief, Bureau of Fire
       1993
71-    7-
1993   28-  Appointing Steven E. Orlosky as First Deputy Fire Chief, Bureau of Fire
       1993
88-    7-   Amending the 18th-year community development program budget for the period of
1993   28-  September 1, 1991, to August 31, 1992
       1993
       7-   Retaining Alan S. Readinger, Esquire, to investigate and provide the City with
89-    28-  legal opinion with respect to certain medical benefits to be paid by Blue Cross
1993   1993 and Blue Shield relative to Councilwoman Dawn A. Schutt, her daughter and
            grandchild
95-    9-1- Authorizing acting duty pay for Marsha L. VanGoethem to acting purchasing agent
1993   1993 during the absence of the Purchasing Agent
108-   10-  Finalizing the 19th-year community development program budget for the period of
1993   13-  September 1, 1993, to August 31, 1994
       1993
122-   12-  Approving the editing and inclusion of certain ordinances as parts of various
1993   15-  component codes of the codified ordinances
       1993
       1-   Authorizing acting duty pay for Paul N. Hoffman from Fire Driver IV to Second
2-1994 12-  Deputy Chief for a period not to exceed 90 days
       1994
22-    4-6- Appointing Paul N. Hofmann as Second Deputy Fire Chief
1994   1994
27-    4-
1994   20-  Appointing Ralph E. Marks as Fire Driver I, Bureau of Fire
       1994
28-    4-
1994   20-  Appointing Robert C. Himes as Fire Driver I, Bureau of Fire
       1994
29-    4-
1994   20-  Appointing John R. Seyfert as Fire Driver I, Bureau of Fire
       1994
30-    4-
1994   20-  Appointing Patrick K. Kozak as Fire Driver I, Bureau of Fire
       1994
31-    4-
1994   20-  Appointing Michael J. Shoumlisky as Fire Driver I, Bureau of Fire
       1994
32-    4-
1994   20-  Appointing Scott A. Sayers as Fire Driver I, Bureau of Fire
       1994
33-    4-
1994   20-  Appointing Michael A. Biancone as Fire Driver I, Bureau of Fire
       1994
34-    4-
1994   20-  Appointing Andrew M. Kutz as Fire Driver I, Bureau of Fire
       1994
35-    4-
1994   20-  Appointing Richard A. Kuhn as Fire Driver I, Bureau of Fire
       1994
36-    4-
1994   20-  Appointing Brian L. Thorpe as Fire Driver I, Bureau of Fire
       1994
37-    4-
1994   20-  Appointing Donald E. Marks as Fire Driver I, Bureau of Fire
       1994
38-    4-   Authorizing acting duty pay for David M. Cituk while performing the duties of
1994   27-  Manager of Accounting, Bureau of Accounting and Fiscal Management, Department
       1994 of Accounts and Finance
40-    4-
1994   27-  Appointing Steven J. Johnson as Fire Driver I, Bureau of Fire
       1994
41-    4-   Authorizing acting duty pay for David C. Weiskercher while performing the
1994   24-  duties of superintendent of Sewage Treatment, Bureau of Sewage Treatment,
       1994 Department of Streets and Public Improvements
48-    5-4- Appointing Joel D. Avram as Police Officer Trainee
1994   1994
49-    5-4- Appointing David M. Bentz as Police Officer Trainee
1994   1994
50-    5-4- Appointing James H. Griffith as Police Officer Trainee
1994   1994
51-    5-4- Appointing William E. Kase as Police Officer Trainee
1994   1994
52-    5-4- Appointing Damond M. Kloc as Police Officer Trainee
1994   1994
53-    5-4- Appointing John J. Lackner, Jr., as Police Officer Trainee
1994   1994
54-    5-4- Appointing Pasquale Leporace, Jr., as Police Officer Trainee
1994   1994
55-    5-4- Appointing Brenda L. Lockhart. as Police Officer Trainee
1994   1994
56-    5-4- Appointing Andrew J. McClure as Police Officer Trainee
1994   1994
57-    5-4- Appointing Bruce T. Monteiro as Police Officer Trainee
1994   1994
58-    5-4- Appointing Cameron M. Parker as Police Officer Trainee
1994   1994
59-    5-4- Appointing Michael D. Rowe as Police Officer Trainee
1994   1994
60-    5-4- Appointing Mark E. Talbot as Police Officer Trainee
1994   1994
62-    5-   Hiring H. Robert Coldstan, Esquire, as an independent contractor to litigate
1994   11-  tax assessment appeals for the City
       1994
65-    5-   Amending the 19th-year community development program budget for the period of
1994   18-  September 1, 1993, to August 31, 1994
       1994
68-    5-   Authorizing acting duty pay for Kevin J. Edmunds from Foreman Grade 7, Step B,
1994   25-  to Acting Assistant Superintendent, Bureau of Sewage Treatment, Department of
       1994 Public Improvements
75-    6-   Retaining Russell W. Scianna, P.C., as independent counsel for the Reading
1994   15-  Zoning Hearing Board, Police Civil Service Board and Reading Fire Civil Service
       1994 Board
98-    8-
1994   31-  Appointing Thomas J. MacDougal, IV, as Police Officer Trainee
       1994
112-   10-  Appointing Fire Suppression Officers, Bureau of Fire, Department of Public
1994   12-  Safety
       1994
116-   10-  Appointing a Lt. Fire Training Officer, Bureau of Fire, Department of Public
1994   19-  Safety
       1994
118-   10-  Finalizing the 20th-year community development program budget for the period of
1994   19-  September 1, 1994, to August 31, 1995
       1994
120-   10-  Retaining David A. Binder, Esquire, as independent counsel for representation
1994   26-  of the City in all matters pertaining to sanitary sewage and the sanitary
       1994 sewage treatment plant
124-   11-
1994   9-   Terminating active duty pay for David M. Cituk as acting Manager of Accounting
       1994
125-   11-  Authorizing active duty payment for Corey Kemp while performing duties of
1994   9-   Manager of Accounting
       1994
129-   11-  Assigning fuel cards for use without charge for fuel to designated Humane
1994   16-  Society of Berks County vehicles in compliance with the City's commercial
       1994 fueline program
140-   12-
1994   28-  Transferring Jeffrey S. Ritz from Deputy Controller to Controller
       1994
11-    2-8- Appointing Terry W. Royce as Fire Driver I, Bureau of Fire
1995   1995
12-    2-8- Appointing James F. Wenrich as Fire Driver I, Bureau of Fire
1995   1995
13-    2-8- Appointing Eric M. Rios as Fire Driver I, Bureau of Fire
1995   1995
14-    2-8- Appointing Stuart M. Bansner as Fire Driver I, Bureau of Fire
1995   1995
15-    2-8- Appointing Jeffrey J. Weitzel as Fire Driver I, Bureau of Fire
1995   1995
16-    2-8- Appointing Robert A. Schmale as Fire Driver I, Bureau of Fire
1995   1995
17-    2-8- Appointing Judd E. Weber as Fire Driver I, Bureau of Fire
1995   1995
18-    2-8- Appointing John W. Dundore, Jr., as Fire Driver I, Bureau of Fire
1995   1995
19-    2-8- Appointing Scott L. Lerch as Fire Driver I, Bureau of Fire
1995   1995
20-    2-8- Appointing Timothy P. Sullivan as Fire Driver I, Bureau of Fire
1995   1995
21-    2-8- Appointing Larry B. Moyer, Jr. as Fire Driver I, Bureau of Fire
1995   1995
51-    5-   Approving the editing and inclusion of certain ordinances as parts of various
1995   17-  component codes of the codified ordinances
       1995
75-    8-2- Appointing Anthony C. Schappel, Jr., as Police Officer Trainee
1995   1995
76-    8-2- Appointing Andrew T. Shearer as Police Officer Trainee
1995   1995
77-    8-2- Appointing Robert W. Bowers as Police Officer Trainee
1995   1995
78-    8-2- Appointing David D. Andre as Police Officer Trainee
1995   1995
79-    8-2- Appointing Kyle D. Johnson as Police Officer Trainee
1995   1995
80-    8-2- Appointing Patrick J. Santoro as Police Officer Trainee
1995   1995
81-    8-2- Appointing Malcolm R. Eddinger as Police Officer Trainee
1995   1995
82-    8-2- Appointing Stacey C. Acker as Police Officer Trainee
1995   1995
83-    8-2- Appointing David A. Reidler as Police Officer Trainee
1995   1995
84-    8-2- Appointing Craig M. Hawley as Police Officer Trainee
1995   1995
85-    8-2- Appointing Craig L. Hevalow as Police Officer Trainee
1995   1995
86-    8-2- Appointing Eric C. Christ as Police Officer Trainee
1995   1995
87-    8-2- Appointing Mark A. Gresh as Police Officer Trainee
1995   1995
88-    8-2- Appointing Timothy J. Moore as Police Officer Trainee
1995   1995
114-   10-  Finalizing the 21st-year consolidation plan budget for the period of September
1995   18-  1, 1995, to August 31, 1996
       1995
       2-
6-1996 26-  Appointing Linda Kelleher as City Clerk
       1996
       2-   Appointing the Mayor and appointment of the Director of Accounts and Finance in
7-1996 26-  place of the Mayor as City Treasurer for the purpose of being the office for
       1996 receipt of applications and other documents under various state laws which
            designates the City Treasurer to receive applications and/or documents
15-    5-
1996   28-  Establishing a temporary fiscal code
       1996
25-    8-   Abolishing the office of City Engineer and replacing the position with a new
1996   26-  position of Director of Department of Public Works/City Engineer
       1996
35-    10-  Approving the editing and inclusion of certain ordinances as parts of various
1996   28-  component codes of the codified ordinances
       1996
44-    12-  Establishing the titles of full-time employment positions for the City for the
1996   23-  fiscal year 1997
       1996
47-    12-
1996   23-  Adopting temporarily the Pennsylvania Code of Ethics
       1996
       2-
3-1997 24-  Amending Ord. No. 44-1996
       1997
       4-   Authorizing the Reading Parking Authority to develop, administer and enforce a
8-1997 14-  system of on-street parking regulations for the City for a period of 2 years
       1997
       4-   Appropriating and transferring monies from the general fund balance for 1996
9-1997 28-  into the contingency account
       1997
10-    5-
1997   27-  Amending Ord. No. 44-1996
       1997
11-    5-   Appropriating and transferring monies from the police, public works, community
1997   27-  development and finance departments
       1997
11A-   7-
1997   14-  Extending the discount period for 1997 recycling bills until July 15, 1997
       1997
13-    8-
1997   25-  Abolishing the Penn Square Commission
       1997
23-    10-
1997   27-  Amending Ord. No. 44-1996
       1997
29-    12-  Placing on the ballot the question whether the City shall provide a
1997   8-   comprehensive system of municipal trash collection for residences within the
       1997 City limits for the primary election of 1998
       1-
2-1998 26-  Establishing the salaries for certain department directors for the year 1998
       1998
       1-   Establishing the full-time employee positions for the City for the fiscal year
3-1998 26-  1998
       1998
       1-
9-1998 13-  Increasing the number of uniformed police officers
       1998
14-    5-
1998   11-  Amending Ord. No. 3-1998
       1998
24-    7-
1998   13-  Amending Ord. No. 3-1998
       1998
49-    12-  Establishing the full-time employee positions for the City for the fiscal year
1998   28-  1999
       1998
53-    12-  Continuing a state of emergency declared by the Mayor to facilitate the
1998   21-  emergency repairs to the sewer system and surrounding infrastructure in the
       1998 vicinity of the 200 block of Rose Street
1-1999 2-8- Adding the position of Parks Maintenance Worker I to the salary ordinance and
       1999 eliminating the position of Custodian II
2-1999 2-8- Adding the position of full-time Clerk/Typist I to the salary ordinance and
       1999 eliminating the position of part-time Clerk/ Typist
       5-   Levying special assessments against benefited properties for the purpose of
8-1999 24-  alley reconstruction between the 1200 block of Alsace Road and the 1200 block
       1999 of Hampden Boulevard
       7-   Adding the position of Parks Maintenance Worker I to the salary ordinance and
9-1999 12-  eliminating the position of Custodian II
       1999
23-    1999 Requiring the Reading Regional Airport Authority to convey all assets of said
1999        Authority to the City
24-    10-
1999   11-  Adding the position of Foreman to the position ordinance
       1999
32-    11-  Adding the position of Parks Maintenance Worker I to the salary ordinance and
1999   22-  eliminating the position of Custodian II
       1999
34-    12-  Establishing the Capital Improvements Program for the funds of the City of
1999   13-  Reading for the fiscal year beginning January 1, 2000, and ending December 31,
       1999 2000
44-    12-  Establishing the full-time employee positions for the City of Reading for the
1999   27-  fiscal year 2000
       1999
7-     6-   Amending Ord. No. 44-1999 to remove certain specified positions from the Full-
2000A  26-  time Employee Position Ordinance
       2000
       9-   Levying special assessments against benefitted properties for the purpose of
17-    11-  alley reconstruction for properties fronting on the 1600 block of North 15th
2000   2000 Street and the 1600 block of Palm Street, between Union Street and North 15th
            Street
19-    10-  Amending Ord. No. 44-1999 to add a specified position to the Full-time Employee
2000   9-   Position Ordinance
       2000
29-    12-  Establishing the full-time employee positions for the City of Reading for the
2000   11-  fiscal year 2001
       2000
32-    11-  Increasing the benefits of certain members of the Reading Firemen's Pension
2000   27-  Fund who have terminated their services with the City of Reading
       2000
33-    11-  Increasing the compensation of certain members of the Officers and Employees
2000   27-  Retirement Fund who have terminated services with the City of Reading
       2000
       1-   Amending Ord. No. 29-2000 to remove certain specified positions from the Full-
1-2001 22-  time Employee Position Ordinance
       2001
       1-   Increasing the benefits of certain members of the Reading Police Pension Fund
2-2001 22-  who have terminated their services with the City of Reading
       2001
       3-   Levying special assessments against benefitted properties for the purpose of
6-2001 12-  alley reconstruction for properties fronting on the 1600 block of North 15th
       2001 street and the 1600 block of Palm Street, between Union Street and North 15th
            Street
       3-   Amending Ord. No. 29-2000 by eliminating and creating certain specified
8-2001 26-  positions for the Full-time Employee Position Ordinance
       2001
12-    4-9- Amending Ord. No. 29-2000 by eliminating and creating certain specified
2001   2001 positions for the Full-time Employee Position Ordinance
15-    5-   Amending Ord. No. 29-2000 by eliminating and creating certain specified
2001A  29-  positions for the Full-time Employee Position Ordinance
       2001
17-    6-   Amending Ord. No. 29-2000 by creating specified positions for the Full-time
2001A  11-  Employee Position Ordinance
       2001
18-    6-
2001   11-  Setting forth the salary of the Public Works Director
       2001
22-    10-  Amending Ord. No. 29-2000 for the Human Relations Office by eliminating and
2001   8-   creating certain specified positions for the Full-time Employee Position
       2001 Ordinance
29-    8-   Amending Ord. No. 29-2000 by eliminating and creating certain specified
2001   27-  positions for the Full-time Employee Position Ordinance
       2001
30-    9-   Amending Ord. No. 29-2000 by eliminating and creating certain specified
2001   10-  positions for the Full-time Employee Position Ordinance
       2001
35-    9-   Amending Ord. No. 29-2000 by creating certain specified positions for the Full-
2001   24-  time Employee Position Ordinance
       2001
37-    11-  Amending Ord. No. 29-2000 by eliminating and creating certain specified
2001   13-  positions for the Full-time Employee Position Ordinance
       2001
41-    11-  Establishing the full-time employee positions for the City of Reading for
2001   27-  fiscal year 2002
       2001
44-    12-  Amending Ord. No. 41-2001 by eliminating and creating certain specified
2001   10-  positions for the Full-time Employee Position Ordinance
       2001
45-    12-  Amending Ord. No. 41-2001 by creating a certain specified position for the
2001   10-  Full-time Employee Position Ordinance
       2001
46-    12-  Amending Ord. No. 29-2000 by creating a certain specified position for the
2001   10-  Full-time Employee Position Ordinance
       2001
       1-   Amending Ord. No. 41-2001 by eliminating 1 Tax Examiner position and adding 1
2-2002 28-  Delinquent Tax Collector in the Finance Tax Division area
       2002
       2-   Amending Ord. No. 41-2001 by eliminating the positions of Business Resource
5-2002 25-  Coordinator and Assistant Director of the Community Development Department and
       2002 the positions of Housing and Neighborhood Improvement Division Manager and
            Planning. Zoning and Economic Development Division Manager shall be created
       3-   The salary of the Public Works Director shall be increased from $65,000 per
7-2002 13-  annum to $68,000 per annum, payable in equal bimonthly installments
       2002
            The full-time positions for the City of Reading for the fiscal year beginning
       4-8- January 1, 2002, and ending December 31, 2002, shall be modified as follows:
8-2002 2002 remove 2 Data Entry Clerk positions in the Information Technology Division/
            Finance Department and create 2 Clerk/Typist positions in the Information
            Technology Division/Finance Department
11-    4-8- Amending Ord. No. 41-2001 by removing the Custodian II position from the Public
2002   2002 Works Department Parks Division and adding a Maintenance Worker I position to
            this division
            Amending Ord. No. 41-2001 by increasing the number of Criminal Investigators by
13-    4-8- transferring 3 officers from the Patrol Section to the Criminal Investigators
2002   2002 area, placing 1 in the Crime Prevention Unit and 2 in the Criminal
            Investigation Section
14-    4-8- Amending Ord. No. 41-2001 by adding 3 additional Patrol Officers, to bring the
2002   2002 total number of Police Officers in the Reading Police Department to 209
17-    4-   Amending Ord. No. 41-2001 by creating the position of Terminal Agency
2002   22-  Coordinator within the Police Department Communications Section
       2002
19-    5-   Providing for local reappointment after the federal census by local governing
2002   28-  bodies which are not entirely elected at large
       2002
26-    5-   Amending the Full-time Employee Position Ord. No. 41-2001, enacted November 27,
2002   28-  2001
       2002
22-    6-
2002   24-  Increasing the salaries of the 7 Department Directors and the Managing Director
       2002
30-    6-   Amending Ord. No. 42-2001 which established the full-time employee positions
2002   24-  for the City of Reading for the fiscal year 2002
       2002
37-    8-   Amending the full-time employee position Ord. No. 29-2001, enacted December 27,
2002   12-  2001
       2002
38-    8-   Amending the full-time employee position Ord. No. 29-2001, enacted December 27,
2002   12-  2001
       2002
50-    9-
2002   23-  Setting forth the salary of the Community Development Director
       2002
64-    12-
2002   9-   Amending Ord. No. 41-2001 for the 2002 full-time position
       2002
65-    12-
2002   9-   Amending Ord. No. 41-2001 for the 2002 full-time position
       2002
66-    12-  Amending the 2002 Full-time Employee Position Ordinance by upgrading 13
2002   9-   Maintenance Worker I positions to Maintenance Worker II positions in the Water
       2002 Authority section
61-    12-  Establishing the full-time positions and salaries for the City of Reading
2002   23-  employees, including budgeted and contractural increases for the fiscal year
       2002 beginning January 1, 2003, and ending December 31, 2003
69-    12-  Amending the 2002 Full-time Employee Position Ordinance by eliminating the
2002   23-  Clerk and Delinquent Water Bill Collector positions and creating 2 Customer
       2002 Service Representatives in the Water Authority section
10-    4-   Amending the City of Reading Full-time Position Ord. No. 61-2002 for the Public
2003   14-  Works Department Environmental Division
       2003
11-    4-   Setting the salary and benefit package for Charles R. Broad, upon the
2003   28-  confirmation of his appointment to Chief of Police for the City of Reading
       2003
21-    5-
2003   27-  Setting forth the salary of the City Solicitor
       2003
24-    6-   Amending the full-time employee positions for the City of Reading for fiscal
2003   23-  year 2003
       2003
25-    7-   Amending the full-time employee positions for the City of Reading for fiscal
2003   14-  year 2003
       2003
28-    8-
2003   25-  Increasing the salary of the Public Works Director, Charles Jones
       2003
31-    9-   Amending the full-time employee positions for the City of Reading for fiscal
2003   22-  year 2003
       2003
32-    10-  Amending Ord. No. 120-94 which retained David A. Binder, Esq., as independent
2003   13-  counsel for representation of the City of Reading in all matters pertaining to
       2003 sanitary sewage and the sanitary sewage treatment plant
            Amending Bill No. 40-2003, which established the full-time employee positions
       1-   for the City of Reading for the fiscal year 2004 by creating the position of
2-2004 26-  Clerk Typist I within the Traffic Division of the Police Department and by
       2004 eliminating the position of Chief Clerk within the Criminal Investigation
            Division of the Police Department
       2-   Repealing and recreating the full-time employee positions for the City of
8-2004 23-  Reading for fiscal year 2004
       2004
            Amending Bill No. 40-2003, which established the full-time employee positions
       2-   for the City of Reading for the fiscal year 2004 by creating the position of
9-2004 23-  Tax Clerk within the Tax Division of the Finance Department and by eliminating
       2004 the position of Delinquent Tax Clerk within the Tax Division of the Finance
            Department
11-    3-8- Setting the salary of the Human Resources Director, Lori L. Lillis, in
2004   2004 accordance with §
            706 of the City of Reading Home Rule Charter
18-    4-   Setting the salary of the Managing Director, R. Leon Churchill, Jr., in
2004   26-  accordance with §§
       2004 401 (a) and 706 of the City of Reading Home Rule Charter
            Amending Bill No. 40-2003, which established the full-time employee positions
28-    6-   for the City of Reading for the fiscal year 2004 by creating the position of
2004   15-  Mailroom/Tax Collector within the Tax Division of the Finance Department and by
       2004 eliminating the position of Mailroom Clerk within the Mailroom Division of the
            Finance Department
            Amending Bill No. 40-2003, which established the full-time employee positions
31-    7-   for the City of Reading for the fiscal year 2004 by creating the position of
2004   12-  Tradesman in the Public Works Department Property Maintenance Team and by
       2004 eliminating the position of Maintenance Worker III from the Public Works
            Department Property Maintenance Team
            Increasing the salary of the Chief of the Department of Fire and Rescue
35-    7-   Services, in accordance with §
2004   26-  706 of the City of Reading Home Rule Charter and Bill No. 22-2002 which
       2004 established a procedure for City Council to provide annual increases to the
            City's Department Directors
40-    9-   Levying special assessments against benefitted properties for the purpose of
2004   13-  alley improvement for the Morgantown Road — Bartlett Street neighborhood
       2004
51-    11-  Establishing the full-time positions for the City of Reading beginning January
2004   29-  1, 2005, and ending December 31, 2005
       2004
            Increasing the salary of the Public Works Director, Charles M. Jones, in
       1-   accordance with §
2-2005 24-  706 of the City of Reading Home Rule Charter and Bill No. 22-2002 which
       2005 established a procedure for City Council to provide annual increases to the
            City's Department Directors
       1-
5-2005 24-  Setting forth the salary of the City Solicitor
       2005
            Increasing the salary of the Finance Director, Tammie Kipp, in accordance with
14-    3-   §
2005   28-  706 of the City of Reading Home Rule Charter and Ord. No. 22-2002 which
       2005 established a procedure for City Council to provide annual increases to the
            City's Department Directors
            Increasing the salary of the Community Development Director, Adam Mukerji, in
15-    3-   accordance with §
2005   28-  706 of the City of Reading Home Rule Charter and Ord. No. 22-2002 which
       2005 established a procedure for City Council to provide annual increase to the
            City's Department Directors
            Increasing the salary of the Public Library Director, Frank Kasprowicz, in
17-    5-9- accordance with §
2005   2005 706 of the City of Reading Home Rule Charter and Ord. No. 22-2002 which
            established a procedure for City Council to provide annual increases to the
            City's Department Directors
       3-   Amending the Full-time Employee Position Ordinance for the City of Reading for
19-    25-  the fiscal year 2005 by adding the Management Position of Operations Supervisor
2005   2005 and eliminating the position of Chief Operator at the Waste Water Treatment
            Plant
30-    4-   Setting the salary of Joyce Pressley as Zoning Administrator for the City of
2005   11-  Reading
       2005
            Establishing the full-time employee positions for the City of Reading for the
31-    4-   fiscal year 2005 by eliminating the position of Tax Clerk within the Tax
2005   25-  Division of the Finance Department and by creating the position of Treasury
       2005 Clerk in the Treasury Division of the Finance Department during the time period
            of January 1, 2005 through and including December 31, 2005
40-    6-
2005   13-  Setting forth the salary of the Human Resources Director
       2005
43-    7-   Establishing the full-time employee positions for the City of Reading for the
2005   11-  fiscal year 2005 by increasing Police Department sworn officer authorization
       2005 from 208 to 209
            Increasing the salary of the Public Works Director, Charles M. Jones, in
53-    8-   accordance with §
2005   22-  706 of the City of Reading Home Rule Charter and Ord. No. 22-2002 which
       2005 established a procedure for City Council to provide annual increases to the
            City's Department Directors
55-    9-   Established the full-time employee positions for the City of Reading for the
2005   12-  fiscal year 2005 by removing the Network Analyst Position and creating the Web
       2005 Developer Position in the Information Technology Division
Res.   9-   Approving the agreement with the Pennsylvania Statewide Latino Coalition in
No.    12-  connection with a federal lawsuit filed in 2003, and authorizing Mayor Thomas
95-    2005 M. McMahon to execute any and all of the necessary documents for its completion
2005
            Increasing the salary of the Managing Director, R. Leon Churchill, Jr., in
58-    9-   accordance with §
2005   26-  706 of the City of Reading Home Rule Charter and Ord. No. 22-2002 which
       2005 established a procedure for City Council to provide annual increases to the
            City's Department Directors
            Established the full-time employee positions for the City of Reading for the
            fiscal year 2005 by removing the position of Director of Human Resources and
            creating the position of Director of Human Resources/Risk and Safety; removing
       9-   the position of Administrative Aide and creating the position of Human
60-    26-  Resources Supervisor; removing the position of HR Coordinator Pension and
2005   2005 creating the position of Confidential Secretary; removing the position of HR
            Coordinator Benefits and creating the position of Risk and Safety Manager and
            creating the position of Risk and Safety Specialist; removing the position of
            Personnel Specialist and creating the position of Employee Relations Specialist
            in the Human Resources/Risk and Safety Division
78-    11-  Ordering the immediate cessation of all construction and the replacement of all
2005   14-  streetscape improvements removed from the premises situate at 200-206 Penn
       2005 Street, Reading, Berks County, Pennsylvania
90-    12-  Establishing the full-time positions for the City of Reading beginning January
2005   19-  1, 2006, and ending December 31, 2006
       2005
            Increasing the salary of the Community Development Director, Adam Mukerji, to
       1-   $81,120, in accordance with §
4-2006 23-  706 of the City of Reading Home Rule Charter and Bill No. 22-2002 which
       2006 established a procedure for City Council to provide annual increases to the
            City's department directors
       6-   Setting forth the salary of the Finance Director, Ryan P. Hottenstein, at
5-2006 23-  $64,900 per annum, payable in equal bimonthly installments
       2006
8-2006 2-6- Setting forth the salary of the Chief of Police, William M. Heim, at $94,500
       2006 per annum, payable in equal bimonthly installments
10-    2-6- Amending the Full-time Employee Position Ordinance for the City of Reading by
2006   2006 eliminating the Secretary position and creating the Zoning Technician position
            in the Community Development Department, Planning Division
            Amending the Full-time Employee Position Ordinance for the City of Reading for
11-    2-   the fiscal year 2006 by adding a Human Relations Administrator position, Clerk
2006   13-  Typist II position/Intake Specialist, Human Relations Investigator, part-time
       2006 Fair Housing Investigator to the Human Relations office which is a Division of
            the Managing Director's office
16-    2-   Amending the 2006 Full-Time Employee Position Ordinance for the Public Works
2006   27-  Department by adding 2 positions of Shift Supervision; by removing the position
       2006 of Biosolids Supervisor; and by removing the position of Foreman
18-    3-   Increasing the salary of the Fire Chief, William H. Rehr, III, to $68,205.69
2006   13-  per annum
       2006
27-    4-
2006   16-  Creating the Reading Police Diversity Board
       2006
            Amending the 2006 Full-Time Employee Position Ordinance for the Public Works
            Department by adding the position of Utilities Division Manager; by adding the
33-    4-   position of Environmental Services Division Manager/Environmentalist; by adding
2006   24-  the position of Systems Superintendent; by removing the position of
       2006 Environmental Division Manager; by removing the position of Solid Waste
            Coordinator/ Environmentalist; and by removing the position of Collections
            System Manager
53-    7-   Amending the 2006 Full-Time Position Ordinance by creating a Division Manager
2006   24-  position and 3 Customer Service Representative positions for the Customer
       2006 Service Office
54-    8-   Increasing the salary of the Public Works Director, Charles M. Jones, to
2006   14-  $81,200, in accordance with §
       2006 706 of the City of Reading Home Rule Charter and Bill No. 22-2002
58-    8-   Increasing the salary of the Managing Director, R. Leon Churchill, Jr., to
2006   28-  $115,566, in accordance with §
       2006 706 of the City of Reading Home Rule Charter and Bill No. 22-2002
       9-   Amending the City of Reading Full-Time Position Ordinance, Bill No. 90-2005, by
62-    25-  eliminating the position of Legal Coordinator and creating the position of
2006   2006 Zoning Administrator in the Managing Director Department, Codes Enforcement
            Office
68-    10-  Amending the City of Reading Full-Time Position Ordinance by adding 2 full-time
2006   23-  positions of Investigator and a Clerk in the Human Relations Commission under
       2006 the Managing Director's Office
72-    11-  Amending the 2006 Full-Time Employee Position Ordinance by adding a Chief
2006   13-  Building Official and eliminating 1 Building Inspector in the Codes Division,
       2006 under the Managing Director's Office
78-    11-  Establishing the full-time employee positions for the City of Reading for the
2006   27-  fiscal year 2007
       2006
89-    12-  Setting forth the salary of the Fire Chief, William H. Rehr, III, at $70,933.82
2006   11-  per annum, payable in equal bimonthly installments
       2006
100-   12-  Establishing the full-time employee positions for the City of Reading for the
2006   26-  fiscal year 2007
       2006
15-    2-
2007   26-  Creating the Reading Fire Diversity Board
       2007
17-    3-   Directing the Berks County Board of Elections to place a referendum question
2007   26-  before City voters on the 2007 primary ballot which would amend the City of
       2007 Reading Home Rule Charter by providing neutrality of the Solicitor
17-    3-   Directing the Berks County Board of Elections to place a referendum question
2007-A 26-  before City voters on the 2007 primary ballot which would amend the City of
       2007 Reading Home Rule Charter by defining the term "residency
19-    3-
2007   26-  Setting forth the salary of the Police Chief, William M. Heim, at $100,737
       2007
27-    6-   Authorizing the Mayor to execute a certain "consent and joinder" to join in an
2007   12-  amended petition to terminate the Clinton F. Earl trust and consent to the
       2007 relief requested therein
38-    5-   Increasing the salary of the City Solicitor, Charles D. Younger, to $66,150 per
2007   29-  annum, payable in equal bimonthly installments
       2007
            Authorizing the Mayor to execute a certain "land-owner- grantee agreement"
41-    5-   between the City of Reading and the Riverplace Development Corporation and/or
2007   29-  Commonwealth of Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection to
       2007 establish solar-powered lighting along the Schuylkill River and Wyomissing
            Creek Trails
48-    7-9- Setting forth the salary of the Finance Director, Ryan P. Hottenstein, at
2007   2007 $68,450 per annum, payable in equal bimonthly installments
49-    6-
2007   25-  Transferring monies from the general fund balance to the general fund
       2007
55-    7-9- Setting forth the salary of the Library Director, Frank Kasprowicz, at $67,087
2007   2007 per annum, payable in equal bimonthly installments
57-    7-9- Amending the full-time employee positions for the City of Reading for the
2007   2007 fiscal year 2007
       7-   Directing the Berks County Board of Elections to place a referendum question
59-    23-  before City voters on the 2007 general election ballot which would amend the
2007   2007 City of Reading Home Rule Charter by changing the date for the presentation of
            the annual budget
       8-   Directing the Berks County Board of Elections to place a referendum question
60-    27-  before City voters on the 2007 general election ballot which would amend the
2007   2007 City of Reading Home Rule Charter by removing the relationship between the
            salary of the Mayor and City Auditor
69-    9-   Increasing the salary of the Public Works Director, Charles M. Jones, to
2007   10-  $83,636
       2007
73-    11-  Authorizing the Mayor to execute a certain "consent and joinder" to join in an
2007   13-  amended petition to terminate the Clinton F. Earl Trust and consent to the
       2007 relief requested therein
79-    11-  Setting forth the salary of the Human Resources Director, Christine Wheelen, at
2007   27-  $80,000 per annum, payable in equal bimonthly installments
       2007
81-    11-  Establishing the full-time employee positions for the City of Reading for the
2007   27-  fiscal year 2008
       2007
       1-
3-2008 28-  Providing a cost of living increase to police pensioners retired before 2000
       2008
       1-   Amending the 2008 City of Reading Full-time Position Ordinance by eliminating
4-2008 28-  the position of Sergeant and creating the position of Lieutenant in Police
       2008 Administration
            Increasing the salary of the Managing Director, R. Leon Churchill, Jr., in
12-    2-   accordance with §
2008   11-  706 of the City of Reading Home Rule Charter and Bill No. 22-2002 which
       2008 established a procedure for City Council to provide annual increases to the
            City's Department Directors
            Increasing the salary of the Fire Chief, William H. Rehr, III, in accordance
13-    2-   with §
2008   11-  706 of the City of Reading Home Rule Charter and Bill No. 22-2002 which
       2008 established a procedure for City Council to provide annual increases to the
            City's Department Directors
            Increasing the salary of the City Solicitor, Charles D. Younger, in accordance
22-    2-   with §
2008   25-  706 of the City of Reading Home Rule Charter and Bill No. 22-2002 which
       2008 established a procedure for City Council to provide annual increases to the
            City's Department Directors
            Increasing the salary of the Police Chief, William M. Heim, in accordance with
23-    2-   §
2008   25-  706 of the City of Reading Home Rule Charter and Bill No. 22-2002 which
       2008 established a procedure for City Council to provide annual increases to the
            City's Department Directors
25-    2-   Providing a cost-of-living increase to officers and employee pensioners retired
2008   25-  before 2002
       2008
28-    3-   Authorizing a reallocation in the amount of $5,000 from the City Council salary
2008   24-  line item to the City Council community promotions line item and authorizing
       2008 that sum to be transferred to Baseballtown Charities
32-    4-   Providing a cost of living increase to fire pensioners retired before January
2008   28-  1, 2000, and their beneficiaries
       2008
33-    4-   Amending the officers and employees pension ordinance by striking all reference
2008   28-  to beneficiaries
       2008
34-    4-   Amending the police pension ordinance by providing for a cost of living
2008   28-  increase to police pensioners' beneficiaries
       2008
       5-   Empowering the Reading Parking Authority Enforcement Officers to issue
37A-   27-  abandoned vehicle reports for all vehicles towed by the Reading Parking
2008   2008 Authority due to parking violations, in accordance with the Pennsylvania
            Vehicle Code, 75 Pa.C.S. § 7303.1
39-    5-   Establishing the City of Reading Local Redevelopment Authority to advise the
2008   27-  City of Reading City Council about the best reuse of the military facility
       2008 located on Kenhorst Boulevard within the municipal boundaries of the City
51-    8-   Amending the 2008 City of Reading Full-time Position Ordinance by reducing the
2008   11-  number of Police Officers to 208 and reducing the number of Firefighters/EMS
       2008 Personnel to 145
56-    9-   Creating a committee to assist, guide and participate in the amending, revising
2008   22-  and rewriting of the City of Reading Zoning Ordinance, Subdivision and Land
       2008 Development Ordinance (SALDO) and Official Map
58-    10-
2008   13-  Requiring that the POW/MIA flag be flown at all City- owned public buildings
       2008
60-    9-   Amending the City of Reading 2008 Full-time Position Ordinance by eliminating
2008   22-  the Community Development Manager position and creating the Community
       2008 Development Director position
61-    9-   Setting forth the salary of the Managing Director, Ryan P. Hottenstein, at
2008   22-  $100,000 per annum, payable in equal bimonthly installments
       2008
            Amending the 2008 City of Reading Full-time Position Ordinance by eliminating
            and creating positions by reducing the number of Health and Safety Clerks from
       10-  5 to 3; eliminating 3 Health and Safety Inspectors; eliminating 2 Health
64-    13-  Inspectors II; reducing the number of Property Maintenance Inspectors from 16
2008   2008 to 15; creating the position of Chief Clerk; and creating 3 First Level
            Supervisor positions. All aforementioned positions are listed in the Codes:
            Development and Inspection section of the 2008 Full-time Position Ordinance
            outlined herein
70-    10-  Setting forth the salary of the Community Development Director, Marty Hayes, at
2008   27-  $85,000 per annum, payable in equal bimonthly installments
       2008
77-    12-  Establishing the full-time employee positions for the City of Reading for the
2008   29-  fiscal year 2009
       2008
            Increasing the salary of the Police Chief, William M. Heim, in accordance with
       2-   §
7-2009 23-  706 of the City of Reading Home Rule Charter and Bill No. 22-2002 which
       2009 established a procedure for City Council to provide annual increases to the
            City's Department Directors
8-2009 2-9- Amending the City of Reading Full-time Position Ordinance by creating the
       2009 position of Gun Safety Coordinator
            Increasing the salary of Human Resources Director, Christine Wheelen, in
10-    3-9- accordance with §
2009   2009 706 of the City of Reading Home Rule Charter and Bill No. 22-2002 which
            established a procedure for City Council to provide annual increases to the
            City's Department Directors
14-    3-   Amending Bill 39-2008, § 2, defining the composition of the Reading Local
2009   23-  Redevelopment Authority and setting term expiration dates
       2009
19-    4-   Amending the full-time employee positions for the City of Reading for the
2009   13-  fiscal year 2009
       2009
21-    4-
2009   13-  Amending the FY 2006-2012 Capital Improvement Plan for the City of Reading
       2009
25-    4-   Setting forth the salary of the Finance Director, Carl Geffken, at $98,000 per
2009   27-  annum, payable in equal bimonthly installments
       2009
32-    6-
2009   22-  Amending the FY 2006-2012 Capital Improvement Plan for the City of Reading
       2009
35-    7-   Amending the full-time employee positions for the City of Reading for the
2009   27-  fiscal year 2009
       2009
48-    8-   Amending the full-time employee positions for the City of Reading for the
2009   24-  fiscal year 2009
       2009
52-    9-   Amending the full-time employee positions for the City of Reading for the
2009   14-  fiscal year 2009
       2009
65-    11-  Establishing the employment positions for the City of Reading for the fiscal
2009   16-  year 2010
       2009
       1-   Directing the Berks County Board of Elections to place a referendum question
1-2010 25-  before City voters on the 2010 primary ballot which would amend the City of
       2010 Reading Home Rule Charter by eliminating the Departments of Human Resources and
            Finance and creating the Department of Administrative Services
5-2010 2-8- Setting forth the salary of the Community Development Director, Daniel
       2010 Robinson, at $80,000 per annum, payable in equal bimonthly installments
14-    4-   Authorizing the Mayor to execute the intergovernmental cooperation agreement
2010   12-  between the City of Reading and the Reading School District for recycling
       2010 collection service
            Authorizing the City to enter into an intergovernmental agreement for the
22-    5-   purpose of providing mutual aid among the County of Berks, the Friendship Hook
2010   10-  and Ladder Company No. 1 of Boyertown, PA, the City of Reading and the Township
       2010 of Spring to assist first responders in the mitigation of emergencies related
            to trench and structural collapse
            Adopting and approving the implementation of the Recovery Plan, dated May 6,
       6-   2010, prepared by the Recovery Plan Coordinator pursuant to the Municipalities
26-    11-  Financial Recovery Act and authorizing and instructing the City Solicitor and
2010   2010 City Clerk to prepare for enactment, adoption and execution any ordinances,
            resolutions, agreements and other documents necessary for the implementation of
            the Recovery Plan
31-    7-   Setting forth the salary of the Director of Administrative Services, Carl E.
2010   12-  Geffken, at $95,550 per annum, payable in equal bimonthly installments
       2010
78-    10-  Amending the 2010 City of Reading Full-Time Position Ordinance by adding the
2010   25-  position of Controller in the Department of Finance
       2010
82-    10-  Amending the 2010 City of Reading Full-Time Position Ordinance by creating 3
2010   25-  Property Maintenance Aides
       2010
83-    10-  Amending the 2010 City of Reading Full-Time Position Ordinance by creating the
2010   25-  position of Community Development Program Manager
       2010
100-   12-  Establishing the full-time employee positions for the City of Reading for the
2010   13-  fiscal year 2011
       2010
       1-   Setting forth the salary of the Managing Director at $95,550 per annum, payable
4-2011 24-  in equal bimonthly installments
       2011
13-    2-   Setting forth the salary of the Director of Administrative Services at $91,350
2011   28-  per annum, payable in equal bimonthly installments
       2011
22-    4-   Setting forth the salary of the Chief of the Department of Fire and Rescue
2011   25-  Services at $77,500 per annum, payable in equal bimonthly installments
       2011
23-    5-   Amending the 2011 City of Reading Full-time Position Ordinance by eliminating 3
2011   23-  Sergeant positions from the Police Department
       2011
24-    5-   Amending the 2011 City of Reading Full-Time Position Ordinance by adding 1
2011   23-  Graffiti Abatement Manager in the Solid Waste Office
       2011
28-    6-   Amending the 2011 City of Reading Full-Time Position Ordinance by increasing
2011   27-  the number of Lieutenants within the Police Department from 8 to 10
       2011
29-    6-   Setting the salaries for the Mayor and Auditor at their 2011 rates until the
2011   27-  City is released from Act 47 by the DCED
       2011
       7-   Amending the 2011 City of Reading Full-Time Position Ordinance by creating 1
32-    11-  Project Accountant/Financial Specialist; 1 Wastewater Treatment Plant Utility
2011   2011 Engineer; 2 Industrial Mechanics; and 2 Maintenance Worker III - Electrical/
            Mechanical positions; and eliminating 4 Maintenance Worker III positions
            Amending the 2011 City of Reading Full-Time Position Ordinance to reflect the
            changes made necessary by the current collective bargaining agreement for the
       7-   Department of Fire and Rescue Services by adding a new category of Fire Fighter
34-    25-  4 Medic and setting the number of positions at 12; reducing the number of Fire
2011   2011 Fighter 4 positions to 76; adding 1 Fire Fighter 3 positions; adding 5 Fire
            Fighter 1 positions; reducing the number of Lieutenant - EMS positions to 3;
            reducing the number of Paramedic positions to 1; and adding 2 additional
            positions for EMS Wheelchair and Basic Life Support units
35-    7-   Directing the Berks County Board of Elections to place a referendum before City
2011   25-  voters on the 2012 primary election ballot which would amend the City of
       2011 Reading Home Rule Charter by changing the qualifications of the City Auditor
36-    7-   Amending the 2011 City of Reading Full-Time Position Ordinance by decreasing
2011   25-  the number of Property Maintenance Supervisors by 1, to a total of 2, and
       2011 increasing the number of Property Maintenance Inspectors by 1, to a total of 14
54-    10-  Amending the 2011 City of Reading Full-Time Position Ordinance by creating 1
2011   10-  Foreman position and 1 Clerk/ Typist II position
       2011
58-    10-  Amending the 2011 City of Reading Full-Time Position Ordinance by reducing the
2011   24-  number of sergeant positions in the Reading Police Department from 26 to 23
       2011
66-    11-  Establishing the full-time employee positions for the City of Reading for the
2011   28-  fiscal year 2011
       2011
15-    2-   Setting for the salary of the Director of the Department of Community
2012   27-  Development at $75,000 per annum, payable in equal bimonthly installments
       2012
30-    3-
2012   12-  Amending the 2012 fiscal year Employee Position Ordinance (Bill No. 66-2011)
       2012
55-    5-   Setting forth the salary for the Director of Fire and Rescue Services at
2012   14-  $72,000 per annum, payable in equal bimonthly installments
       2012
56-    5-   Amending Bill No. 30-2012, the 2012 City of Reading Full- Time Position
2012   29-  Ordinance, by adding 3 temporary employees to the Citizens' Service Center for
       2012 the Tax Amnesty Program
59-    5-   Setting forth the salary of the Managing Director of the City of Reading at
2012   29-  $100,000 per annum, payable in equal bimonthly installments
       2012
65-    6-   Setting the salary of the Administrative Services Director at $90,000 per
2012   14-  annum, payable in equal bimonthly installments
       2012
78-    7-9- Authorizing the City to enter into an intergovernmental cooperation agreement
2012   2012 for the purpose of creating a coalition to address the MS4 permit requirements
            for the Wyomisssing Creek Watershed
81-    8-   Authorizing the Mayor to execute the first addendum to the agreement of
2012   13-  cooperation between the City of Reading and the Reading School District setting
       2012 forth clarifications to the original agreement
84-    8-   Authorizing the City to enter into an intergovernmental cooperation agreement
2012   27-  with other municipalities to participate in the Berks County MS4 Steering
       2012 Committee
85-    8-   Authorizing the City to enter into a memorandum of understanding with the Berks
2012   27-  County Conservation District to control accelerated erosion and prevent
       2012 sediment pollution which may result from earth disturbance activities
96-    9-   Authorizing the Mayor to execute a memorandum of understanding between the
2012   24-  Reading Berks Association of Realtors and the City of Reading for the creation
       2012 of the Core Program within Reading
112-   11-  Authorizing the City to enter into an agreement with Muhlenberg Township and
2012   19-  Muhlenberg Township Authority for cooperation with regard to transportation,
       2012 treatment and disposal of sewage
113-   11-  Authorizing the administration to develop and implement an amnesty program to
2012   19-  encourage responsible parties to pay delinquent housing-related fees and
       2012 quality-of-life violations
121-   12-
2012   10-  Amending the Municipalities Financial Recovery Act recovery plan
       2012
126-   12-  Establishing employee positions for the City of Reading for the fiscal year
2012   17-  2013
       2012
9-2013 3-7- Amending the 2013 fiscal year employee position ordinance (Ord. No. 126-2012)
       2013 by adding 20 positions to the Department of Fire and Rescue Services
       2-   Authorizing the Mayor to execute an amended memorandum of understanding between
10-    25-  the Reading Berks Association of Realtors, Reading Redevelopment Authority and
2013   2013 the City of Reading to allow core properties to be marketed and sold as owner-
            occupied rentals
       3-   Authorizing the Mayor to execute an amended memorandum of understanding between
18-    25-  the Reading Berks Association of Realtors and the City of Reading to allow core
2013   2013 properties to be marketed and sold as owner-occupied single units or owner-
            occupied residential or mixed-use rentals
21-    3-
2013   25-  Amending the 2013 full-time position ordinance
       2013
30-    6-   Authorizing the Mayor to execute a lease agreement between the City of Reading
2013   24-  and WFMZ for the lease of a portion of the "WEEU Building" for the installation
       2013 of a transmitter on the existing tower
33-    6-   Authorizing the Mayor to negotiate terms and to execute any and all documents,
2013   22-  agreements, and any necessary papers to effectuate the conveyance of certain
       2013 Penn Street properties to the City of Reading
37-    8-   Amending the 2013 position ordinance transferring two positions from the
2013   26-  Streets Division of the Department of Public Works to the Solid Waste Division
       2013 of the Department of Public Works
39-    8-   Authorizing the Mayor to execute the intergovernmental agreement between the
2013   26-  City of Reading and the Reading School District for recycling collection
       2013 service
46-    10-  Amending the 2013 position ordinance transferring two positions from the
2013   14-  Department of Administrative Services, Citizens Service Center Division, to the
       2013 Waste Water Treatment Division of the Department of Public Works
54-    11-
2013   4-   Amending the Municipalities Financial Recovery Act recovery plan
       2013
64-    11-  Establishing the employee positions for the City of Reading for the fiscal year
2013   25-  2014
       2013
75-    12-
2013   9-   Memorandum of understanding regarding the Pagoda
       2013
84-    12-  Amending the recovery plan for the City of Reading adopted through Ordinance
2013   9-   No. 26-2010, as amended
       2013
            Directing the Berks County Board of Elections to place a referendum question
12-    2-   before City voters on the 2014 primary ballot which would amend the City of
2014   10-  Reading Home Rule Charter by requiring an amendment to the annual position
       2014 ordinance to authorize hiring of City personnel when such hiring exceeds the
            authorized number of employees
            Directing the Berks County Board of Elections to place a referendum question
14-    2-   before City voters on the 2014 primary ballot which would amend the City of
2014   10-  Reading Home Rule Charter to require appointment of a Charter Review Commission
       2014 at least every five years but no sooner than every three years and prohibit
            City officials or employees from serving on the Commission
       2-   Directing the Berks County Board of Elections to place a referendum question
15-    10-  before City voters on the 2014 primary ballot which would amend the City of
2014   2014 Reading Home Rule Charter to remove duplicative language and clarify the
            relationship between the Mayor and the Managing Director
            Directing the Berks County Board of Elections to place a referendum question
16-    2-   before City voters on the 2014 primary ballot which would amend the City of
2014   10-  Reading Home Rule Charter by deleting the requirement that the City Auditor be
       2014 a CPA with a minimum of five years' experience in business administration,
            accounting, management or municipal government
       2-   Directing the Berks County Board of Elections to place a referendum question
17-    10-  before City voters on the 2014 primary ballot which would amend the City of
2014   2014 Reading Home Rule Charter to allow one person to serve on two boards and
            commissions
            Directing the Berks County Board of Elections to place a referendum question
27-    4-   before City voters on the 2014 general election ballot which would amend the
2014   14-  City of Reading Home Rule Charter by deleting the requirement that the City
       2014 Auditor be a CPA with a minimum of five years' experience in business
            administration, accounting, management or municipal government
            Directing the Berks County Board of Elections to place a referendum question
28-    4-   before City voters on the 2014 general election ballot which would amend the
2014   14-  City of Reading Home Rule Charter to require appointment of a Charter Review
       2014 Commission at least every five years but no sooner than every three years and
            prohibit City officials or employees from serving on the Commission
       4-   Directing the Berks County Board of Elections to place a referendum question
29-    14-  before City voters on the 2014 general election ballot which would amend the
2014   2014 City of Reading Home Rule Charter to provide authority to the Mayor to issue
            administrative regulation and procedure
       4-   Directing the Berks County Board of Elections to place a referendum question
30-    14-  before City voters on the 2014 general election ballot which would amend the
2014   2014 City of Reading Home Rule Charter to allow one person to serve on two boards
            and commissions
       4-   Directing the Berks County Board of Elections to place a referendum question
31-    14-  before City voters on the 2014 general election ballot which would amend the
2014   2014 City of Reading Home Rule Charter to remove duplicative language and clarify
            the relationship between the Mayor and the Managing Director
            Directing the Berks County Board of Elections to place a referendum question
32-    4-   before City voters on the 2014 general election ballot which would amend the
2014   14-  City of Reading Home Rule Charter by requiring an amendment to the annual
       2014 position ordinance to authorize hiring of City personnel when such hiring
            exceeds the authorized number of employees
42-    4-
2014   24-  Authorizing a MOU between the City and the Reading Recreation Commission
       2014
55-    7-   Authorizing the execution of an intermunicipal cooperation agreement for the
2014   28-  disposal of electronic waste with the Berks County Solid Waste Authority
       2014
56-    7-   Amending the 2014 position ordinance by eliminating one position at the
2014   28-  wastewater treatment plant
       2014
57-    7-   Amending the 2014 position ordinance by decreasing the Developer positions from
2014   28-  two to one and increasing The Network Administrator position from one to two
       2014
59-    8-
2014   11-  Establishing the salary of the Director of Public Works
       2014
60-    8-   Amending the 2014 position ordinance by establishing the position of Assistant
2014   11-  Municipal Operations Manager in the Department of Administrative Services
       2014
70-    9-
2014   22-  Establishing the salary of the Director of Fire and Rescue Services
       2014
71-    10-  Authorizing the Mayor to execute the lease between the City of Reading and the
2014   27-  Reading Area Firefighters Museum, Inc., for premises located at 501 South 5th
       2014 Street
82-    10-  Authorizing the Mayor to execute the redevelopment agreement between the City
2014   27-  of Reading and Our City Reading for Penn Square properties
       2014
84-    12-  Authorizing the Mayor to execute a settlement agreement between the City of
2014   8-   Reading and Stevens & Lee for payment of certain legal bills incurred during
       2014 the Reading Area Water Authority lease negotiation
87-    11-  Amending the 2014 position ordinance by decreasing the Network Administrator
2014   10-  positions from two to one and creating one position of Network Engineer
       2014
       11-  Amending the recovery plan, adopted 6-11-2010, and authorizing and instructing
90-    24-  the City Solicitor and City Clerk to prepare for enactment, adoption and
2014   2014 execution any ordinances, resolutions, agreements and other documents necessary
            for implementation of the recovery plan
93-    11-  Establishing the employee positions for the City of Reading for fiscal year
2014   24-  2015
       2014
10-    3-9- Amending the 2015 position ordinance to add two part-time Graffiti Abatement
2015   2015 Technicians
26-    5-   Amending the 2015 position ordinance by reclassifying the Human Relations
2015   26-  Investigator position from one full-time position to one part-time position
       2015
33-    6-   Authorizing the lease of certain real property to the redevelopment authority
2015   22-  pursuant to a lease agreement
       2015
70-    11-  Establishing the employee positions for the City of Reading for fiscal year
2015   23-  2016
       2015
71-    11-
2015   23-  Amending the annual salary of the City Solicitor
       2015
       1-   Amending the 2016 position ordinance by eliminating the position of Business
4-2016 27-  Analyst and replacing it with a Staff Assistant; eliminating the position of
       2016 Confidential Secretary; and replacing the vacant IT Developer position with the
            IT Data Analyst position
12-    2-   Amending the 2016 position ordinance by eliminating the position of Housing and
2016   22-  Development Coordinator and replacing it with a Community Development
       2016 Coordinator
13-    3-   Amending the 2016 position ordinance by eliminating the Lead Clerk/Trainer
2016   28-  position and adding the Records Clerk position
       2016
19-    5-
2016   23-  Setting forth the salary of the Managing Director
       2016
20-    6-
2016   13-  Setting forth the salary of the Chief of Police
       2016
21-    6-   Amending the 2016 fiscal year employee position ordinance as set forth in the
2016   13-  2016 annual operating budget
       2016
43-    10-
2016   10-  Setting forth the salary of the Director of Community Development
       2016
44-    10-  Authorizing the entrance into an intergovernmental cooperation agreement
2016   10-  between the City of Reading and the Reading School District for recycling
       2016 collection
51-    10-
2016   24-  Amending the 2016 position ordinance for the Public Works Operations Division
       2016
78-    8-
2017   14-  Memorandum of understanding with the Berks County Conservation District
       2017
81-    8-   Amending the 2017 position ordinance by reclassifying the Clerk typist II
2017   28-  position to Secretary in the Department of Fire and Rescue Services.
       2017
90-    9-   Authorizing the city to enter into a restated intergovernmental cooperation
2017   25-  agreement for the Wyomissing Creek Watershed Coalition to address the MS4
       2017 permit requirements.
102-   11-  Establishing the employee positions for the City of Reading for fiscal year
2017   27-  2018
       2017
       1-   Authorizing the Mayor to execute the lease between Eco-Site, LLC, a Delaware
3-2018 10-  Limited Liability Company and the City of Reading for a monopole within Hampden
       2018 Park
       2-
7-2018 26-  Setting forth the salary of the Solicitor in the Department of Law
       2018
12-    2-   Amending the 2018 position ordinance to authorize one part- time position in
2018   26-  the Law Department and adding one additional part-time position in the Zoning
       2018 Division
21-    6-   Approving creation of the Mt. Penn Preserve Partnership Council of Governments
2018   25-  (MP3 COG) to foster a cooperative effort to implement components from the Mt.
       2018 Penn Preserve Master Plan and implement other regional initiatives.
22-    6-   Amending the 2018 Position ordinance to authorize one full-time position for a
2018   25-  Planning Manager in the Community Development Department Zoning Division.
       2018
26-    6-   Authorizing the Mayor to execute a cooperative purchasing agreement with the
2018   25-  Reading Housing Authority.
       2018
37-    7-9- Amending the 2018 position ordinance to reclassify the position of arborist
2018   2018 into the position of arborist/foreman in the Shade Tree Fund.
67-    10-  Amending the 2018 position ordinance by creating the position of community
2018   8-   response coordinator
       2018
68-    10-  Amending the 2018 position ordinance in the Police Department Administration
2018   22-  Division by changing the civilian part-time administrative assistant to the
       2018 Police Chief to a full- time position
75-    11-
2018   26-  Amending Ord. No. 68-2018
       2018
83-    12-  Establishing the employee positions for the City of Reading for fiscal year
2018   10-  2019
       2018
       3-
8-2019 11-  Setting forth the salary of the Director of Administrative Services
       2019
20-    5-   Amending the 2019 position ordinance to authorize a pay rate increase for part-
2019   28-  time telecommunicator position in the Police Special Service Division
       2019
Res.   9-9-
80-    2019 Appointing members to the Charter Review Commission
2019
37-    9-
2019   23-  Setting forth the salary of the Director of Community Development
       2019
Res.   9-
96-    23-  Renewal of agreement for recycling collection service (Reading School District)
2019   2019
47-    10-  Amending the 2019 employee position ordinance, changing the position of
2019   28-  Division Manager in the Community Development Department to Deputy Director
       2019
54-    11-  Amending the 2019 position ordinance by making the part-time clerk a full-time
2019   12-  secretary in the Zoning Division
       2019
58-    12-  Establishing the employee positions for the City of Reading for the fiscal year
2019   9-   2020
       2019
62-    12-
2019   9-   Authorizing the increase in the compensation for Police Academy instructors
       2019
16-    2-   Amending the 2020 Position Ordinance - to authorize a pay rate increase for
2020   10-  video services unit (VSU) video relief monitor position in the Police Special
       2020 Service Division
19-    2-
2020   10-  Setting forth the salary of the Managing Director
       2020
20-    2-   Setting forth the salary of the Property Maintenance Manager in the Community
2020   24-  Development Department
       2020
21-    2-
2020   24-  Setting forth the salary of the Community Development Director
       2020
24-    2-   Amending the personnel code by amending the salary range for the Public Works
2020   24-  Director and Community Development Director
       2020
29-    3-   Authorizing the city to suspend all standard operating procedures under the
2020   16-  city purchasing policy pursuant to the declaration of disaster emergency
       2020 (COVID-19)
Res.   3-   Ratifying a declaration of disaster emergency (COVID-19) and authorizing the
41A-   16-  continuance and renewal of the declaration not to exceed 90 days or until
2020   2020 further action is taken by the Council
41-    4-
2020   27-  Setting forth the salary of the Chief of Police
       2020
Res.   4-   Creating an emergency fund to provide loans and grants to small businesses
71-    27-  affected by the COVID-19 public health emergency
2020   2020
44-    5-   Amending the 2020 Position Ordinance - authorizing reclassification of an
2020   11-  administrative position in the Mayor’s office to include a Chief of Staff
       2020
Res.   5-   Authorizing city to include escalator clauses in paving contracts using liquid
83-    11-  fuels tax funds
2020   2020
Res.   5-
85-    11-  Confirming A. Elizabeth Kraft as City Solicitor
2020   2020
Res.   6-8- Extending and renewing the declaration of disaster emergency (COVID-19) issued
108-   2020 March 6, 2020
2020
Res.   6-8-
109-   2020 Temporarily setting aside certain formal requirements for sidewalk cafes
2020
48-    6-   Reenacting Bill No. 29-2020, authorizing the city to suspend all standard
2020   15-  operating procedures under the city purchasing policy pursuant to the
       2020 declaration of disaster emergency (COVID-19)
       7-   Directing the Berks County Board of Elections to place a referendum question
53-    13-  before city voters on the 2020 general election ballot which would amend the
2020   2020 City of Reading Home Rule Charter by repealing the residency requirement for
            the Managing Director
       7-   Directing the Berks County Board of Elections to place a referendum question
54-    13-  before city voters on the 2020 general election ballot which would amend the
2020   2020 City of Reading Home Rule Charter by repealing the residency requirement for
            the heads of departments, offices and agencies
56-    7-   Amending the 2020 Position Ordinance to reclassify the Capital Projects Manager
2020   13-  position as Deputy Director PW and Project Manager
       2020
58-    8-   Amending the 2020 Position Ordinance to authorize salary increase for Police
2020   10-  Records Supervisor
       2020
63-    9-   Reenacting Bill No. 48-2020, authorizing the city to suspend all standard
2020   14-  operating procedures under the city purchasing policy pursuant to the
       2020 declaration of disaster emergency (COVID-19)
Res.   11-
166-   9-   Confirming Abraham Amorós as Managing Director
2020   2020
76-    11-
2020   23-  Setting the salary of the Managing Director
       2020
82-    12-
2020   14-  Establishing the employee positions for fiscal year 2021.
       2020
85-    12-
2020   14-  Setting the salary of the Human Resource Director.
       2020
Res.   12-
179-   14-  Appointing Timothy Waldman to the Electrical Examining Board.
2020   2020
Res.   12-
180-   14-  Adopting a background check policy.
2020   2020
93-    12-  Executing a lease agreement for office space within City Hall for US
2020   28-  Congresswoman Houlahan.
       2020
Res.   1-4- Authorizing the execution of a parking facilities agreement with the Reading
182-   2021 Parking Authority.
2020
Res.   12-  Ratifying the local disaster declaration initiated by the Emergency Management
183-   21-  Coordinator.
2020   2020
Res.   12-  Authorizing the promotion of Firefighter/EMT John Naylor to Lieutenant-Fire
184-   28-  Prevention Officer.
2020   2020
Res.   12-  Ratifying the collective bargaining agreement between the City and the
186-   28-  International Association of Firefighters (IAFF) Local 1803.
2020   2020
12-    2-   Amending the 2021 position ordinance to reclassify Human Resource Assistant to
2021   22-  a Full-Time Training and Employment Coordinator.
       2021
14-    2-
2021   22-  Establishing the employee positions for fiscal year 2021.
       2021
Res.   2-
25-    22-  Approving a promotion increase in salary for Codes Manager.
2021   2021
27-    4-
2021   12-  Increasing salary of Chief of Police.
       2021
30-    4-   Authorizing the amendment of the 2021 position ordinance to reassign two
2021   26-  officers from the patrol division to the criminal investigations division who
       2021 will be assigned to the Pennsylvania State Police Auto Theft Taskforce.
Res.   3-   Authorizing the Mayor to sign and submit an application for a PA DCNR Community
34-    22-  Conservation Partnerships Program grant for a rehabilitation project at the
2021   2021 Reading Iron Playground.
Res.   3-
35-    25-  Appointing members of the Youth Commission.
2021   2021
Res.   4-
43-    26-  Reappointing Ann Sellers to the Environmental Advisory Council.
2021   2021
Res.   4-
44-    26-  Appointing Ryan Yanchocik to the Recreation Commission.
2021   2021
Res.   5-
46-    10-  Authorizing an additional bank account for the 2021 fiscal year.
2021   2021
Res.   5-   Appointing Serenity Plaza, representing Council District 5, to the Youth
47-    10-  Commission.
2021   2021
Res.   5-
48-    10-  Appointing Elta Jackson-Henry to the Diversity Board.
2021   2021
50-    6-   Authorizing the entrance into an intergovernmental cooperation agreement
2021   28-  between the city and the Reading School District.
       2021
Res.   5-   Authorizing the Managing Director of the city to sign and submit the PennDOT
51-    24-  traffic signal maintenance agreement.
2021   2021
52-    6-
2021   28-  Setting forth the salary of the City Solicitor.
       2021
Res.   6-1- Ratifying the collective bargaining agreement between the city and American
52-    2021 Federation of State, County and Municipal Employees (AFSCME) local 3799
2021        effective January 1, 2021 and expiring December 31, 2022.
Res.   5-
54-    24-  Confirming Frederick T. Lachat, III, as City Solicitor.
2021   2021
Res.   6-
55-    14-  Authorizing the Mayor to execute a PY2021 Home Action Plan Amendment.
2021   2021
Res.   6-   Authorizing certain city officials to use the PennDOT dotgrants on-line
57-    14-  reporting system to file the required liquid fuels forms annually.
2021   2021
Res.   6-
58-    14-  Authorizing the Mayor to file an application for RACP funds.
2021   2021
Res.   6-
60-    14-  Appointing Samantha Martinez-Escobar to the Youth Commission.
2021   2021
Res.   6-   Authorizing Public Works Director to sign and submit PennDOT permit application
60A-   28-  forms and other related forms for the construction of the Marion Street Station
2021   2021 project.
            Directing the Berks County Board of Elections to place a referendum before City
61-    8-9- voters on the 2021 general election ballot which would amend the City of
2021   2021 Reading Home Rule Charter by eliminating the requirement for the city's Public
            Works Director to be an engineer.
63-    9-   Directing the Berks County Board of Elections to place a referendum before City
2021   13-  voters on the 2022 primary election ballot which would amend the City of
       2021 Reading Home Rule Charter by eliminating Charter Section 907.
Res.   6-   Appointing Lynanne Bohn to the Board of Health with a term ending December 31,
67-    28-  2026.
2021   2021
Res.   6-   Appointing Donald Snyder to the Plumbing Board with a term ending December 31,
68-    28-  2027.
2021   2021
72-    9-
2021   27-  Setting forth salary of the Deputy Chief of Police.
       2021
Res.   7-   Appointing Donna Reed as the Council Representative to the America250PA Berks
72-    26-  County Commission.
2021   2021
73-    10-
2021   11-  Increasing salary of the Wastewater Treatment Plant Laboratory Supervisor.
       2021
Res.   7-   Appointing Michael McDevitt to the Historical Architectural Review Committee
75-    26-  with a term ending July 26, 2026.
2021   2021
Res.   7-   Appointing Pamela Gockley to the Shade Tree Commission with a term ending
76-    26-  August 31, 2026.
2021   2021
77-    10-
2021   11-  Increasing the salary of the Auditing Coordinator Position.
       2021
Res.   8-   James Schlegel reappointed to the First Energy Stadium Commission with a term
81-    23-  ending August 18, 2026.
2021   2021
Res.   8-   Stacey Taylor reappointed to the Human Relations Commission with a term ending
82-    23-  February 14, 2025.
2021   2021
Res.   8-   Appointing Maria Delgado to the Housing Authority with a term ending December
83-    23-  31, 2026.
2021   2021
Res.   8-   Michael Kautter reappointed to the Fire/Building Code Board of Appeals with a
84-    23-  term ending December 31, 2025.
2021   2021
Res.   9-   Jerry Jones appointed to the Blighted Property Review Committee with a term
87-    13-  ending September 13, 2025.
2021   2021
Res.   9-   Rebecca Noviello appointed to Environmental Advisory Council with a term ending
88-    13-  September 13, 2024.
2021   2021
90-    12-
2021   13-  Establishing the employee positions for the City for the fiscal year 2022.
       2021
Res.   10-  Ratifying the collective bargaining agreement between the City and the American
93-    11-  Federation of State, County and Municipal Employees (AFSCME) Local 2763
2021   2021 regarding salary changes and other provisions with an effective date of January
            1, 2021.
Res.   10-  Appointing Nehemiah Diaz Lopez, representing Council District 2, to the Youth
94-    11-  Commission with a term ending July 1, 2024.
2021   2021
Res.   10-  Authorizing the City to enter into an agreement with the County of Berks for
95-    25-  consolidated dispatch services.
2021   2021
Res.   11-
97-    1-   Appointing individuals to the City Redistricting Committee.
2021   2021
Res.   11-  Michael Micozzi is reappointed to the Reading Public Library Board with a term
99-    8-   ending December 31, 2026.
2021   2021
Res.   11-  Authorizing submission of the PY2021 Action Plan to the United States
100-   8-   Department of Housing and Urban Development.
2021   2021
Res.   11-
102-   8-   Authorizing the promotion of Sergeant Aaron Demko to the rank of Lieutenant.
2021   2021
Res.   11-  Appointing Michael J. Gombar, Jr., Esquire to the position of Council
102A-  22-  Solicitor.
2021   2021
Res.   11-
103-   8-   Authorizing the promotion of Officer Daniel Egbert to the rank of Sergeant.
2021   2021
Res.   11-  Appointing Nelson DeLeon to the Planning Commission with a term ending April 1,
103A-  22-  2025.
2021   2021
Res.   12-  Authorizing the City to execute a stipulated settlement in recycling
105-   13-  litigation.
2021   2021
Res.   12-  Appointing Rogelio Flores to the Youth Commission with a term ending July 1,
107-   13-  2023.
2021   2021
Res.   12-  Appointing Mark Cianciosi to the Code and License Appeals Board with a term
108-   13-  ending December 13, 2024.
2021   2021
Res.   12-  Authorizing the addendum to the agreement with Kenhorst Borough, for the City
110-   27-  to provide police service for the year 2022.
2021   2021
Res.   12-  Authorizing the City to enter into a partnership agreement with Olivet Boys &
112-   27-  Girls Club for management of Youth Police Academy
2021   2021
Res.   1-
1-2022 10-  Authorizing bank accounts for 2022.
       2022
Res.   1-   Ratifying the declaration of disaster emergency executed by the Mayor and
2-2022 10-  Council President and authorizing the continuance and renewal of the
       2022 declaration of disaster emergency.
       3-   Eliminating the Executive Assistant position in the Mayor's Office and creating
5-2022 14-  a second Special Assistant position.
       2022
Res.   1-   Appointing Kyle Zeiber to the Berks County Reading Area Transportation Study
6-2022 24-  (RATS) Technical Committee.
       2022
Res.   1-
8-2022 24-  Appointing Johanny Cepeda-Freytiz as Council Vice President.
       2022
Res.   1-
9-2022 24-  Appointing Linda A. Kelleher as City Clerk.
       2022
       1-   Directing the Berks County Board of Elections to place a referendum question
10-    24-  before city voters on the 2022 primary ballot which would amend the City of
2022   2022 Reading Home Rule Charter by eliminating the requirement for the City's Public
            Works Director to be an engineer
Res.   1-   Reappointing Craig Breneiser to the Fire Civil Service Board with a term ending
10-    24-  January 24, 2026.
2022   2022
Res.   1-   Appointing Sarah Crothers to the Environmental Advisory Council with a term
11-    24-  ending January 24, 2025.
2022   2022
Res.   1-   Reappointing Robert Conklin to the Planning Commission with a term ending April
12-    24-  1, 2025.
2022   2022
Res.   2-   Appointing Jeff Waltman as Council representative to the Berks Community Action
19-    14-  Program (BCAP) with Brianna Tyson as alternate.
2022   2022
Res.   2-   Appointing Donna Reed as Council liaison to the BCTV Board with Brianna Tyson
20-    14-  as alternate.
2022   2022
Res.   2-   Appointing Johanny Cepeda-Freytiz as Council representative to the Blighted
21-    14-  Property Review Committee with Brianna Tyson as alternate.
2022   2022
Res.   2-   Appointing Donna Reed as Council representative on the Conversion Therapy Board
22-    14-  with Johanny Cepeda-Freytiz as alternate.
2022   2022
Res.   2-   Appointing Melissa Ventura as Council representative to the Diversity Board
23-    14-  with Johanny Cepeda-Freytiz as alternate.
2022   2022
Res.   2-   Appointing Jeffrey Waltman as Council representative to the Downtown
24-    14-  Revitalization Public Private Partnership (P3) with Johanny Cepeda-Freytiz and
2022   2022 Donna Reed as alternates.
Res.   2-   Appointing Marcia Goodman-Hinnershitz as Council representative to the
25-    14-  Environmental Advisory Council with Brianna Tyson as alternate.
2022   2022
Res.   2-   Appointing Johanny Cepeda-Freytiz as Council liaison to the Human Relations
26-    14-  Commission.
2022   2022
Res.   2-   Appointing Jeffrey Waltman as Council representative to the Local Redevelopment
27-    14-  Authority.
2022   2022
Res.   2-   Appointing Marcia Goodman-Hinnershitz as Council representative to the Mt. Penn
28-    14-  Preserve Council of Governments Executive Committee.
2022   2022
Res.   2-   Appointing Marcia Goodman-Hinnershitz as Council representative on the Other
29-    14-  Post-Employment Benefits (OPEB) Board with Johanny Cepeda-Freytiz as alternate.
2022   2022
Res.   2-   Appointing Donna Reed as Council liaison to the Planning Commission with
30-    14-  Johanny Cepeda-Freytiz as alternate.
2022   2022
Res.   2-   Appointing Donna Reed as Council liaison to the Reading Area Transportation
31-    14-  Study Coordinating Committee with Jeffrey Waltman as alternate.
2022   2022
Res.   2-   Appointing Marcia Goodman-Hinnershitz and Melissa Ventura as Council
32-    14-  representatives to the Recreation Commission with Wesley Butler as alternate.
2022   2022
Res.   2-   Appointing Marcia Goodman-Hinnershitz and Johanny Cepeda- Freytiz as Council
33-    14-  representatives to the School District Work Group with Wesley Butler as
2022   2022 alternate.
Res.   2-
34-    14-  Appointing Donna Reed as Council liaison to the Shade Tree Commission.
2022   2022
Res.   2-
35-    14-  Appointing Donna Reed as Council liaison to the Stadium Commission.
2022   2022
Res.   2-   Appointing Melissa Ventura, Johanny Cepeda-Freytiz and Wesley Butler as Council
36-    14-  liaisons to the Youth Commission.
2022   2022
36-    4-   Amending position ordinance to add two full-time and two part- time Downtown
2022   25-  Commercial Corridor Ambassadors.
       2022
Res.   2-   Appointing Marcia Goodman-Hinnershitz to the Audit Committee with Johanny
37-    14-  Cepeda-Freytiz as alternate.
2022   2022
37-    4-
2022   25-  Setting forth the salary of the Chief of Fire and Rescue Services.
       2022
Res.   2-   Appointing Marcia Goodman-Hinnershitz to the Revenue Committee with Johanny
39-    14-  Cepeda-Freytiz as alternate.
2022   2022
Res.   2-   Naming EMS Deputy Chief Michael Sninsky as the Deputy Emergency Management
40-    14-  Coordinator to assist the Emergency Management Coordinator.
2022   2022
Res.   2-   Reappointing Cecile Grimshaw to the Reading Area Water Authority with a term
42-    14-  ending January 1, 2027.
2022   2022
Res.   2-   Appointing Dale Eisenhofer to the HVAC Board with a term ending December 31,
43-    14-  2026.
2022   2022
Res.   2-   Reappointing Kathryn Cobb-Holmes to the Human Relations Commission with a term
44-    14-  ending February 14, 2026.
2022   2022
Res.   2-   Appointing Peter Rye to the Planning Commission with a term ending April 1,
45-    14-  2026.
2022   2022
49-    7-   Authorizing the addition of Deputy Managing Director to the position of Finance
2022   11-  Director along with salary adjustment.
       2022
Res.   2-   Authorizing the engagement agreement between the City and EducationWorks, Inc.
50A-   28-  for the creation of the City of Reading Climate Corps.
2022   2022
Res.   2-   Appointing Beatriz Gonzalez to the Youth Commission, representing Council
51-    28-  District 2, with a term ending July 1, 2022.
2022   2022
Res.   2-   Appointing William Dorward to the Equal Business Opportunity Board with a term
52-    28-  ending February 28, 2025.
2022   2022
Res.   2-   Appointing Charles Jones as an alternate to the Zoning Hearing Board with a
53-    28-  term ending January 1, 2027.
2022   2022
       6-   Directing the Berks County Board of Elections to place a referendum question
53-    27-  before city voters on the 2022 general election ballot which would amend the
2022   2022 City of Reading Home Rule Charter by allowing the capital budget public hearing
            to be held on the same date as the operating budget public hearing.
       6-   Directing the Berks County Board of Elections to place a referendum question
54-    27-  before city voters on the 2022 general election ballot which would amend the
2022   2022 City of Reading Home Rule Charter by eliminating Charter sections 1102 through
            1109 and replacing the language.
Res.   3-
55-    14-  Appointing Wesley Butler to the Council Nominations and Appointments Committee.
2022   2022
Res.   3-   Ratifying the recission of the Tuesday, January 4, 2022, Declaration of
56-    14-  Disaster Emergency effective March 4, 2022.
2022   2022
Res.   3-   Agreement to the alternative form of financial security for municipal
57-    14-  improvements related to the Habitat for Humanity Gateway Improvement.
2022   2022
Res.   3-   Reappointing Lisa Blount to the Human Relations Commission with a term ending
61-    14-  February 14, 2026.
2022   2022
61-    6-   Accepting payment from J & A Court relating to the outstanding loans related to
2022   27-  the bookbindery property at 148 North Fourth Street and approving the execution
       2022 of all documents deemed necessary and appropriate to complete this transaction.
Res.   3-   Reappointing Karen Archie to the Human Relations Commission with a term ending
62-    14-  February 14, 2026.
2022   2022
Res.   3-   Appointing Timothy Waldman to the Fire/Building Code Board of Appeals with a
63-    14-  term ending December 31, 2027.
2022   2022
Res.   3-   Authorizing the Mayor to sign necessary paperwork to receive payments from
65-    28-  PennDOT for conveyances related to the Schuylkill Avenue Railroad Bridge
2022   2022 Project.
Res.   3-   Appointing Susan Williams to the Charter Board with a term ending April 26,
66-    28-  2027.
2022   2022
Res.   3-   Reappointing Richard Wagner to the Human Relations Commission with a term
67-    28-  ending February 14, 2026.
2022   2022
Res.   3-
68-    28-  Confirming Christopher Geltz as Chief Building Official.
2022   2022
Res.   4-4- Appointing Christopher Daubert to the vacant District 1 Council Seat, effective
70-    2022 immediately.
2022
71-    7-   Authorizing entrance into an intergovernmental agreement for the purposes of
2022   25-  joining with other political subdivisions and entities as a member of the local
       2022 emergency response team known as the "Berks County Emergency Response Team".
Res.   4-   Appointing Patty Bell to the Library Board with a term ending December 31,
72-    11-  2027.
2022   2022
Res.   4-   Appointing Josephine Torres-Boykins to the Equal Business Opportunity Board
73-    11-  with a term ending April 11, 2025.
2022   2022
Res.   4-   Authorizing the execution of the Federal-Aid Reimbursement Settlement Agreement
74-    25-  No. 057563 for the Penn Street Crosswalk Project.
2022   2022
Res.   4-   Confirming the appointment of James G. Stoudt, Jr. as Fire Chief beginning May
77-    25-  1, 2022.
2022   2022
78-    8-
2022   22-  Setting forth the salary of the Managing Director.
       2022
Res.   5-9-
79-    2022 Authorizing the Mayor to execute a PY2019 Action Plan Amendment.
2022
Res.   5-9-
80-    2022 Authorizing the Mayor to execute a PY2019 Action Plan Amendment.
2022
Res.   5-9- Appointing Jeff Waltman as Council representative to the Berks Community Action
81-    2022 Program (BCAP).
2022
Res.   5-9- Appointing Donna Reed as Council liaison to the BCTV Board with Marcia Goodman-
82-    2022 Hinnershitz as alternate.
2022
Res.   5-9- Appointing Johanny Cepeda-Freytiz as Council representative to the Blighted
83-    2022 Property Review Committee with Christopher Daubert as alternate.
2022
Res.   5-9- Appointing Melissa Ventura as Council representative to the Diversity Board
84-    2022 with Johanny Cepeda-Freytiz and Wesley Butler as alternates.
2022
Res.   5-9- Appointing Marcia Goodman-Hinnershitz as Council representative to the
85-    2022 Environmental Advisory Council with Donna Reed and Johanny Cepeda-Freytiz as
2022        alternates.
Res.   5-9- Appointing Johanny Cepeda-Freytiz as Council liaison to the Human Relations
86-    2022 Commission with Christopher Daubert as alternate.
2022
Res.   5-9- Appointing Donna Reed as Council liaison to the Shade Tree Commission with
87-    2022 Christopher Daubert as alternate.
2022
Res.   5-9- Appointing Donna Reed as Council liaison to the Stadium Commission with Wesley
88-    2022 Butler as alternate.
2022
Res.   5-9- Appointing David McCoy to the Recreation Commission with a term ending December
89-    2022 31, 2025.
2022
Res.   5-   Removing Ernest Schlegel from the Reading Redevelopment Authority Board for
90-    19-  cause.
2022   2022
Res.   5-   Authorizing the promotion of 2nd Deputy Chief Michael R. Glore to 1st Deputy
91-    23-  Fire Chief, effective June 1, 2022.
2022   2022
Res.   5-   Authorizing the promotion of Fire Suppression Lieutenant David C. Williams to
92-    23-  2nd Deputy Fire Chief, effective June 1, 2022.
2022   2022
Res.   5-   Authorizing the promotion of Firefighter Steven E. Ginder to Fire Suppression
93-    23-  Lieutenant, effective June 1, 2022.
2022   2022
Res.   5-   Appointing Jessica Schwartz as an alternate to the Board of Health with a term
94-    23-  ending December 31, 2027.
2022   2022
Res.   5-   Reappointing Jeffrey Darlington as an alternate to the Board of Ethics with a
95-    23-  term ending May 23, 2025.
2022   2022
Res.   5-   Appointing Dennis Baver to the Fire/Building Code Board of Appeals with a term
96-    23-  ending December 31, 2027.
2022   2022
Res.   5-   Removing Rebecca Noviello from the Environmental Advisory Council for failure
97-    23-  to attend three consecutive regular meetings of the Environmental Advisory
2022   2022 Council meetings and for no other reason.
       6-   Authorizing the Public Works Department to enter into a one- year renewal of
Res.   13-  the Intergovernmental Cooperation Agreement between the City and the Reading
99-102 2022 School District for the collection of recyclable materials for the 2022-2023
            academic year.
Res.   6-   Appointing Genesis Munoz-Arias as liaison to the Youth Commission effective
102-   13-  July 1, 2022.
2022   2022
Res.   6-   Authorizing appointments to the American Rescue Plan Act (ARPA) Grant Review
103-   13-  Committee for the following individuals: Dolores Martinez, Cindy Castner, Maria
2022   2022 Laboy, Kevin Murphy, Wesley Butler, Donna Reed and Marcia Goodman-Hinnershitz.
Res.   6-   Appointing Steven Symons to the HVAC Board with a term ending December 31,
105-   27-  2028.
2022   2022
Res.   6-   Appointing Steven Symons as an alternate to the Fire/Building Code Board of
106-   27-  Appeals with a term ending December 31, 2027.
2022   2022
Res.   6-   Appointing Chad Milligan to the HVAC Board with a term ending December 31,
107-   27-  2028.
2022   2022
Res.   6-   Appointing Johanny Cepeda-Freytiz to the vacant Council President position
108-   27-  effective immediately and expiring January 2, 2023.
2022   2022
Res.   7-   Authorizing the promotion of Patrol Officer Stephen Butler to the rank of
109-   11-  Sergeant, effective July 17, 2022.
2022   2022
Res.   7-   Accepting the resignation of Johanny Cepeda-Freytiz from the District 6 Council
110-   11-  seat, effective June 27, 2022.
2022   2022
Res.   7-   Authorizing conditional offers of employment for the hiring of the following as
111-   11-  probationary patrol officers effective July 11, 2022: Mocha Baldwin, Evan Cook,
2022   2022 Brayden Lewis, Christian Lewis, Zachary Rivera, Zachary Shenk, Mohamed
            Solimani- Hussein and Drew Zebertavage.
Res.   7-   Appointing Thomas McMahon and John Miller Jr. to the Reading Redevelopment
114-   18-  Authority with terms ending on December 31, 2022 and December 31, 2023
2022   2022 respectively.
114-   9-
2022   26-  Setting forth the salary of the Pension Coordinator.
       2022
Res.   7-
117-   25-  Confirming C. Thomas Neff as Zoning Administrator.
2022   2022
117-   10-  Authorizing the City to enter into a memorandum of understanding with the Berks
2022   10-  County Conservation District to control accelerated erosion and prevent
       2022 sediment pollution which may result from earth disturbance activities.
Res.   7-   Reappointing Michael Gombar Jr. to the Berks County Convention Center Authority
118-   25-  with a term ending August 29, 2026.
2022   2022
Res.   7-   Reappointing Heminton Ureña to the Blighted Property Review Committee with a
119-   25-  term ending July 25, 2026.
2022   2022
Res.   7-   Appointing O. Christopher Miller to the vacant District 6 Council seat,
120-   25-  effective immediately and expires January 2, 2024.
2022   2022
Res.   7-   Appointing Christopher Daubert, Marcia Goodman-Hinnershitz and Johanny Cepeda-
121-   25-  Freytiz to the Council Staff Oversight Committee, effective immediately.
2022   2022
Res.   7-   Appointing Fred Thompson to the Reading Redevelopment Authority with a term
122-   25-  ending December 31, 2024.
2022   2022
Res.   7-   Appointing Donna Reed, Melissa Ventura and Johanny Cepeda- Freytiz to the RAWA
123-   25-  Lease Agreement Work Group, effective immediately.
2022   2022
Res.   8-8-
126-   2022 Confirming William Heim as Managing Director.
2022
Res.   8-   Appointing Melissa Ventura as Council representative to the Berks Community
128-   22-  Action Program (BCAP), with Wesley Butler as an alternate.
2022   2022
Res.   8-   Appointing O. Chris Miller as Council representative to the Downtown
129-   22-  Revitalization Public Private Partnership (P3).
2022   2022
Res.   8-   Appointing Donna Reed as Council representative to the Reading Area
130-   22-  Transportation Study (RATS) with O. Chris Miller as an alternate.
2022   2022
Res.   8-   Appointing Johanny Cepeda-Freytiz as Council representative to the Blighted
131-   22-  Property Review Committee with O. Chris Miller as an alternate.
2022   2022
Res.   8-   Appointing Christopher Daubert as Council representative to the School District
132-   22-  Work Group.
2022   2022
Res.   8-   Appointing Marcia Goodman-Hinnershitz as Council representative to the
133-   22-  Aulenbach Cemetery Board with Donna Reed as an alternate.
2022   2022
Res.   8-   Extending the appointment of Holly Guldin as Acting Human Resources Director
134-   22-  for an additional 90 days.
2022   2022
Res.   8-   Extending the appointment of Kyle Zieber as Acting Public Works Director to
135-   22-  serve an additional 90 days.
2022   2022
135-   12-
2022   19-  Establishing the employee positions for the City for the fiscal year 2023.
       2022
Res.   8-
136-   22-  Appointing Donna Reed as the Council Vice-President.
2022   2022
140-   12-
2022   19-  Setting forth the salary of the Human Resources Director.
       2022
Res.   9-   Amending the cooperation agreement between the City and the Redevelopment
142-   12-  Authority of Reading.
2022   2022
Res.   9-   Reappointing Erin Weller to the Historical Architectural Review Board with a
143-   12-  term ending September 12, 2027.
2022   2022
Res.   9-   Reappointing Aaron Booth to the Historical Architectural Review Board with a
144-   12-  term ending September 12, 2027.
2022   2022
Res.   9-   Appointing Dihmond Perez to the Youth Commission, representing Council District
147-   26-  4, with a term ending July 1, 2024.
2022   2022
Res.   9-   Appointing Janetivis Aponte to the Youth Commission, representing Council
148-   26-  District 5, with a term ending July 1, 2024.
2022   2022
Res.   10-  Ratifying the Collective Bargaining Agreement between the City and American
152-   10-  Federation of State, County and Municipal Employees (AFSCME).
2022   2022
Res.   10-  Reappointing Cathy Curran-Myers to the Environmental Advisory Council with a
159-   24-  term ending October 24, 2025.
2022   2022
Res.   10-  Appointing Stephan Thompson to the Environmental Advisory Council with a term
160-   24-  ending October 24, 2025.
2022   2022
Res.   11-  Accepting the resignations of Robert Conklin and Lee Olsen from the Reading
164-   14-  Planning Commission to remain in compliance with the PAMPC.
2022   2022
Res.   11-  Authorizing submission of the PY2023 Action Plan to the United States
165-   14-  Department of Housing and Urban Development.
2022   2022
Res.   11-  Appointing Frank Denbowski to the Planning Commission with a term ending April
166-   14-  1, 2025.
2022   2022
Res.   11-  Appointing Daniel DeCarlo to the Planning Commission with a term ending April
167-   14-  1, 2026.
2022   2022
Res.   11-  Accepting the resignation of Zelda Yoder from the Reading Human Relations
168-   28-  Commission to remain in compliance with the PA State Law (PA Human Relations
2022   2022 Act).
Res.   11-  Extending the appointment of Kyle Zeiber as Acting Public Works Director for an
169-   28-  additional 90 days.
2022   2022
Res.   11-  Extending the appointment of Holly Guldin as Acting Human Resources Director
170-   28-  for an additional 90 days.
2022   2022
Res.   11-  Reappointing Thomas Ryan to the Shade Tree Commission with a term ending August
173-   28-  31, 2027.
2022   2022
Res.   11-  Reappointing William Vitale to the Environmental Advisory Council with a term
174-   28-  ending November 28, 2025.
2022   2022
Res.   11-  Appointing James Cole to the Environmental Advisory Council with a term ending
175-   28-  November 28, 2025.
2022   2022
Res.   12-  Accepting the resignation of Scott Lindsey as a City representative on the
176-   5-   Reading Public Library Board.
2022   2022
Res.   12-  Accepting the resignation of Terry Withers from the Electricians Examination
179-   19-  Board.
2022   2022
Res.   12-  Authorizing conditional offers of employment for the following as probationary
180-   19-  patrol officers: Enrique Gonzaelz, Cesar Arias, Sabdiel Diaz, Freddy Rosado-
2022   2022 Velez, Alexus Perez and Jonathan Henne.
Res.   12-
181-   19-  Approving the first amendment to employment contract of the City Solicitor.
2022   2022
Res.   12-  Reappointing Craig Weisman to the HVAC Board with a term ending December 31,
183-   19-  2028.
2022   2022
Res.   12-  Reappointing Salvador Sepulveda to the Reading Public Library Board with a term
184-   19-  ending December 31, 2027.
2022   2022
Res.   12-  Reappointing Sandy Graffius to the Audit Committee with a term ending December
185-   19-  19, 2025.
2022   2022
Res.   12-  Ratifying the collective bargaining agreement between the City and the
186-   19-  International Association of Firefighters (IAFF) Local 1803 effective January
2022   2022 1, 2023 and expiring December 31, 2026.
Res.   12-  Ratifying the collective bargaining agreement between the City and the
189-   19-  Fraternal Order of Police (FOP) Lodge 9, effective January 1, 2023 and expiring
2022   2022 December 31, 2026.
Res.   12-  Confirming the appointment of Marcelino Colón, Jr., as the Human Resources
190-   19-  Director.
2022   2022
Res.   1-9- Authorizing the bank accounts for the 2023 calendar year.
3-2023 2023
Res.   1-9- Appointing Marcia Goodman-Hinnershitz, O. Chris Miller and Melissa Ventura to
4-2023 2023 the Nominations and Appointments Committee.
Res.   1-9- Appointing Donna Reed as Council President, with a term ending the first Monday
6-2023 2023 in January 2024.
Res.   1-   Appointing Melissa Ventura, Donna Reed and Marcia Goodman-Hinnershitz to the
9-2023 23-  RAWA work group.
       2023
       1-   Amending the 2023 position ordinance by increasing the salary for the Deputy CD
9-2023 23-  Director.
       2023
Res.   1-   Authorizing the promotion of Officer Victor Morrison, to the rank of Sergeant,
10-    23-  effective January 23, 2023.
2023   2023
Res.   1-   Authorizing the promotion of Sergeant Nicholas Epolito, to the rank of
11-    23-  Lieutenant, effective January 23, 2023.
2023   2023
Res.   1-   Authorizing conditional offers of employment to the following probationary
13-    23-  firefighters and paramedic/firefighters: Matthew Weston, Trevor Nevius, Brent
2023   2023 Hanson, Jonathan Borkert, Garrett Noone, Shawn Troxel, Benjamin Klein, Nicholas
            Malloy, Christopher Berbaum and Conrad Strawbridge.
Res.   1-   Authorizing the Mayor to execute the memorandum of understanding for animal
14-    23-  control services with Berks Animal Rescue League.
2023   2023
Res.   1-   Reappointing Steven McCracken to the Reading Area Water Authority with a term
15-    23-  ending January 1, 2028.
2023   2023
Res.   1-   Reappointing Thomas McMahon to the Reading Redevelopment Authority with a term
16-    23-  ending December 31, 2027.
2023   2023
Res.   2-6- Agreeing to act to leave the District 5 Council seat open until January 1, 2024
17-    2023 when the newly elected District 5 Council member will be seated.
2023
Res.   2-   Accepting the resignation of Patty Bell from the Library Board, effective
18-    13-  January 22, 2023, as per her resignation notice.
2023   2023
Res.   2-   Authorizing the City Council Solicitor to file a petition with the Court of
25-    13-  Common Pleas of Berks County to fill the vacant District 5 Council seat per
2023   2023 Section 207 of the Charter.
Res.   2-   Reappointing John Dethoff to the Board of Health with a term ending December
26-    13-  31, 2027.
2023   2023
Res.   2-   Appointing Melanie Tavarez to the Youth Commission with a term ending July 1,
27-    13-  2025.
2023   2023
Res.   2-
28-    27-  Authorizing submission of the PY2021 Annual Action Plan.
2023   2023
Res.   2-   Authorizing the amendment of the Mt. Penn Preserve Partnership Council of
31-    27-  Government (MP3 COG) Agreement.
2023   2023
Res.   2-   Appointing Jordan Henning as an alternate to the Board of Health with a term
32-    27-  ending December 31, 2028.
2023   2023
Res.   2-   Appointing James Harris to the Planning Commission with a term ending April 1,
33-    27-  2027.
2023   2023
Res.   2-   Reappointing Philip Rabena to the Zoning Hearing Board with a term ending
34-    27-  January 1, 2028.
2023   2023
Res.   2-   Appointing Jeffrey Hartman to the Electrician’s Examining Board with a term
35-    27-  ending October 1, 2024.
2023   2023
37-    4-   Amending the 2023 position ordinance to reflect a change to the position title
2023   10-  and salary of the Public Works Operations Division Manager and creating the new
       2023 position of Deputy Director of Public Works.
Res.   3-   Ratifying the collective bargaining agreement between the City and American
38-    13-  Federation of State, County and Municipal Employees (AFSCME), Local 2763
2023   2023 effective January 1, 2023 and expiring December 31, 2026.
Res.   3-   Appointing Kaitlin Daley to the Reading Public Library Board with a term ending
39-    27-  December 31, 2028.
2023   2023
Res.   3-   Confirming the appointment of Tim Krall, P.E., as the Acting Public Works
41-    27-  Director and naming Kyle Zeiber Acting Deputy Public Works Director and
2023   2023 Operations Manager.
Res.   4-   Accepting the resignation of Steven Belinski from the Reading Housing
42-    10-  Authority, effective March 30, 2023.
2023   2023
Res.   4-   Reappointing Robert Fegley to the Plumbing Board with a term ending December
43-    10-  31, 2028.
2023   2023
Res.   4-   Appointing Tressa Jefferson to the Reading Area Water Authority with a term
44-    10-  ending January 1, 2028.
2023   2023
Res.   4-   Promoting 2nd Deputy Chief Larry B. Moyer Jr. to 1st Deputy Fire Chief,
47-    24-  effective May 1, 2023.
2023   2023
Res.   4-   Authorizing the promotion of Fire Suppression Lieutenant Andrew F. Getka to 2nd
48-    24-  Deputy Fire Chief, effective May 1, 2023.
2023   2023
Res.   4-   Authorizing the promotion of Firefighter Joshua Green to Fire Suppression
49-    24-  Lieutenant, effective May 1, 2023.
2023   2023
Res.   4-   Authorizing the signing and payment of the letter of agreement with Let’s Think
50-    24-  Wireless (LTW) for the parts, maintenance and support of the VSU Surveillance
2023   2023 System.
50-    5-   Amending the 2023 Position Ordinance - to authorize a pay rate increase for
2023   22-  Video Services Unit and Telecommunicator positions in the Special Services
       2023 Division of the Police Department.
Res.   4-   Appointing Aidee Santos Acosta to the Youth Commission with a term ending July
52-    24-  1, 2025.
2023   2023
Res.   4-   Reappointing Leidy Ramos to the Charter Board with a term ending April 26,
53-    24-  2028.
2023   2023
Res.   4-   Appointing William Gernert to the Plumbing Board with a term ending December
54-    24-  31, 2025.
2023   2023
Res.   4-   Appointing Chad Maurer to the Plumbing Board with a term ending December 31,
55-    24-  2027.
2023   2023
Res.   5-8- Authorizing the amended agreement of cooperation between the City and the
58-    2023 Reading School District regarding the Reading Recreation Commission.
2023
Res.   5-8-
59-    2023 Authorizing the Mayor to execute a PY2023 CDBG Action Plan Amendment.
2023
Res.   5-   Accepting the resignation of Karen Archie from the Reading Human Relations
60-    22-  Commission, effective June 1, 2023, as per her resignation notice.
2023   2023
Res.   5-   Accepting the resignation of Melissa Eggert from the Reading Board of Ethics,
61-    22-  effective May 12, 2023, as per her resignation notice.
2023   2023
Res.   5-   Reappointing Frank Forster to the Plumbing Board with a term ending December
62-    22-  31, 2028.
2023   2023
Res.   5-   Appointing Steven Yarnell to the Reading Redevelopment Authority with a term
63-    22-  ending December 31, 2025.
2023   2023
       6-   Directing the Berks County Board of Elections to place a referendum question
64-    26-  before city voters on the 2023 general election ballot which would amend the
2023   2023 City of Reading Home Rule Charter by eliminating the requirement for the City’s
            Public Works Director to be an engineer.
Res.   6-   Authorizing the Public Works Department to enter into a one- year renewal of
65-    12-  the Intergovernmental Cooperation Agreement between the City and the Reading
2023   2023 School District for the collection of recyclable materials.
66-    6-   Amending the 2023 position ordinance to add two full-time and two part-time
2023   26-  Downtown Commercial Corridor Ambassadors.
       2023
Res.   6-   Authorizing conditional offers of employment for the following as probationary
69-    26-  patrol officers effective July 10, 2023: Brian Bakovic Garcia, Jason Brown,
2023   2023 Trent Garlin, Dylan Humlhanz, and Nicholas Morgan.
Res.   7-   Authorizing the engagement agreement between the City and PowerCorps PHL, for
75-    10-  the creation of the City of Reading Climate Corps.
2023   2023
Res.   8-   Modifying the 2021-2024 LFT Road Project engineering agreement with McCormick
75A-   14-  Taylor, Inc.
2023   2023
76-    9-   Amending the 2023 position ordinance to add the position of Senior Associate in
2023   11-  the Human Resources Department.
       2023
Res.   7-
77-    24-  Authorizing the execution of a PY2019 Action Plan amendment.
2023   2023
Res.   8-   Appointing Bennyli Suero to the Youth Commission with a term ending July 1,
79-    14-  2026.
2023   2023
Res.   8-
80-    14-  Appointing Mia Perez to the Youth Commission with a term ending July 1, 2026.
2023   2023
Res.   8-   Appointing Karen Wang to the Board of Health with a term ending December 31,
81-    14-  2028.
2023   2023
Res.   8-
82-    14-  Appointing Daniel Heck to the HVAC Board with a term ending December 31, 2029.
2023   2023
Res.   8-
83-    14-  Appointing John Stine to the HVAC Board with a term ending December 31, 2029.
2023   2023
Res.   8-   Reappointing Savannah Baller to the Animal Control Board with a term ending
84-    28-  August 28, 2026.
2023   2023
Res.   8-   Reappointing Michael Fiucci to the Berks County Convention Center Authority
85-    28-  with a term ending August 29, 2027.
2023   2023
Res.   9-   Accepting the resignation of Lynanne Bohn from the Reading Board of Health,
87-    11-  effective August 31, 2023.
2023   2023
Res.   9-
88-    11-  Appointing Brad Auman to the HVAC Board with a term ending December 31, 2029.
2023   2023
Res.   9-   Reappointing Pamela Johnson to the Police Civil Service Board with a term
89-    11-  ending September 11, 2027.
2023   2023
Res.   9-   Reappointing Jeffrey Gattone to the Zoning Hearing Board with a term ending
90-    11-  January 1, 2028.
2023   2023
Res.   9-   Reappointing Edwin Stock to the Police Civil Service Board with a term ending
94-    25-  September 25, 2027.
2023   2023
Res.   10-  Reappointing Shane McFarlane to the Charter Board with a term ending April 26,
98-    9-   2028.
2023   2023
Res.   10-  Reappointing Anna Miller to the Animal Control Board with a term ending October
99-    9-   9, 2026.
2023   2023
Res.   10-  Permitting the Fire Chief or designee to sign the contract with Glick Fire
101-   23-  Equipment to execute a fleet leasing agreement of fire apparatus.
2023   2023
102-   11-  Authorizing the City to enter into an agreement with the Borough of Kenhorst in
2023   27-  order to authorize the City of Reading Police Department to provide police
       2023 services within the corporate limits of the Borough of Kenhorst.
Res.   10-  Reappointing Nicholas Eyrich to the Blighted Property Review Committee with a
103-   23-  term ending October 23, 2026.
2023   2023
Res.   11-  Appointing Eddit Marmolejos-Gil to the Equal Business Opportunity Advisory
104-   13-  Board with a term ending October 23, 2026.
2023   2023
Res.   11-  Authorizing the promotion of Sergeant Lance Lonsinger, to the rank of
105-   13-  Lieutenant, effective November 13, 2023.
2023   2023
Res.   11-  Authorizing the promotion of Officer James G. Yeasted, to the rank of Sergeant,
106-   13-  effective November 13, 2023.
2023   2023
Res.   11-  Authorizing the promotion of Sergeant Alexander Sholedice, to the rank of
107-   13-  Lieutenant, effective November 13, 2023.
2023   2023
Res.   11-  Authorizing conditional offer of employment to the following Probationary
108-   13-  Paramedic: Shay Lugo.
2023   2023
108-   11-  Amending the 2023 position ordinance to add the position of Emergency Vehicle
2023   27-  Technician in the Department of Fire & Rescue Services.
       2023
110-   12-
2023   4-   Establishing the employee positions for the City for the fiscal year 2024.
       2023
Res.   11-
111-   13-  Removing Jerry Jones from the BPRC for failing to attend BRPC meetings.
2023   2023
Res.   11-  Appointing Anthony Orozco to the Reading Public Library Board with a term
113-   13-  ending December 31, 2028.
2023   2023
Res.   11-  Authorizing submission of the PY2024 to PY2028 Consolidated Plan and the PY2024
114-   13-  Action Plan
2023   2023
Res.   11-  Accepting the resignation of Steve Karnat from the O&E Pension Board, effective
115-   27-  December 31, 2023.
2023   2023
Res.   11-
120-   27-  Appointing Melissa Ventura as Council Vice President, effective immediately.
2023   2023
Res.   12-  Appointing Maria Kanter as primary and Minh Ngo as alternate representatives on
123-   18-  the Berks County Tax Collection Committee (TCC).
2023   2023
Res.   12-
128-   18-  Authorizing submission of the PY2024 to PY2028 Equity Plan.
2023   2023
Res.   12-  Appointing Suzanne Cody to the Reading Historic Architectural Review Board with
130-   18-  a term ending December 18, 2028.
2023   2023
Res.   12-
132-   27-  Confirming the appointment of Elias Vasquez as the Police Chief.
2023   2023
Res.   1-8- Authorizing conditional offers of employment for the hiring of the following as
2-2024 2024 probationary patrol officers effective January 15, 2024: Justin Bennett,
            Maxwell Gaston, Mariangeliz Ramos, and Antonia Miranda.
       1-8- Amending the 2024 position ordinance by increasing the salaries of the City
3-2024 2024 Clerk, Deputy City Clerk, Legislative Aide and Human Relations Executive
            Director.
Res.   1-8- Confirming the appointment of Kyle Zeiber as Public Works Director.
5-2024 2024
5-2024 1-8- Setting the salary of the Chief of Police.
       2024
Res.   1-8- Appointing Melissa Ventura as Council Vice President.
6-2024 2024
Res.   1-   Ratifying Resolution No. 6-2024, appointing Melissa Ventura as Council Vice
8-2024 22-  President.
       2024
       1-
8-2024 22-  Setting the salary of the Public Works Director.
       2024
Res.   1-   Vanessa Campos, Wesley Butler, and Chris Miller are appointed as the
9-2024 22-  Nominations & Appointments Committee.
       2024
       2-   Amending the 2024 position ordinance by increasing the number of sworn
9-2024 26-  personnel in the Department of Fire and Rescue Services from 138 to 144.
       2024
Res.   1-   Appointing Chris Miller as Council representative to the Environmental Advisory
10-    22-  Council with Rafael Nunez as alternate.
2024   2024
10-    2-   Amending the 2024 position ordinance to eliminate the Deputy Public Works
2024   26-  Director position, reinstate the Operations Manager position and to increase
       2024 the salary of the Project Engineer position.
Res.   1-   Appointing Rafael Nunez as Council representative to the Diversity Board with
11-    22-  Jaime Baez Jr. as alternate.
2024   2024
Res.   1-   Appointing Chris Miller as Council representative to the Blighted Property
12-    22-  Review Committee with Jaime Baez Jr. as alternate.
2024   2024
Res.   1-   Appointing Donna Reed as Council liaison to the Reading Area Transportation
13-    22-  Study (RATS) with Chris Miller as alternate.
2024   2024
Res.   1-   Appointing Jaime Baez Jr. as Council representative to the Mt. Penn Preserve
14-    22-  Council of Governments Executive Committee with Rafael Nunez as alternate.
2024   2024
Res.   1-   Appointing Vanessa Campos as Council representative to the Recreation
15-    22-  Commission with Melissa Ventura as alternate.
2024   2024
Res.   1-   Appointing Wesley Butler to the Audit Committee with Melissa Ventura as
16-    22-  alternate.
2024   2024
Res.   1-   Appointing Wesley Butler to the Capital Planning Committee with Melissa Ventura
17-    22-  as alternate.
2024   2024
Res.   1-   Appointing Wesley Butler to the Revenue Committee with Melissa Ventura as
18-    22-  alternate.
2024   2024
Res.   1-   Appointing Melissa Ventura as Council representative to the Berks Community
19-    22-  Action Program (BCAP) with Jaime Baez Jr. as alternate.
2024   2024
Res.   1-   Appointing Jaime Baez Jr. as Council representative to the Downtown
20-    22-  Revitalization Public Private Partnership (P3) Chris Miller and Vanessa Campos
2024   2024 as alternates.
Res.   1-   Appointing Melissa Ventura, Rafael Nunez, and Donna Reed as Council
21-    22-  representatives to the School District Work Group.
2024   2024
Res.   1-   Appointing Donna Reed as Council liaison to the First Energy Stadium Commission
22-    22-  with Rafael Nunez as alternate.
2024   2024
Res.   1-   Appointing Melissa Ventura as Council liaison to the Shade Tree Commission with
23-    22-  Donna Reed as alternate.
2024   2024
Res.   1-   Appointing Wesley Butler as Council liaison to the Human Relations Commission
24-    22-  with Melissa Ventura as alternate.
2024   2024
24-    3-   Amending the 2024 position ordinance by setting the salary of the Project
2024   25-  Coordinator position in Public Works Administration at $78,000.
       2024
Res.   1-   Appointing Jaime Baez Jr. as Council liaison to the Planning Commission with
25-    22-  Donna Reed as alternate.
2024   2024
25-    4-8- Setting the salary of the Accounting Manager.
2024   2024
Res.   1-   Appointing Donna Reed as Council liaison to the BCTV Board with Chris Miller as
26-    22-  alternate.
2024   2024
Res.   1-   Appointing Rafael Nunez as Council Representative to the Conversion Therapy
27-    22-  Board with Donna Reed as alternate.
2024   2024
Res.   1-   Appointing Wesley Butler as Council representative to the Other Post Employment
28-    22-  Benefits (OPEB) Board with Donna Reed as alternate.
2024   2024
28-    4-   Amending the 2024 position ordinance to set the salary for four HUD grant
2024   22-  funded positions: Lead Hazard Reduction Coordinator, HH Program Coordinator, HH
       2024 Risk Assessor, and HH Intake Coordinator.
Res.   1-   Appointing Wesley Butler as Council liaison to the Youth Commission with Chris
29-    22-  Miller as alternate.
2024   2024
29-    5-   Authorizing the increase in compensation for police academy instructors from
2024   13-  $35 per hour to $50 per hour.
       2024
Res.   1-   Reappointing Linda Kelleher as City Clerk for a two-year term as required by
31-    22-  Charter Section 225.
2024   2024
31-    5-   Amending the 2024 position ordinance to create two positions Blight/Transfer
2024   13-  Officer and Blight/Transfer Inspector within the Special Blight Unit operating
       2024 within the Community Development Property Maintenance Division.
Res.   1-   Reappointing Jose Delfi to the Electrical Examining Board with a term ending
33-    22-  October 1, 2029.
2024   2024
Res.   2-   Authorizing conditional offer of employment to probationary paramedic Matthew
34A-   12-  Griffin.
2024   2024
36-    6-   Authorizing the Mayor to execute a cooperative purchasing agreement with the
2024   24-  Reading Parking Authority for engineering services for the 300 to 600 blocks of
       2024 Penn Street.
Res.   2-   Appointing Vanessa Campos to the Reading Redevelopment Authority with a term
37-    12-  ending December 31, 2029 and appointing Jaime Baez, Jr. as liaison to the
2024   2024 Reading Redevelopment Authority with a term ending on the first Monday of
            January 2026.
37-    6-   Amending the personnel code to correct the salary range for the Traffic
2024   24-  Engineer.
       2024
Res.   2-   Reappointing Lorena Keely to the Reading Housing Authority with a term ending
38-    12-  December 31, 2028.
2024   2024
38-    6-   Amending the 2024 position ordinance to set the salary of the Public Works
2024   24-  Public Outreach & Education Coordinator.
       2024
Res.   2-   Reappointing Myra Maldonado to the Reading Housing Authority with a term ending
39-    12-  December 31, 2028.
2024   2024
Res.   2-   Reappointing David Dobrosky to the HVAC Board with a term ending December 31,
40-    12-  2030.
2024   2024
Res.   2-   Reappointing Rick Mountz to the First Energy Stadium Commission with a term
41-    12-  ending August 18, 2029.
2024   2024
Res.   2-   Reappointing Barry Unger to the Plumbing Board with a term ending December 31,
42-    12-  2029.
2024   2024
43-    7-   Amending the 2024 position ordinance creating the position of Police Academy
2024   22-  Administrative Officer with a salary of $65,000.
       2024
44-    7-   Amending the 2024 position ordinance to include an additional position of
2024   22-  Maintenance Worker 1 with a salary of $46,196.88.
       2024
Res.   2-   Authorizing the promotion of Officer David Vega, date of employment January 21,
47-    26-  2013, to the rank of Sergeant, effective February 26, 2024.
2024   2024
Res.   2-   Authorizing the promotion of Officer Christopher Baker, date of employment
48-    26-  January 16, 2012, to the rank of Sergeant, effective February 26, 2024.
2024   2024
48-    8-   Amending the 2024 position ordinance to correct the salary of the Blight
2024   12-  Transfer Inspector.
       2024
Res.   2-
49-    26-  Adopting the Debt Policy.
2024   2024
Res.   2-   Reappointing Chad Spohn to the Plumbing Board with a term ending December 31,
50-    26-  2029.
2024   2024
Res.   2-   Appointing Gerald Richter to the Reading Public Library Board with a term
51-    26-  ending December 31, 2027.
2024   2024
51-    8-   Amending the position ordinance to include the position of Administrative
2024   26-  Assistant in the Human Resources Department.
       2024
Res.   3-
52-    11-  Promoting Brian Thorpe to 1st Deputy Fire Chief, effective March 16, 2024.
2024   2024
Res.   3-   Authorizing conditional offers of employment to the following probationary
53-    11-  firefighters to be effective March 18, 2024: Steven Dunn, Jacob Rolon, Andrew
2024   2024 Erney, Jared Diachynsky, Casey Tiderman, Michael Schlouch and Draven Radcliff.
53-    8-   Amending the position code to create a Second Deputy Chief Position in the
2024   26-  Police Department.
       2024
Res.   3-   Reappointing Robert Hospidor to the Board of Health with a term ending December
55-    11-  31, 2028.
2024   2024
Res.   3-   Reappointing Kathy Schorn to the Board of Health with a term ending December
56-    11-  31, 2028.
2024   2024
Res.   3-   Appointing Ann Woodward to the Blighted Property Review Committee with a term
57-    11-  ending March 11, 2028.
2024   2024
Res.   3-   Appointing Jaime Keith as an alternate to the Blighted Property Review
59-    11-  Committee with a term ending March 11, 2028.
2024   2024
Res.   3-   Permitting the Fire Chief, or designee, to sign the contract with Stryker Sales
60-    25-  Corp for the three-year maintenance agreement for parts, labor, travel and
2024   2024 batteries for the power cot.
60-    9-9- Amending the 2024 position ordinance by creating a third part- time clerk
2024   2024 position in Zoning with a salary of $36,400.
Res.   3-   Authorizing the Fire Department to execute an agreement with the County of
61-    25-  Berks DES to authorize: Fire Chief James G. Stoudt. Jr, 1st Deputy Chief Thomas
2024   2024 Kemery, 2nd Deputy Chief Andrew Getka, to make any necessary run card changes.
62-    9-9- Approving a contract with Dale Carnegie to provide a tailored in-person
2024   2024 leadership program for up to 72 City of Reading Administrators, Managers, and
            Supervisors.
Res.   3-   Authorizing participation in the 2024 Cohort of the Pennsylvania Blueprint
63-    25-  Communities program.
2024   2024
Res.   3-   Authorizing the settlement agreement with Dream Venture PA II, LLC (developer)
66-    25-  and Rachel F LLC (owner) relative to the proposed use and development of 601
2024   2024 Penn Street.
Res.   3-   Reappointing Thomas Fox to the Zoning Hearing Board with a term ending January
67-    25-  1, 2029.
2024   2024
Res.   3-   Reappointing Jared Barcz to the Zoning Hearing Board with a term ending January
68-    25-  1, 2029.
2024   2024
Res.   3-   Appointing Juan Moya to the Board of Health with a term ending December 31,
69-    25-  2029.
2024   2024
Res.   3-   Rescinding Res. No. 58-2024, and appointing Andrew Boyd as an alternate to the
70-    25-  Blighted Property Review Committee with a term ending July 25, 2026.
2024   2024
73-    11-  Amending the 2024 position ordinance by authorizing the restoration of the
2024   25-  Historic Preservation Specialist I position and setting the salary at $60,000.
       2024
Res.   4-8- Authorizing the signing and payment of the letter of agreement with Let’s Think
74-    2024 Wireless (LTW) for the parts, maintenance and support of the VSU Surveillance
2024        System, in the amount of $84,354.37.
Res.        Authorizing an increase in the total amount allowed to be spent per firm for
75-    4-8- the Public Works Engineering services to Cedarville Engineering, Buchart Horn,
2024   2024 Gannett Fleming, McCormick Taylor and Spotts, Stevens & McCoy from $250,000 to
            $500,000.
Res.   4-8- Authorizing the purchase engineering services contract of $35,000 to Civil &
76-    2024 Environmental Consultants (CEC) for the design development of the Hillside
2024        Splashpad Project.
76-    12-  Establishing the employee positions for the City of Reading for the fiscal year
2024   9-   2025.
       2024
Res.   4-8- Appointing Lori Bellman to the Shade Tree Commission with a term ending August
77-    2024 31, 2029.
2024
Res.   4-8- Appointing Amara Cordero to the Animal Control Board with a term ending April
78-    2024 8, 2027.
2024
Res.   4-   Approving the award of contract to Buchert Horn in the amount of $670,000 to
79-    22-  perform design engineering and construction management services for the Reading
2024   2024 City Public Safety Building construction project.
Res.   5-   Authorizing the promotion of Sergeant Scott Errington, date of employment July
81-    13-  23, 2012, to the rank of Lieutenant, effective April 29, 2024.
2024   2024
Res.   5-   Authorizing conditional offer of employment to probationary paramedic Brian
84-    13-  Szabo to be effective June 3, 2024.
2024   2024
Res.   5-   Appointing Janice Grant to the Police Civil Service Board with a term ending
85-    13-  May 13, 2028.
2024   2024
Res.   5-   Approval of a costars contract with BSGI for $139,699 for security improvements
87-    28-  to the City Hall access points.
2024   2024
Res.   5-   Approval of a costars contract with BSGI for $117,890 for Code required
88-    28-  improvements in conjunction with the elevator modernization project.
2024   2024
Res.   5-   Reappointing William Cinfici to the Planning Commission with a term ending
91-    28-  April 1, 2028.
2024   2024
Res.   5-   Appointing Christopher Trachte to the Planning Commission with a term ending
92-    28-  April 1, 2028.
2024   2024
Res.   5-   Appointing Council members Jaime Baez, Jr., Vanessa Campos, and Rafael Nunez to
93-    28-  a committee to review proposals to translate the Charter to Spanish and
2024   2024 potentially refer proposals to City Council for approval.
Res.   5-   Authorizing City Council’s purchase of one-year memberships in National
94-    28-  Association of Latino Elected Officials (NALEO) for Council members: Melissa
2024   2024 Ventura, Jaime Baez, Jr., and Rafael Nunez.
Res.   6-   Authorizing the promotion of Officer Eric Shade, date of employment January 16,
95-    10-  2012, to the rank of Sergeant.
2024   2024
Res.   6-
96-    10-  Authorizing execution of a PY2024 CDBG Action Plan amendment.
2024   2024
Res.   6-   Approval of a costars contract with Commercial Flooring Professionals for
96A-   24-  $38,664.75 for garage and shop office floor rehabilitation.
2024   2024
Res.   6-   Authorizing the purchase of a costars contract with Doug Lamb Construction in
97-    10-  the amount of $58,075 for the concrete floor repairs of Public Works Shop and
2024   2024 Garage.
Res.   6-   Authorizing conditional offers of employment for the hiring of the following as
97A-   24-  probationary patrol officers effective July 1, 2024: John Lopez, Eric Himmel,
2024   2024 Dakota Schaeffer, Devon Ferrero, Liam Marin, Ayden Lewis, Carlos Guerrero-
            Montanez and Julian Nguyen.
Res.   6-   Authorizing the Public Works Department to enter into a one- year renewal of
98-    10-  the Intergovernmental Cooperation Agreement between the City and the Reading
2024   2024 School District for the collection of recyclable materials.
Res.   6-   Authorizing the promotion of Criminal Investigator John McKeever, date of
98A-   24-  employment January 15, 2018, to the rank of Sergeant, effective June 24, 2024.
2024   2024
Res.   6-   Authorizing the Mayor to eliminate the “not to exceed” amount in the Triad
99A-   24-  Associates Contract and limit their contract to a maximum of $100,000 for 2024
2024   2024 through 2028.
Res.   6-   Approval of a costars contract with Pro Max Fence in the amount of $97,325 for
100-   10-  two security gates along Skyline Drive and Duryea Drive.
2024   2024
Res.   6-   Reappointing Dennis Straub to the Animal Control Board with a term ending June
101-   10-  10, 2026.
2024   2024
Res.   6-   Appointing Jonathan Auchter to the Animal Control Board with a term ending June
102-   10-  10, 2027.
2024   2024
Res.   7-8- Approval of costars contract with Landis Bonfitto in the amount of $41,486 for
103-   2024 the upgrade of the heating system.
2024
Res.   7-8- Appointing Kelley Coates to the Reading Redevelopment Authority with a term
104-   2024 ending December 31, 2028.
2024
Res.   7-8- Reappointing Wayne Bealer to the Planning Commission with a term ending April
105-   2024 1, 2026.
2024
Res.   7-8- Removing Aidee Santos Acosta from the Youth Commission for failing to attend
106-   2024 Youth Commission meetings.
2024
Res.   7-   Authorizing the promotion of Fire Suppression Lieutenant Richard Kuhn to 2nd
109-   22-  Deputy Fire Chief, effective July 23, 2024.
2024   2024
Res.   7-   Authorizing the promotion of Firefighter Ronald Frey to Fire Suppression
110-   22-  Lieutenant, effective July 23, 2024.
2024   2024
Res.   7-   Reappointing Ricky Denunzio to the First Energy Stadium Commission with a term
111-   22-  ending August 18, 2029.
2024   2024
Res.   7-   Reappointing Michael Schorn to the First Energy Stadium Commission with a term
112-   22-  ending August 18, 2029.
2024   2024
Res.   8-   Authorizing the engagement agreement between the City and Green Building
113A-  12-  Alliance, for the creation of the Resilient Communities Initiative.
2024   2024
Res.   8-   Authorizing the engagement agreement between the City and Student Conservation
114-   12-  Association, for the management of the City of Reading Climate Corps.
2024   2024
Res.   8-   Authorizing the United States Geological Survey to install a groundwater
115-   12-  monitoring well and station at Angelica Creek Park.
2024   2024
Res.   8-   Reappointing Ann Sellers to the Environmental Advisory Council with a term
118A-  12-  ending August 12, 2027.
2024   2024
Res.   8-   Authorizing the purchase of a costars contract with Broderk’s Landscaping not
121-   26-  to exceed $206,125 for landscaping services at Mineral Spring Park.
2024   2024
Res.   8-   Authorizing the purchase of a costars contract with Berman truck not to exceed
122-   26-  $452,762 for two 47X Western Star trucks.
2024   2024
Res.   8-   Authorizing the purchase of a costars contract with Masano and E.M. Kutz not to
123-   26-  exceed $175,000 for two 2024 vehicles.
2024   2024
Res.   8-   Approving an engineering contract with H.F. Lenz Co. in the amount of $826,228
125-   26-  to perform the full design and construction management services for the Reading
2024   2024 City Hall HVAC replacement project.
Res.   9-9- Confirming the appointment of Earl Lucas and Lucy Cortez to the City of
132-   2024 Reading’s City Revitalization and Improvement Zone Authority.
2024
Res.   9-9- Confirming the appointment of Deb Millman, Tim Daley, and Shannon Leonhard to
133-   2024 the City of Reading’s City Revitalization and Improvement Zone Authority.
2024
Res.   9-9- Confirming the appointment of Peter Rye, Devon Lee Guistwite, and Josephine
134-   2024 Torres-Boykins to the City of Reading’s City Revitalization and Improvement
2024        Zone Authority.
Res.   9-   Awarding GESA Energy Efficiency and Energy Transition Project to Schneider
140-   23-  Electric Buildings America, Inc. in the amount of $17,995,929.96.
2024   2024
Res.   10-  Adopting PennDOT Publication 383 “Traffic Calming Handbook” in conjunction with
141-   14-  the Institute of Transportation Engineers (ITE) Publication “Traffic Calming
2024   2024 Practice Revised.”
Res.   9-
142-   23-  Approving and adopting the Reading Downtown Strategic Plan.
2024   2024
Res.   9-   Confirming the appointment of John Masano to the City of Reading’s City
143-   30-  Revitalization and Improvement Zone Authority.
2024   2024
Res.   9-   Confirming the appointment of Pablo Matos to the City of Reading’s City
144-   30-  Revitalization and Improvement Zone Authority.
2024   2024
Res.   9-   Appointing to the Charter Review Commission: David Myers, Ann Sheehan, Brian
145-   23-  Grubb, Jonathan Mejia, Tanya Melendez, and Evelyn Morrison.
2024   2024
Res.   10-  Confirming the appointment of Deborah Twigg as the Human Resources Director at
145A-  7-   the salary of $105,000.
2024   2024
Res.   10-  Authorizing the promotion of 2nd Deputy Fire Chief David Williams to 1st Deputy
149-   14-  Fire Chief, effective October 16, 2024.
2024   2024
Res.   10-  Authorizing the promotion of Fire Suppression Lieutenant Steven Ginder to 2nd
150-   14-  Deputy Fire Chief, effective October 16, 2024.
2024   2024
Res.   10-  Reappointing Rodney Ridley to the Berks County Convention Center Authority with
151-   14-  a term ending August 29, 2028.
2024   2024
Res.   10-  Authorizing the promotion of Sergeant Francisco Contreras to the rank of
152-   28-  Lieutenant, effective October 21, 2024.
2024   2024
Res.   10-  Authorizing the promotion of C.I. Trevor Atkins to the rank of Sergeant,
153-   28-  effective October 21, 2024.
2024   2024
Res.   10-  Authorizing the promotion of Firefighter/EMT Matthew Grant to Suppression
155-   28-  Lieutenant, effective November 1, 2024.
2024   2024
Res.   10-  Extending the contract with McNees Strategic Solutions Group to increase the
158-   28-  range of services provided.
2024   2024
Res.   11-  Authorizing the City to enter an agreement with All City Management Services to
167-   12-  extend current School Crossing Guard Services Contract by one year for the
2024   2024 2025-2026 school year.
Res.   11-  Reappointing Israel Gonzalez to the Berks County Convention Center Authority
170-   12-  with a term ending August 29, 2028.
2024   2024
Res.   11-  Appointing Ed Bernitsky to the Electrical Examining Board with a term ending
171-   12-  October 1, 2030.
2024   2024
Res.   11-  Reappointing Timothy Pelter to the Electrical Examining Board with a term
172-   12-  ending October 1, 2030.
2024   2024
Res.   11-  Appointing Corey DiLella to the Animal Control Board with a term ending
173-   25-  November 25, 2027.
2024   2024
Res.   11-
174-   25-  Appointing Shelia Perez to the Charter Review Commission.
2024   2024
Res.   12-  Approving the second amendment to employment contract of the City Council
177-   16-  Solicitor.
2024   2024
Res.   12-  Authorizing the promotion of Lieutenant Brett Sneeringer, date of employment
179-   16-  January 31, 2011, to the rank of Captain, effective December 16, 2024.
2024   2024
Res.   12-  Authorizing the promotion of Sergeant Melville Fegely, date of employment June
180-   16-  30, 2008, to the rank of Lieutenant, effective December 16, 2024.
2024   2024
Res.   12-  Authorizing the promotion of Officer Missael DeJesus, date of employment
181-   16-  January 19, 2015, to the rank of Sergeant, effective December 16, 2024.
2024   2024
            Authorizing conditional offers of employment for the hiring of the following
Res.   12-  probationary patrol officers effective January 13, 2025: Taylor D. Sidler, Eric
182-   16-  A. Gainor, Cavin D. Gehris, Philip C. Houck, Kaedon J. Sandcroft, Maximo A.
2024   2024 Castillo-Alcantara, Olivia A. Krogermeier, Cameron D. Casner, Michelle J.
            Bishop, Marshall K. Patterson, and Samuel P. Istenes.
       1-   Authorizing conditional offers of employment to the following probationary
Res.   13-  firefighters: Cobie Arnold, Ryan Balmer, Gavin Boyce, Michael Brunner, Thomas
3-2025 2025 Cotner, Timothy Eisenhard, Anthony Huffman, Sampson Lerch, Marc Passaro, Dustin
            Readinger, Brian Shaffer, and Steven Travers.
Res.   1-   Authorizing the Mayor to execute a memorandum of understanding for animal
5-2025 13-  control services with Berks Animal Rescue League.
       2025
Res.   1-
6-2025 13-  Authorizing execution of a PY2024 CDBG Action Plan amendment.
       2025
Res.   1-   Extending the program year for the Reading Climate Corps pending approval of
7-2025 13-  the agreement with the Student Conservation Association.
       2025
Res.   1-   Authorizing the execution of an agreement to accept payments in the form of a
9-2025 13-  one-time pilot payment and annual payments for allowing parcels to retain their
       2025 exempt status from real estate taxes.
Res.   1-   Reappointing Mark Cianciosi to the Code and Licenses Appeals Board with a term
10-    13-  ending January 13, 2027.
2025   2025
Res.   2-   Authorizing the promotion of Officer Michael Balch from the Patrol Division to
18-    10-  Sergeant, effective February 3, 2025.
2025   2025
20-    3-   Amending the 2025 position ordinance to reflect the Executive Director for RRA
2025   10-  reports to the CR Director and RRA Board, and to reflect promotions.
       2025
Res.   2-   Authorizing the name change of the Reading Climate Corps to the Reading
21-    10-  Conservation Corps.
2025   2025
Res.   2-   Authorizing the promotion of Lieutenant Aaron Demko to the rank of Captain,
23-    24-  effective February 10, 2025.
2025   2025
Res.   2-   Authorizing the promotion of Sergeant Thomas Fleming to the rank of Lieutenant,
24-    24-  effective February 10, 2025.
2025   2025
Res.   2-   Accepting the resignation of Christopher Trachte from the Planning Commission,
25-    24-  effective February 10, 2025.
2025   2025
Res.   2-
26-    24-  Approving and adopting the City of Reading Housing and Blight Strategy.
2025   2025
26-    4-   Amending the Mt. Penn Preserve Partnership Council of Government (MP3 COG) to
2025   28-  modify the Board membership and make some additional clarifications.
       2025
Res.   2-   Reappointing Richard Carpenter to the Reading Area Water Authority with a term
29-    24-  ending January 1, 2030.
2025   2025
Res.   3-   Accepting the resignation of Shane McFarlane from the Charter Board, effective
32-    10-  March 5, 2025.
2025   2025
Res.   3-   Authorizing the adoption of the City of Reading, PA Traffic Calming Policy
33-    10-  Report.
2025   2025
33-    4-   Amending the 2025 position ordinance to convert two part-time telecommunicator
2025   28-  positions to one full-time position.
       2025
Res.   3-   Appointing Jamie Keith as a full member to the Blighted Property Review
34-    10-  Committee.
2025   2025
Res.   3-   Appointing Ashley Ramirez to the Youth Commission with a term ending July 1,
37-    10-  2028.
2025   2025
Res.   3-   Accepting the resignation of Jonathan Auchter from the Animal Control Board,
37A-   24-  effective March 10, 2025.
2025   2025
Res.   3-   Appointing Arielys Morales to the Youth Commission with a term ending July 1,
38-    10-  2028.
2025   2025
Res.   3-   Approving the Parking Authority’s Parking Stall Plan for the 2025 Construction
41A-   24-  Season.
2025   2025
Res.   3-   Appointing Annabelle Salom Milander to the Youth Commission with a term ending
42-    24-  July 1, 2028.
2025   2025
Res.   3-   Appointing Riyanna Routier to the Youth Commission with a term ending July 1,
43-    24-  2028.
2025   2025
Res.   4-   Accepting the resignation of Leidy Ramos from the Charter Board, effective
44-    14-  March 26, 2025.
2025   2025
Res.   4-   Accepting the resignation of Susan Williams from the Charter Board, effective
45-    14-  March 26, 2025.
2025   2025
46-    7-   Amending the 2025 position ordinance to update the Police Tech Specialist title
2025   28-  and position to an AFSCME rank and file position with a title of Police Systems
       2025 Support Analyst, and a base hourly rate of $33.65.
Res.   4-
47-    14-  Authorizing bank accounts for the 2025 year.
2025   2025
54-    9-8- Amending the 2025 position ordinance to change the job title of Police social
2025   2025 worker to Social Services Liaison.
Res.   5-   Reappointing Richard Polityka to the Historical Architectural Review Board with
61-    12-  a term ending May 12, 2030.
2025   2025
Res.   5-   Authorizing Public Works proposed plan to provide partial reimbursement for the
63-    27-  screening of dumpsters and toters/receptacles permitted to be located within
2025   2025 the public right-of-way.
Res.   5-   Authorizing the Public Works Department to enter into a one- year renewal of
65-    27-  the Intergovernmental Cooperation Agreement between the City and the Reading
2025   2025 School District for the collection of recyclable materials at each of the
            district’s facilities.
Res.   6-9- Authorizing the purchase of a one-year contract renewal of HPE server support
65A-   2025 and maintenance from IntegraONE in the amount of $111,691.78 under CoStars
2025        Contract.
67-    10-  Amending the 2025 position ordinance to increase the hourly wage of the part-
2025   27-  time auditing assistant position from $23 to $26 per hour.
       2025
68-    10-  Requesting the creation of the position of Outreach and Education Coordinator
2025   27-  in the office of Human Relations Commission.
       2025
            Authorizing conditional offers of employment for hiring of the following as
Res.   6-   probationary patrol officers effective July 7, 2025: Konner A. Kegerise, Kyle
69-    23-  A. Rankin, Bryan S. Ditzler, Angel Colon-Acevedo, Jason A. Zulick, Justin R.
2025   2025 Bennett, Gavin R. Blankenbiller, Sergio Soto Jr., Rori A. Caulfield, Shishir
            Neupane, and Joshua J. Klouser.
Res.   6-   Appointing Stephen Gieringer to the Reading Redevelopment Authority with a term
74-    23-  ending December 31, 2029.
2025   2025
Res.   6-   Affirming the termination of employment of Captain Christian Rothermel from the
75-    23-  Reading Police Department.
2025   2025
Res.   6-
76-    23-  Adopting the Vision Zero Action Plan.
2025   2025
Res.   6-   Confirming the appointment of David Barr as the City of Reading Community
77-    27-  Development Director.
2025   2025
Res.   7-   Authorizing conditional offer of employment to the following probationary
78-    14-  paramedic to be effective July 1, 2025: Jeremy Sorg.
2025   2025
Res.   7-   Accepting the resignation of Kelley Coates from the Reading Redevelopment
79-    14-  Authority.
2025   2025
Res.   7-
82-    14-  Appointing Linda Soto to the Board of Ethics with a term ending July 14, 2028.
2025   2025
Res.   7-   Appointing Angela Meas to the Environmental Advisory Council with a term ending
83-    14-  July 14, 2028.
2025   2025
Res.   7-   Authorizing the promotion of Fire Suppression Lieutenant Joshua Green to 2nd
89-    28-  Deputy Fire Chief, effective July 25, 2025.
2025   2025
Res.   8-   Authorizing the Mayor to execute a PY2024 and PY2025 CDBG Action Plan
91-    11-  Amendment.
2025   2025
Res.   8-   Authorizing the promotion of Criminal Investigator Ryan Crampsie to the rank of
92-    11-  Sergeant, effective August 25, 2025.
2025   2025
Res.   8-   Authorizing conditional offers of employment to the following EMT/Paramedic to
94-    11-  be effective August 15, 2025: Tyler Bell, Braiden Bice, Kayle Jenkins, Ethan
2025   2025 Moquin, Victoria Motter, and Abahgail Wiekrykas.
Res.   8-   Reappointing Jeffrey Darlington to the Board of Ethics with a term ending
97-    11-  August 11, 2028.
2025   2025
Res.   8-   Reappointing Nelson De Leon to the Planning Commission with a term ending April
98-    11-  1, 2029.
2025   2025
Res.   8-   Reappointing Melanie Tavarez to the Youth Commission with a term ending July 1,
99-    11-  2028.
2025   2025
Res.   9-8- Authorizing conditional offers of employment for the hiring of the following as
102-   2025 probationary patrol officers effective September 1, 2025: Katelynn Duca and
2025        Richard Geiger.
Res.   9-8- The Mayor is authorized and directed to sign the PennDOT Municipal Winter
103-   2025 Traffic Services Agreement.
2025
Res.   9-8- Accepting the resignation of Stephen Gieringer from the Reading Redevelopment
105-   2025 Authority, effective September 8, 2025.
2025
Res.   9-   Appointing Virna Quinones to the Charter Board with a term ending April 26,
112-   22-  2027.
2025   2025
Res.   9-   Appointing Scott Lindsey to the Charter Board with a term ending April 26,
113-   22-  2028.
2025   2025
Res.   9-   Reappointing Gary Yeager Jr. to the First Energy Stadium Commission with a term
114-   22-  ending August 18, 2030.
2025   2025
Res.   10-
115-   6-   Confirming Javier Ruiz as Chief of Police of the Reading Police Department.
2025   2025
Res.   10-  Authorizing the promotion of Sergeant Bradley McClure to the rank of
116-   13-  Lieutenant, effective October 13, 2025.
2025   2025
Res.   10-  Authorizing the promotion of Police Officer Kyle Kunkle to the rank of
117-   13-  Sergeant, effective October 13, 2025.
2025   2025
Res.   10-  Accepting the resignation of Stephen Yarnell from the Reading Redevelopment
118-   13-  Authority, effective October 6, 2025.
2025   2025
Res.   10-  Accepting the resignation of Adela Rodriguez from the Charter Review
120-   13-  Commission, effective October 8, 2025.
2025   2025
Res.   10-  Authorizing the purchase of one 2025 Ford police interceptor utility emergency
122-   27-  response vehicle under Costars Contract.
2025   2025
Res.   10-  Removing James Cole from the Environmental Advisory Council on the
123-   27-  recommendation of the Board of Ethics for violations of the City of Reading
2025   2025 Ethics Code and failure to attend meetings.
Res.   11-  Authorizing submission of the PY2026 CDBG ESG and Home Action Plan to the
124-   10-  United States Department of Housing and Urban Development.
2025   2025
Res.   11-  Authorizing the promotion of Lieutenant Alexander Sholedice to the rank of
125-   10-  Captain, effective November 17, 2025.
2025   2025
Res.   11-  Reappointing Todd Rathman to the Electricians Examining Board with a term
128-   10-  ending October 1, 2031.
2025   2025
Res.   11-  Reappointing William Vitale to the Environmental Advisory Council with a term
129-   10-  ending November 10, 2028.
2025   2025
Res.   11-
130-   10-  Appointing three members to the Reading Redevelopment Authority.
2025   2025
Res.   11-  Accepting the resignation of Brian Grubb from the Charter Review Commission,
132-   24-  effective immediately.
2025   2025
Res.   11-  Authorizing the Mayor to execute a PY 2018 and PY 2019 Home Action Plan
134-   24-  Amendment.
2025   2025
Res.   11-  Appointing Claudette Bullock to the Charter Review Commission effective
138-   24-  immediately.
2025   2025
Res.   11-  Setting the term for Reading Redevelopment Authority member: S. Sergei
142-   24-  Szortyka, term expiring December 31, 2025.
2025   2025
Res.   11-  Setting the term for Reading Redevelopment Authority member: Kevin Yarnall,
143-   24-  term expiring December 31, 2028.
2025   2025
Res.   11-  Setting the term for Reading Redevelopment Authority member: Joey Miranda, term
144-   24-  expiring December 31, 2026.
2025   2025
Res.   11-  The Mayor is authorized to execute the agreement to resolve the dispute
145-   24-  regarding municipal parking fees owed to the City and credits owed to the
2025   2025 City’s towing contractor.
           
 
 
Chapter A614
PLAN APPROVAL
§
A614-101.   Plan approval.
[Below is a listing of ordinances adopted by the City of Reading regarding the
approval of plans. Full copies of said ordinances can be found in the City
Clerk's Office.]
§ A614-101. Plan approval.
Ord. No. Date Description
Ord. No. Date       Description
                    Accepting the survey and plan submitted by the City
6-1917   3-21-1917  Engineer designating new streets, avenues and highways as
                    part of the Eighteenth Ward.
                    Approving the survey and plan submitted by the City
                    Engineer, July 25, 1923, designating new streets, avenues
                    and highways as part of the Fifteenth Ward, designated on
48-1923  8-28-1923  said plan as the 1st section of the Glenside Annexation,
                    with the grades and directing the same to be placed on
                    topographical survey and entered and recorded in the plot
                    book of street plans in the office of the City Engineer.
                    Approving the plan notated as plan of streets as proposed
19-1925  4-22-1925  to be placed on the topographical survey of the City
                    situate in the 8th section.
                    Approving the plan showing proposed streets to be placed on
30-1925  7-1-1925   the topographical survey of the 3rd section of the
                    Eighteenth Ward.
114-1927 9-14-1927  Approving the plan revising the topographical survey of
                    proposed streets in Cathedral Heights.
157-1927 12-14-1927 Approving the plan revising the topographical survey of
                    proposed streets in Hessian Camp No. 2.
28-1928A 4-4-1928   Approving the plan of Hessian Camp Property.
42-1928  5-9-1928   Revising the topographical survey to conform with the plans
                    and profiles on file in the office of the City Engineer.
4-1930   2-19-1930  Revising the topographical survey to conform with the plans
                    and profiles in the office of the City Engineer.
5-1930   2-19-1930  Revising the topographical survey to conform with the plans
                    and profiles in the office of the City Engineer.
                    Amending Ord. No. 6-1917 and Ord. No. 188-1927 by modifying
23-1959  10-28-1959 the topographical survey by correcting angles, distances
                    and radii of curves in block bounded by Summit Avenue,
                    Bartlett Street, Prospect Avenue and Arlington Street.
                    Approving Plan No. 1906-13-S, topographical plan showing
49-1952  11-19-1952 proposed realignment of streets on and through property
                    belonging to the Reading Housing Authority situate in the
                    Eighteenth Ward of the City.
                    Approving the proposed plan of the Reading Downtown
66-1995  7-5-1995   Improvement District Authority pursuant to Ord. No. 134-
                    1995.
60-2019  12-9-2019  Establishing five year Capital Plan for the City of
                    Reading.
Chapter A615
PUBLIC PROPERTY
§
A615-101.   Public property.
[Below is a listing of ordinances adopted by the City of Reading regarding
public property. Full copies of said ordinances can be found in the City
Clerk's Office.]
§ A615-101. Public property.
Ord. No. Date Description
Ord. Date Description
No.
     3-
65a  25-  Acquiring a triangular tract of land from Isaac J. Goldsmith.
     1914
26-  6-3- Exchanging certain real estate between the City and Joseph A. White.
1914 1914
68-  9-9- Acquiring a triangular tract of land from George W. Diemer upon certain
1914 1914 conditions.
20-  4-   Purchasing a tract of land in the City and another tract contiguous in
1915 21-  Muhlenburg Township from Reading Company.
     1915
47-  9-8- Leasing of the fire house of the Oakbrook Fire Company by the City.
1915 1915
74-  12-  Appropriating and condemning a portion of land of the Berks Land Company
1915 22-  for the purpose of making a park and parkway along the Schuylkill River.
     1915
76-  12-  Purchasing property from Catharine Garrigues located in Lower Alsace
1915 22-  Township in the amount of $500.
     1915
84-  12-  Accepting a gift of land from William H. and Annie R. Lunden situate in
1915 29-  Muhlenburg Township for park purposes and agreeing to lay a water main
     1915 along said property at the expense of the City.
85-  12-  Accepting a gift of land from George F. and Rosa Eisenbrown situate in
1915 29-  Muhlenburg Township.
     1915
86-  12-  Acquiring a triangular tract of land from Frank A. Livingood, Ella C.
1915 29-  Livingood, Alice Livingood Surls and Charles J. Livingood.
     1915
42-  5-3- Purchasing real estate in Lower Alsace Township from William J. Shearer.
1916 1916
46-  5-
1916 19-  Purchasing real estate in Muhlenberg Township from Daniel J. Driscoli.
     1916
75-  12-
1917 26-  Leasing of the fire house of the Liberty Fire Company by the City.
     1917
82-  1-7- Purchasing certain real estate in settlement of past and the elimination
1917 1918 of future claims for flood damages.
23-  8-   Purchasing real estate in the Sixteenth Ward of the City from Pamela C.
1918 14-  Sweeny.
     1918
18-  4-9- Purchasing real estate in the Thirteenth Ward from Charles Bishop and
1919 1919 Annie Becker.
42-  9-3- Purchasing real estate from the Social Welfare League of Reading for
1919 1919 public library purposes.
28-  5-   Appropriating and condemning real estate of the heirs of Reese Davies in
1920 19-  Ontelaunee Township for the extension of the Maiden Creek filters to
     1920 improve the water supply.
29-  6-2- Purchasing real estate in Lower Alsace Township from Howard L. and Bertha
1920 1920 M. Ash.
47-  8-   Purchasing the machinery, equipment and appurtenances of the Reading
1920 11-  Reduction Company installed at the garbage plant at Millmont.
     1920
4-   1-   Appropriating and condemning real estate of Mary B. McCoy for the erection
1921 26-  of a public building for the use of the City.
     1921
10-  2-   Accepting the gift of Harry F. and Maude Kantner of a tract of land
1921 23-  situate on Penn's Mount for a public park or public property purposes.
     1921
20-  4-6- Accepting the gift of tract of land situate partly in the City and partly
1921 1921 in Alsace Township from Reading Iron Company for public park or public
          forestry purposes.
23-  4-6- Accepting a tract of land situate on the western slope of Mount Penn in
1921 1921 the City from the Right Reverend Monsignor George Bornemann for public
          park or public forestry purposes.
38-  6-   Constructing and equipping a public comfort station and appurtenances
1921 15-  underground on the highway on the southwestern corner of Fifth and Penn
     1921 Streets.
43-  8-   Appropriating and condemning real estate of August F. Kostenbader situate
1921 24-  partly within the limits of the City and partly in Lower Alsace Township
     1921 for the purpose of making a public park.
44-  8-   Appropriating and condemning real estate of Elizabeth Kirschman situate
1921 24-  partly within the limits of the City and partly in Lower Alsace Township
     1921 for the purpose of making a public park.
51-  9-   Purchasing real estate in the City from Carr and Schad, Inc., for public
1921 28-  library purposes.
     1921
3-   1-
1922 18-  Amending Ord. No. 44 1921.
     1922
4-   1-
1922 18-  Amending Ord. No. 43 1921.
     1922
29-  5-   Reserving a tract of land at the intersection of Centre Avenue and North
1922 17-  Fourth Street for the use of the commonwealth as a site for an equestrian
     1922 statue of the late General David McMurtrie Gregg.
     2-   Executing an agreement between the City and the County of Berks for
7-   14-  changing the topographical survey and acquiring properties on account of
1923 1923 the construction of a new bridge on Schuylkill Avenue over the Schuylkill
          River in the Fifteenth Ward.
18-  4-4- Purchasing real estate in Lower Alsace Township from Edmond Schlegel.
1923 1923
60-  10-  Appropriating and condemning real estate of Edward E. Schaeffer in
1923 24-  Ontelaunee Township to improve water supply of the City.
     1923
61-  10-  Appropriating and condemning real estate of Hannah I. Davies, Sallie
1923 24-  Davies and Edward Davies, the heirs of Reese Davies, in Ontelaunee
     1923 Township to improve water supply of the City.
49-  6-   Appropriating and condemning real estate of Amalia Thalheimer, deceased,
1924 25-  situate in the Township of Alsace for public parks purposes.
     1924
57-  7-9- Purchasing real estate in Lower Alsace Township from George D. Horst for
1924 1924 public park purposes.
58-  7-9- Purchasing real estate in Lower Alsace Township from George D. Horst for
1924 1924 the Water Department.
73-  8-6- Accepting the gift of George D. Horst and the Taxpayers League of Drenkle
1924 1924 Field formerly situate in Lower Alsace Township for park purposes.
76-  7-   Conveying by the Mayor property located at 626 North Eleventh Street under
1924 30-  the will of I.A. Gerhart.
     1924
13-  2-   Accepting the gift of the Reading Iron Company of three tracts of land
1925 25-  situate on Mount Penn in the Sixteenth Ward for public park or public
     1925 forestry purposes.
14-  2-
1925 25-  Purchasing real estate from W. Oscar Miller for public park purposes.
     1925
16-  4-1- Purchasing certain real estate from Jonathan K. and Anna M. Seidel and
1925 1925 Howard F. and May R. Seidel for public street and highway purposes.
27-  5-6- Purchasing real estate from Mrs. Elizabeth Kirschmann for the purpose of
1925 1925 protecting the watershed.
33-  7-8- Appropriating and condemning real estate of Herman W. Rether situate in
1925 1925 the City for public park purposes.
5-   1-   Purchasing real estate in Lower Alsace Township from Samuel M. Sherman for
1926 27-  the purpose of protecting the watershed of the City.
     1926
6-   2-   Purchasing real estate in Lower Alsace Township from the Albert Thalheimer
1926 10-  estate for the purpose of protecting the watershed of the City.
     1926
7-   2-   Appropriating and condemning real estate of Ida M. Hottenstein of
1926 10-  Ontelaunee Township for watershed purposes.
     1926
8-   2-   Appropriating and condemning real estate of Morris Rothenberger of
1926 10-  Ontelaunee Township for watershed purposes.
     1926
9-   2-   Appropriating and condemning real estate of George R. Rader of Ontelaunee
1926 10-  Township for watershed purposes.
     1926
11-  2-   Appropriating and condemning real estate of Frank Lauer situate in the
1926 24-  City for park and playground purposes.
     1926
12-  2-   Appropriating and condemning real estate of William P. Sweeny and Kate B.
1926 24-  Tuke situate in the City for park and playground purposes.
     1926
13-  2-   Purchasing real estate in Lower Alsace Township from the executors and
1926 17-  heirs of Jacob B. Livingood for the purpose of protecting the watershed.
     1926
14-  3-   Purchasing real estate in Lower Alsace Township from the executors and
1926 10-  heirs of Jacob B. Livingood for the purpose of protecting the watershed.
     1926
15-  2-   Appropriating and condemning real estate of Daniel P. Shurr situate in
1926 17-  Ontelaunee Township for watershed purposes.
     1926
17-  2-   Appropriating and condemning real estate of Abraham B. Lessher situate in
1926 20-  the Maidencreek Township for watershed purposes.
     1926
18-  3-   Appropriating and condemning real estate of Samuel R. Althouse situate in
1926 10-  Ontelaunee Township for watershed purposes.
     1926
19-  3-   Appropriating and condemning real estate of Emma Briel situate in
1926 10-  Maidencreek Township for watershed purposes.
     1926
20-  3-   Appropriating and condemning real estate of Raymond L. and Helen Ohlinger
1926 17-  situate in Maidencreek Township for watershed purposes.
     1926
21-  3-   Appropriating and condemning real estate of William E. Smith situate in
1926 10-  Maidencreek Township for watershed purposes.
     1926
22-  3-   Appropriating and condemning real estate of M.O. Koontz situate in
1926 10-  Maidencreek Township for watershed purposes.
     1926
23-  3-   Appropriating and condemning real estate of J.B. Lesher situate in
1926 10-  Maidencreek Township for watershed purposes.
     1926
24-  3-   Appropriating and condemning real estate of W. Arthur Snyder situate in
1926 10-  Maidencreek Township for watershed purposes.
     1926
25-  3-   Appropriating and condemning real estate of Ammon C. Lesher situate in
1926 10-  Maidencreek Township for watershed purposes.
     1926
26-  3-   Appropriating and condemning real estate of Benjamin M. Schlappig situate
1926 10-  in Maidencreek Township for watershed purposes.
     1926
27-  3-   Appropriating and condemning real estate of E. Rebecca Schlappig situate
1926 10-  in Maidencreek Township for watershed purposes.
     1926
28-  3-   Appropriating and condemning real estate of Howard Seiger situate in
1926 10-  Maidencreek Township for watershed purposes.
     1926
29-  3-   Appropriating and condemning real estate of David A. and Ella Strausser
1926 17-  situate in Maidencreek Township for watershed purposes.
     1926
30-  3-   Appropriating and condemning real estate of O.F. and Sallie B. Berger
1926 17-  situate in Maidencreek Township for watershed purposes.
     1926
31-  3-   Appropriating and condemning real estate of Roy F. Lesher situate in
1926 10-  Maidencreek Township for watershed purposes.
     1926
32-  3-   Appropriating and condemning real estate of Jennie E. Heilman situate in
1926 10-  Maidencreek Township for watershed purposes.
     1926
33-  3-   Appropriating and condemning real estate of W. Edward Smith situate in
1926 10-  Maidencreek Township for watershed purposes.
     1926
34-  3-   Appropriating and condemning real estate of Howard Briel situate in
1926 10-  Maidencreek Township for watershed purposes.
     1926
35-  3-   Appropriating and condemning real estate of Edwin Briel situate in
1926 10-  Maidencreek Township for watershed purposes.
     1926
36-  3-   Appropriating and condemning real estate of William Moore situate in
1926 10-  Maidencreek Township for watershed purposes.
     1926
37-  3-   Appropriating and condemning real estate of Theodore M. Deck situate in
1926 10-  Maidencreek Township for watershed purposes.
     1926
38-  3-   Purchasing real estate in Ontelaunee and Maidencreek Townships from Samuel
1926 17-  M. Sherman for the protection of the watershed.
     1926
39-  3-   Appropriating and condemning real estate of H. Ferdinand Wiegard situate
1926 17-  in Maidencreek Township for watershed purposes.
     1926
40-  3-   Appropriating and condemning real estate of Clara L. Parvin situate partly
1926 17-  in Maidencreek Township and partly in Ontelaunee Township for watershed
     1926 purposes.
42-  3-   Appropriating and condemning real estate of Harvey J. Kunkle situate in
1926 17-  Maidencreek Township for watershed purposes.
     1926
47-  3-   Appropriating and condemning real estate of James U. Heffley estate
1926 24-  situate partly in Maidencreek Township and partly in Ontelaunee Township
     1926 for watershed purposes.
51-  3-   Appropriating and condemning real estate of Mary C. Morris and Sallie H.
1926 31-  Wiley situate in Maidencreek Township for watershed purposes.
     1926
52-  4-7- Appropriating and condemning real estate of Isaac M. Philips situate in
1926 1926 Ontelaunee Township for watershed purposes.
53-  4-7- Appropriating and condemning real estate of Reuben M. Forney situate in
1926 1926 Ontelaunee Township for watershed purposes.
54-  4-7- Appropriating and condemning real estate of John Saul situate in
1926 1926 Ontelaunee Township for watershed purposes.
55-  4-7- Appropriating and condemning real estate of Thomas M. Lightfoot situate in
1926 1926 Maidencreek Township for watershed purposes.
56-  4-   Purchasing real estate in Lower Alsace Township from Julia O.H. Rick for
1926 21-  public park purposes.
     1926
57-  4-   Appropriating and condemning real estate of George L. Strauser situate in
1926 14-  Maidencreek Township for watershed purposes.
     1926
59-  4-   Appropriating and condemning real estate of Ruth A. and Catherine
1926 14-  Rothermel situate in Maidencreek Township for watershed purposes.
     1926
60-  4-   Appropriating and condemning real estate of John D. Adams situate in
1926 14-  Maidencreek Township for watershed purposes.
     1926
63-  4-   Purchasing real estate in Lower Alsace Township from the Mount Penn
1926 21-  Improvement Company for public park purposes.
     1926
64-  8-   Purchasing real estate in Lower Alsace Township from the Mount Penn
1926 11-  Improvement Company for watershed purposes.
     1926
65-  4-   Appropriating and condemning real estate of Wilson A. Gasser situate in
1926 21-  Maidencreek Township for watershed purposes.
     1926
66-  4-   Appropriating and condemning real estate of William H. Moyer situate in
1926 21-  Maidencreek Township for watershed purposes.
     1926
67-  4-   Appropriating and condemning real estate of Harvey E. Moyer situate in
1926 21-  Maidencreek Township for watershed purposes.
     1926
68-  4-   Appropriating and condemning real estate of Blanche Sincox situate in
1926 21-  Maidencreek Township for watershed purposes.
     1926
69-  4-   Appropriating and condemning real estate of Mary Ellen Long situate in
1926 21-  Maidencreek Township for watershed purposes.
     1926
70-  4-   Appropriating and condemning real estate of Laura B. Remsnyder situate in
1926 28-  Maidencreek Township for watershed purposes.
     1926
71-  4-   Appropriating and condemning real estate of Charles I. and Katie A.
1926 28-  Hinnershitz situate in Maidencreek Township for watershed purposes.
     1926
72-  4-   Appropriating and condemning real estate of Leroy A. Gasser situate in
1926 28-  Maidencreek Township for watershed purposes.
     1926
73-  4-   Appropriating and condemning real estate of Blanche E. Dorsett situate in
1926 28-  Maidencreek Township for watershed purposes.
     1926
74-  4-   Appropriating and condemning real estate of Minnie Koch situate in
1926 28-  Maidencreek Township for watershed purposes.
     1926
75-  4-   Appropriating and condemning real estate of Thomas H. Hannon situate in
1926 28-  Maidencreek Township for watershed purposes.
     1926
76-  4-   Appropriating and condemning real estate of John L. and Lulu B. Brumbach
1926 28-  situate in Maidencreek Township for watershed purposes.
     1926
77-  4-   Appropriating and condemning real estate of Tobias S. Ochs situate in
1926 28-  Maidencreek Township for watershed purposes.
     1926
78-  4-   Appropriating and condemning real estate of William C. and Clara A.
1926 28-  Deysher situate in Maidencreek Township for watershed purposes.
     1926
79-  4-   Appropriating and condemning real estate of William R. Jacobs situate in
1926 28-  Maidencreek Township for watershed purposes.
     1926
90-  7-7- Appropriating and condemning real estate of Aaron R. Barth situate in the
1926 1926 City of Reading for public park purposes.
93-  7-   Appropriating and condemning real estate of William I. and Helen May
1926 21-  Conrad situate in Ontelaunee Township for improvements to the water supply
     1926 of the City.
94-  7-   Appropriating and condemning real estate of Edward Davies. Sallie Davies
1926 21-  and Hannah I. Davies situate in Ontelaunee Township for improvements to
     1926 the water supply of the City.
95-  7-   Appropriating and condemning real estate of John Blankhorn situate in
1926 21-  Ontelaunee Township for improvements to the water supply of the City.
     1926
96-  7-   Appropriating and condemning real estate of James A. and Sara E. Elbert
1926 21-  situate in Maidencreek Township for watershed purposes.
     1926
97-  7-   Appropriating and condemning real estate of George R. and Lulia Davies
1926 21-  Curry situate in Maidencreek Township for watershed purposes.
     1926
98-  7-   Appropriating and condemning real estate of Willard Weinhold situate in
1926 21-  Maidencreek Township for watershed purposes.
     1926
99-  7-   Appropriating and condemning real estate of John C. and Naomi B. German
1926 21-  situate in Maidencreek Township for watershed purposes.
     1926
101- 7-   Purchasing 165 lots of real estate in La Vale situate in Maidencreek
1926 21-  Township from H. Ferdinand Wiegand for watershed purposes.
     1926
102- 7-   Purchasing 11 lots of real estate in La Vale situate in Maidencreek
1926 21-  Township from H. Ferdinand Wiegand for watershed purposes.
     1926
104- 7-   Appropriating and condemning real estate of Lillian M. Brumbach situate in
1926 27-  Maidencreek Township for watershed purposes.
     1926
105- 7-   Appropriating and condemning real estate of Laura M. Bortz situate in
1926 27-  Maidencreek Township for watershed purposes.
     1926
106- 7-   Appropriating and condemning real estate of Gustus D. Becker situate in
1926 27-  Maidencreek Township for watershed purposes.
     1926
107- 7-   Appropriating and condemning real estate of Frederick Brossman situate in
1926 27-  Maidencreek Township for watershed purposes.
     1926
108- 7-   Appropriating and condemning real estate of Helene Bauman situate in
1926 27-  Maidencreek Township for watershed purposes.
     1926
109- 7-   Appropriating and condemning real estate of John Calvaresi situate in
1926 27-  Maidencreek Township for watershed purposes.
     1926
110- 7-   Appropriating and condemning real estate of William B. and Mamie Fichthorn
1926 27-  situate in Maidencreek Township for watershed purposes.
     1926
111- 7-   Appropriating and condemning real estate of Constantio Ernesto situate in
1926 27-  Maidencreek Township for watershed purposes.
     1926
112- 7-   Appropriating and condemning real estate of Elmer A. Fisher situate in
1926 27-  Maidencreek Township for watershed purposes.
     1926
113- 7-   Appropriating and condemning real estate of Bessie Griscom situate in
1926 27-  Maidencreek Township for watershed purposes.
     1926
114- 7-   Appropriating and condemning real estate of Alice E. Gring situate in
1926 27-  Maidencreek Township for watershed purposes.
     1926
115- 7-   Appropriating and condemning real estate of Deborah M. Hoffman situate in
1926 27-  Maidencreek Township for watershed purposes.
     1926
116- 7-   Appropriating and condemning real estate of James C. Heist situate in
1926 27-  Maidencreek Township for watershed purposes.
     1926
117- 7-   Appropriating and condemning real estate of Edwin J. Hetherington situate
1926 27-  in Maidencreek Township for watershed purposes.
     1926
118- 7-   Appropriating and condemning real estate of Frank T. and Martha E. Heyde
1926 27-  situate in Maidencreek Township for watershed purposes.
     1926
119- 7-   Appropriating and condemning real estate of Herman and Eugenia Hahnel
1926 27-  situate in Maidencreek Township for watershed purposes.
     1926
120- 7-   Appropriating and condemning real estate of Marie A. Kauffman situate in
1926 27-  Maidencreek Township for watershed purposes.
     1926
121- 7-   Appropriating and condemning real estate of Howard A. and Anna Kauffman
1926 27-  situate in Maidencreek Township for watershed purposes.
     1926
122- 7-   Appropriating and condemning real estate of R. Leroy and Anetta Killian
1926 27-  situate in Maidencreek Township for watershed purposes.
     1926
123- 7-   Appropriating and condemning real estate of James W. and Sarah E. Ketterer
1926 27-  situate in Maidencreek Township for watershed purposes.
     1926
124- 7-   Appropriating and condemning real estate of Earl Klevansky situate in
1926 27-  Maidencreek Township for watershed purposes.
     1926
125- 8-4- Appropriating and condemning real estate of John Fields situate in
1926 1926 Maidencreek Township for watershed purposes.
126- 8-4- Appropriating and condemning real estate of Carrie E. Luband situate in
1926 1926 Maidencreek Township for watershed purposes.
127- 8-4- Appropriating and condemning real estate of George A. Markert, Jr.,
1926 1926 situate in Maidencreek Township for watershed purposes.
128- 8-4- Appropriating and condemning real estate of James J. Merkel situate in
1926 1926 Maidencreek Township for watershed purposes.
129- 8-4- Appropriating and condemning real estate of Frank E. Miller situate in
1926 1926 Maidencreek Township for watershed purposes.
130- 8-4- Appropriating and condemning real estate of G. Robert and Anna Norton
1926 1926 situate in Maidencreek Township for watershed purposes.
131- 8-4- Appropriating and condemning real estate of Mark E. Paff situate in
1926 1926 Maidencreek Township for watershed purposes.
132- 8-4- Appropriating and condemning real estate of Leona Reeser situate in
1926 1926 Maidencreek Township for watershed purposes.
133- 8-4- Appropriating and condemning real estate of William J. Reusing situate in
1926 1926 Maidencreek Township for watershed purposes.
134- 8-4- Appropriating and condemning real estate of H.G. Roberts situate in
1926 1926 Maidencreek Township for watershed purposes.
135- 8-4- Appropriating and condemning real estate of Howard I. Snyder situate in
1926 1926 Maidencreek Township for watershed purposes.
136- 8-4- Appropriating and condemning real estate of Whyoma M. Spangler situate in
1926 1926 Maidencreek Township for watershed purposes.
137- 8-4- Appropriating and condemning real estate of J. Walter Stover situate in
1926 1926 Maidencreek Township for watershed purposes.
138- 8-4- Appropriating and condemning real estate of Luke S. Stover situate in
1926 1926 Maidencreek Township for watershed purposes.
139- 8-4- Appropriating and condemning real estate of Sarah E. and Myrta M. Yarnell
1926 1926 situate in Maidencreek Township for watershed purposes.
140- 8-4- Appropriating and condemning real estate of Elizabeth Yohn situate in
1926 1926 Maidencreek Township for watershed purposes.
141- 8-4- Appropriating and condemning real estate of Edwina Yohn situate in
1926 1926 Maidencreek Township for watershed purposes.
142- 8-4- Appropriating and condemning real estate of Lewis W. Zechman situate in
1926 1926 Maidencreek Township for watershed purposes.
143- 8-4- Appropriating and condemning real estate of Merrit Lumber Yards, Inc.,
1926 1926 situate in Maidencreek Township for watershed purposes.
144- 8-4- Appropriating and condemning real estate of Jesse G. Hawley situate in
1926 1926 Maidencreek Township for watershed purposes.
145- 8-4- Appropriating and condemning a portion of real estate of Samuel S. Kindt
1926 1926 situate in Ontelaunee Township for watershed purposes.
156- 9-   Appropriating and condemning real estate of Lewis W. Muschlitz situate in
1926 15-  Ontelaunee Township for watershed purposes.
     1926
157- 9-8- Amending Ord. No. 8-1926.
1926 1926
158- 9-8- Amending Ord. No. 64-1926.
1926 1926
159- 9-8- Amending Ord. No. 63-1926.
1926 1926
160- 9-8- Purchasing real estate in Maidencreek Township from Leona Reeser for the
1926 1926 purpose of protecting the watershed.
168- 9-   Purchasing real estate in Maidencreek Township from Bessie Griscom for the
1926 22-  purpose of protecting the watershed.
     1926
169- 9-   Appropriating and condemning real estate of Raymond B. Brown situate in
1926 22-  Ontelaunee Township for watershed purposes.
     1926
170- 9-   Exchanging real estate owned by the City for certain other real estate
1926 29-  owned by George D. Horst.
     1926
172- 10-  Purchasing real estate in Maidencreek Township from John D. Adams for
1926 6-   watershed purposes.
     1926
174- 10-  Purchasing real estate in Maidencreek Township from Florence E. James for
1926 20-  watershed purposes.
     1926
175- 11-  Purchasing real estate in Maidencreek Township from William H. Moyer for
1926 3-   watershed purposes.
     1926
176- 11-  Purchasing real estate in Maidencreek Township from Harvey E. Moyer for
1926 3-   watershed purposes.
     1926
189- 12-  Purchasing real estate in Ontelaunee Township from William I. and Helen
1926 8-   May Conrad for watershed purposes.
     1926
190- 12-  Purchasing real estate in Ontelaunee Township from John Blankhorn for
1926 8-   watershed purposes.
     1926
191- 12-  Purchasing real estate in Maidencreek Township from Whyoma M. Spangler for
1926 15-  watershed purposes.
     1926
192- 12-  Purchasing real estate in Maidencreek Township from Mary L. Honsberger for
1926 22-  watershed purposes.
     1926
200- 1-   Purchasing real estate in Maidencreek Township from Kathryn M. Anderson
1926 19-  for watershed purposes.
     1927
3-   1-   Purchasing real estate in Maidencreek Township from Frederick Brossman for
1927 19-  watershed purposes.
     1927
4-   1-   Purchasing real estate in Alsace Township from Edward Spuhler for park
1927 26-  purposes.
     1927
5-   1-   Appropriating and condemning real estate of Edwin L. Parvin, Elizabeth S.
1927 19-  Knight, heirs of George B. Parvin, deceased, and Lucia L. Parvin Riddle
     1927 situate in Ontelaunee Township for watershed purposes.
     1-   Appropriating and condemning real estate of Carrie A. Parvin, Edwin L.
6-   19-  Parvin, Elizabeth S. Knight, heirs of George B. Parvin, deceased, Mary I.
1927 1927 Parvin, Benjamin Parvin and Lucia L. Parvin Riddle situate in Ontelaunee
          Township for watershed purposes.
7-   1-   Purchasing real estate in Ontelaunee Township from Hannah I. Davies for
1927 26-  use of the Bureau of Water.
     1927
8-   1-   Purchasing real estate in Ontelaunee Township from Edward Davies and
1927 26-  Hannah I. Davies for use of the Bureau of Water.
     1927
9-   1-   Purchasing real estate in Maidencreek Township from Willard Weinhold for
1927 26-  watershed purposes.
     1927
13-  2-9- Purchasing real estate in Maidencreek Township from Alice E. Gring for use
1927 1927 of the Bureau of Water.
14-  2-9- Purchasing real estate in Maidencreek Township from John Fields for use of
1927 1927 the Bureau of Water.
17-  4-   Purchasing real estate in Ontelaunee Township from George H. Rader for use
1927 20-  of the Bureau of Water.
     1927
18-  2-   Purchasing real estate in Maidencreek Township from G. Robert and Anna
1927 16-  Norton for use of the Bureau of Water.
     1927
19-  2-   Appropriating and condemning real estate of Amos R. Esterly situate in
1927 16-  Maidencreek Township for use of the Bureau of Water.
     1927
20-  2-   Appropriating and condemning real estate of Mary Pribula situate in
1927 16-  Maidencreek Township for use of the Bureau of Water.
     1927
21-  2-   Appropriating and condemning real estate of Egnak Shtoyko situate in
1927 16-  Maidencreek Township for use of the Bureau of Water.
     1927
22-  2-   Appropriating and condemning real estate of Warren D. Jacoby and William
1927 16-  H. Hunsberger situate in Maidencreek Township for use of the Bureau of
     1927 Water.
23-  2-   Appropriating and condemning real estate of Warren D. and Florence W.
1927 16-  Jacoby situate in Maidencreek Township for use of the Bureau of Water.
     1927
24-  2-   Appropriating and condemning real estate of Thomas E. Lindenrnuth situate
1927 16-  in Maidencreek Township for use of the Bureau of Water.
     1927
26-  2-   Appropriating and condemning real estate of Thomas H. Hannon situate in
1927 23-  Maidencreek Township for use of the Bureau of Water.
     1927
27-  2-   Appropriating and condemning real estate of Lyle L. Wagner situate in
1927 23-  Maidencreek Township for use of the Bureau of Water.
     1927
28-  2-   Appropriating and condemning real estate of Leo K. Althouse situate in
1927 23-  Maidencreek Township for use of the Bureau of Water.
     1927
29-  2-   Appropriating and condemning real estate of Leroy Yoder situate in
1927 23-  Maidencreek Township for use of the Bureau of Water.
     1927
30-  2-   Appropriating and condemning real estate of Cora Ettinger situate in
1927 23-  Maidencreek Township for use of the Bureau of Water.
     1927
31-  2-   Appropriating and condemning real estate of Anthony B. Rearden situate in
1927 23-  Maidencreek Township for use of the Bureau of Water.
     1927
32-  2-   Appropriating and condemning real estate of Anthony B. Rearden situate in
1927 23-  Maidencreek Township for use of the Bureau of Water.
     1927
33-  2-   Appropriating and condemning real estate of Jacob F. Forney situate in
1927 23-  Ontelaunee Township for use of the Bureau of Water.
     1927
37-  3-   Appropriating and condemning real estate of Samuel N. Potteiger situate in
1927 23-  the City for park and playground purposes.
     1927
38-  3-   Appropriating and condemning real estate of William E. Fisher situate in
1927 23-  the City for park and playground purposes.
     1927
40-  3-9- Purchasing real estate in Maidencreek Township from Herman and Eugenia
1927 1927 Hahnel for use of the Bureau of Water.
41-  3-9- Purchasing real estate in Maidencreek Township from Cora Ettinger for use
1927 1927 of the Bureau of Water.
42-  3-9- Purchasing real estate in Maidencreek Township from Helene Bauman for use
1927 1927 of the Bureau of Water.
          Appropriating and condemning real estate a society or association known as
43-  3-9- "Exeter Monthly Meeting," "The Friends," "Society of Friends" and
1927 1927 "Maidencreek Preparative Meeting" situate in Ontelaunee Township for the
          use of the Bureau of Water.
          Appropriating and condemning real estate from a society or association
44-  3-9- known as "Exeter Monthly Meeting," "The Friends," "Society of Friends" and
1927 1927 "Maidencreek Preparative Meeting" situate in Maidencreek Township for the
          use of the Bureau of Water.
45-  3-   Purchasing real estate in Maidencreek Township from William J. Reusing for
1927 16-  use of the Bureau of Water.
     1927
46-  3-   Purchasing real estate in Maidencreek Township from Elmer A. Fisher for
1927 16-  use of the Bureau of Water.
     1927
47-  3-   Appropriating and condemning real estate from Howard D. Becker situate in
1927 23-  Maidencreek Township for park and playground purposes.
     1927
48-  3-   Purchasing real estate in Maidencreek Township from Anthony B. Rearden for
1927 30-  use of the Bureau of Water.
     1927
49-  3-   Purchasing real estate in Maidencreek Township from Edwin J. Hetherington
1927 30-  for use of the Bureau of Water.
     1927
50-  4-6- Purchasing real estate in Maidencreek Township from Luke S. Stover for use
1927 1927 of the Bureau of Water.
51-  4-6- Purchasing real estate in Maidencreek Township from J. Walter Stover for
1927 1927 use of the Bureau of Water.
54-  4-   Purchasing real estate in Maidencreek Township from Lillian M. Brumbach
1927 13-  for use of the Bureau of Water.
     1927
55-  4-   Appropriating and condemning real estate from Jesse Lightfoot situate in
1927 20-  Maidencreek Township for use of the Bureau of Water.
     1927
56-  4-   Appropriating and condemning real estate from Thomas M. Lightfoot situate
1927 20-  in Maidencreek Township for use of the Bureau of Water.
     1927
57-  4-   Purchasing real estate in Maidencreek Township from Howard I. Snyder for
1927 20-  use of the Bureau of Water.
     1927
58-  4-   Purchasing real estate in Maidencreek Township from Thomas H. Hannon for
1927 20-  use of the Bureau of Water.
     1927
60-  4-   Purchasing real estate in Maidencreek Township from R. Leroy and Annetta
1927 27-  Killian for use of the Bureau of Water.
     1927
61-  5-4- Purchasing real estate in Maidencreek Township from Lewis W. Zechman for
1927 1927 use of the Bureau of Water.
62-  5-4- Purchasing real estate in Maidencreek Township from John S. Hipple for use
1927 1927 of the Bureau of Water.
63-  5-4- Purchasing real estate in Ontelaunee Township from Samuel R. Althouse for
1927 1927 use of the Bureau of Water.
67-  5-   Purchasing real estate in Maidencreek Township from Deborah M. Hoffman for
1927 18-  use of the Bureau of Water.
     1927
73-  6-   Appropriating and condemning real estate from Samuel N. Potteiger situate
1927 15-  in the City for park and playground purposes.
     1927
74-  6-8- Purchasing real estate in Maidencreek Township from Constantino Ernesto
1927 1927 for use of the Bureau of Water.
92-  7-   Appropriating and condemning real estate from Charles C. Snyder situate in
1927 27-  Ontelaunee Township for use of the Bureau of Water.
     1927
93-  7-   Appropriating and condemning real estate from Warren J. High situate in
1927 27-  Ontelaunee Township for use of the Bureau of Water.
     1927
94-  7-   Appropriating and condemning real estate from Benjamin Keim situate in
1927 27-  Maidencreek Township for use of the Bureau of Water.
     1927
105- 8-   Purchasing real estate in Maidencreek Township from James A. and Sarah E.
1927 10-  Elbert for use of the Bureau of Water.
     1927
106- 8-   Purchasing real estate in Maidencreek Township from Sarah E. and Myrta
1927 17-  Yarnell for use of the Bureau of Water.
     1927
120- 9-   Purchasing real estate in Maidencreek Township from Marie A. Kauffman for
1927 14-  use of the Bureau of Water.
     1927
121- 9-   Appropriating and condemning real estate from Harry A. Phillips situate in
1927 14-  Maidencreek Township for use of the Bureau of Water.
     1927
122- 9-   Appropriating and condemning a portion real estate from Sailer Lauer,
1927 14-  Marguerite Wesner, and Elsie Bosler situate in Maidencreek Township for
     1927 use of the Bureau of Water.
123- 9-   Purchasing real estate in Maidencreek Township from John C. and Naomi B.
1927 21-  German for use of the Bureau of Water.
     1927
128- 10-  Purchasing real estate in Maidencreek Township from Wilson A. Gasser for
1927 5-   use of the Bureau of Water.
     1927
129- 10-  Purchasing real estate in Maidencreek Township from Leroy A. Gasser for
1927 5-   use of the Bureau of Water.
     1927
130- 10-  Purchasing real estate in Maidencreek Township from Leroy A. Gasser for
1927 5-   use of the Bureau of Water.
     1927
131- 10-  Purchasing real estate in Maidencreek Township from Edith M. Yohn for use
1927 5-   of the Bureau of Water.
     1927
133- 10-  Purchasing real estate in Maidencreek Township from James J. Merkel for
1927 18-  use of the Bureau of Water.
     1927
134- 10-  Purchasing real estate in Maidencreek Township from Justus D. Becker for
1927 18-  use of the Bureau of Water.
     1927
135- 10-  Purchasing real estate in Maidencreek Township from Tobias S. Ochs for use
1927 18-  of the Bureau of Water.
     1927
140- 10-  Purchasing real estate in Maidencreek Township from Thomas E. Lindenmuth
1927 26-  for use of the Bureau of Water.
     1927
141- 11-  Purchasing real estate in Maidencreek Township from Earl Klevansky for use
1927 2-   of the Bureau of Water.
     1927
142- 11-  Purchasing real estate in Maidencreek Township from William R. Jacobs for
1927 2-   use of the Bureau of Water.
     1927
149- 11-  Appropriating and condemning a portion of real estate from Calvin Berndt
1927 16-  situate in Maidencreek Township for use of the Bureau of Water.
     1927
150- 11-  Appropriating and condemning a portion of real estate from Henry S.
1927 16-  Hartman situate in Maidencreek Township for use of the Bureau of Water.
     1927
154- 11-  Appropriating and condemning a portion of real estate from Joseph S.
1927 23-  Pendleton situate in Maidencreek Township for watershed purposes.
     1927
159- 12-  Purchasing real estate in Maidencreek Township from Laura M. Bortz for use
1927 7-   of the Bureau of Water.
     1927
160- 11-  Purchasing real estate in Maidencreek Township from Carrie E. Lubanda for
1927 30-  use of the Bureau of Water.
     1927
161- 11-  Approving an agreement between the City and the trustees of the Exeter
1927 30-  Monthly Meeting of the Society of Friends for the acquisition of tracts of
     1927 real estate for use of the Bureau of Water.
162- 11-  Purchasing real estate in Maidencreek Township from John L. and Lulu B.
1927 30-  Brumbach for use of the Bureau of Water.
     1927
163- 11-  Appropriating and condemning a portion real estate from William S. Seidel
1927 30-  and Maude H. Schaeffer situate in Maidencreek Township for watershed
     1927 purposes.
194- 12-  Appropriating and condemning real estate from Calvin O. and Katie Alice
1927 21-  Berndt situate in Maidencreek Township for the use of the Bureau of Water.
     1927
195- 12-  Appropriating and condemning real estate from Katie Alice Berndt situate
1927 21-  in Maidencreek Township for the use of the Bureau of Water.
     1927
196- 12-  Appropriating and condemning real estate from Benjamin B. Peter estate
1927 21-  situate in Maidencreek Township for the use of the Bureau of Water.
     1927
30-  3-   Rescinding the lease for the Pagoda property to Sarah M. Eckel and leasing
1928 21-  the property to Fred M. and Kathryn Schaffner
     1928
36-  4-   Entering into an agreement with the Reading School District to provide for
1928 18-  the purchase by the City of the Old Boys' High School property.
     1928
40-  5-2- Executing an option agreement between the National Natatorium Corporation
1928 1928 and the City giving the City the privilege of purchasing the "Sternbergh
          Plot" within 10 years.
47-  5-9- Providing an amicable settlement of damages and the transfer of title to
1928 1928 City of real estate of Warren J. High situate in Oriteaunee Township.
49-  5-   Providing an amicable settlement of damages and perfecting of the title in
1928 16-  the City of real estate of William C. and Clara A. Deysher situate in
     1928 Maidencreek Township.
50-  5-   Providing an amicable settlement of damages and perfecting of the title in
1928 16-  the City of real estate of Edith H. Seyfert and Helen H. Quier situate in
     1928 Maidencreek Township.
53-  5-   Appropriating and condemning a portion of real estate of Isaac Schwab
1928 29-  situate in Maidencreek Township for use of the Bureau of Water.
     1928
54-  5-   Appropriating and condemning a portion of real estate of George W. Grubb
1928 23-  situate in Maidencreek Township for use of the Bureau of Water.
     1928
55-  5-   Appropriating and condemning a portion of real estate of George E.
1928 23-  Koszarek situate in Maidencreek Township for use of the Bureau of Water.
     1928
56-  5-   Providing an amicable settlement of damages and perfecting of the title in
1928 23-  the City of real estate of Egnak Shtoyko situate in Maidencreek Township.
     1928
57-  5-   Providing an amicable settlement of damages and perfecting of the title in
1928 23-  the City of real estate of Howard A. and Anna Kauffman situate in
     1928 Maidencreek Township.
58-  5-   Providing an amicable settlement of damages and perfecting of the title in
1928 29-  the City of real estate of Howard D. Becker situate in Maidencreek
     1928 Township.
60-  6-6- Entering into an agreement with George D. Horst for the purchase of real
1928 1928 estate.
61-  6-6- Providing an amicable settlement of damages and perfecting of the title in
1928 1928 the City of real estate of Merritt Lumber Yard. Inc., situate in
          Maidencreek Township.
64-  6-   Providing an amicable settlement of damages and perfecting of the title in
1928 13-  the City of real estate of William B. and Mamie Fichthorn situate in
     1928 Maidencreek Township.
65-  6-   Appropriating and condemning a portion of real estate of Irwin and Jennie
1928 13-  F. Ludwig situate in Maidencreek Township for use of the Bureau of Water.
     1928
66-  6-   Appropriating and condemning a portion of real estate of Lowell R. and
1928 13-  Mary G. Kerling situate in Maidencreek Township for use of the Bureau of
     1928 Water.
67-  6-   Appropriating and condemning a portion of real estate of Harry J. and
1928 13-  Helen M. Shuman situate in Maidencreek Township for use of the Bureau of
     1928 Water.
68-  6-   Appropriating and condemning a portion of real estate of Irwin S. Kalbach
1928 13-  situate in Maidencreek Township for use of the Bureau of Water.
     1928
69-  6-   Appropriating and condemning a portion of real estate of George S.
1928 13-  Rothermel situate in Maidencreek Township for use of the Bureau of Water.
     1928
70-  6-   Providing an amicable settlement of damages and perfecting of the title in
1928 13-  the City of real estate of David and Ella Strauser situate in Maidencreek
     1928 Township.
71-  6-   Providing an amicable settlement of damages and perfecting of the title in
1928 13-  the City of real estate of Roy F. Lesher situate in Maidencreek Township.
     1928
72-  6-   Providing an amicable settlement of damages and perfecting of the title in
1928 13-  the City of real estate of E. Rebecca Schlappig situate in Maidencreek
     1928 Township.
73-  6-   Providing an amicable settlement of damages and perfecting of the title in
1928 13-  the City of real estate of E. Benjamin M. Schlappig situate in Maidencreek
     1928 Township.
76-  6-   Providing an amicable settlement of damages and perfecting of the title in
1928 13-  the City of real estate of Frank E. Miller situate in Maidencreek
     1928 Township.
77-  6-   Providing an amicable settlement of damages and perfecting of the title in
1928 20-  the City of real estate of Charles I. and Katie A. Hinnershitz situate in
     1928 Maidencreek Township.
78-  6-   Providing an amicable settlement of damages and perfecting of the title in
1928 27-  the City of real estate of Harvey J. Kunkle situate in Maidencreek
     1928 Township.
80-  6-   Appropriating and condemning a portion of real estate of Edna M. Lockhart
1928 27-  situate in Maidencreek Township and partly in Richmond Township for use of
     1928 the Bureau of Water.
81-  6-   Providing an amicable settlement of damages and perfecting of the title in
1928 27-  the City of real estate of Jennie E. Heilman situate in Maidencreek
     1928 Township.
82-  6-   Providing an amicable settlement of damages and perfecting of the title in
1928 27-  the City of real estate of Raymond B. Brown situate in Onteaunee Township.
     1928
84-  7-3- Providing an amicable settlement of damages and perfecting of the title in
1928 1928 the City of real estate of Emma Briel situate in Maidencreek Township.
85-  7-3- Providing an amicable settlement of damages and perfecting of the title in
1928 1928 the City of real estate of George A. Market, Jr., situate in Maidencreek
          Township.
86-  7-   Providing an amicable settlement of damages and perfecting of the title in
1928 11-  the City of real estate of Earl H. G. Roberts situate in Maidencreek
     1928 Township.
88-  7-   Providing an amicable settlement of damages and perfecting of the title in
1928 18-  the City of real estate of Leroy Yoder situate in Maidencreek Township.
     1928
89-  7-   Providing an amicable settlement of damages and perfecting of the title in
1928 18-  the City of real estate of John Saul situate in Ontelaunee Township.
     1928
90-  7-   Providing an amicable settlement of damages and perfecting of the title in
1928 18-  the City of real estate of Warren D. and Florence W. Jacoby situate in
     1928 Maidencreek Township.
91-  7-   Providing an amicable settlement of damages and perfecting of the title in
1928 18-  the City of real estate of Theodore M. Deck situate in Maidencreek
     1928 Township.
92-  7-   Providing an amicable settlement of damages and perfecting of the title in
1928 18-  the City of real estate of James W. Ketterer situate in Maidencreek
     1928 Township.
97-  7-   Providing an amicable settlement of damages and perfecting of the title in
1928 25-  the City of real estate of Lewis W. Muschlitz situate in Ontelaunee
     1928 Township.
98-  8-1- Providing an amicable settlement of damages and perfecting of the title in
1928 1928 the City of real estate of Mary Ellen Long situate in Maidencreek
          Township.
99-  8-8- Providing an amicable settlement of damages and perfecting of the title in
1928 1928 the City of real estate of Elizabeth Yohn situate in Maidencreek Township.
100- 8-8- Providing an amicable settlement of damages and perfecting of the title in
1928 1928 the City of real estate of M.O. Koontz situate in Maidencreek Township.
101- 8-8- Providing an amicable settlement of damages and perfecting of the title in
1928 1928 the City of real estate of Ida May Lesher situate in Maidencreek Township.
102- 8-8- Appropriating and condemning a portion of real estate of Jacob S. Wentzel
1928 1928 situate in Richmond Township for use of the Bureau of Water.
103- 8-8- Appropriating and condemning a portion of real estate of William and Clara
1928 1928 Greishaber situate in Maidencreek Township for use of the Bureau of Water.
104- 8-8- Appropriating and condemning a portion of real estate of Frank Boylan,
1928 1928 John Rhoads and Edward Wicklein situate in Maidencreek Township for use of
          the Bureau of Water.
105- 8-   Providing an amicable settlement of damages and perfecting of the title in
1928 15-  the City of real estate of W. Arthur Snyder situate in Maidencreek
     1928 Township.
109- 8-   Providing an amicable settlement of damages and perfecting of the title in
1928 29-  the City of real estate of George R. Curry and Lulia Davies Curry situate
     1928 in Maidencreek Township.
110- 8-   Providing an amicable settlement of damages and perfecting of the title in
1928 29-  the City of real estate of Reuben M. Forney situate in Ontelaunee
     1928 Township.
112- 9-5- Providing an amicable settlement of damages and perfecting of the title in
1928 1928 the City of real estate of Harry L. Foreman situate in Maidencreek
          Township.
121- 10-  Providing an amicable settlement of damages and perfecting of the title in
1928 17-  the City of real estate of Howard Seiger situate in Maidencreek Township.
     1928
122- 10-  Providing an amicable settlement of damages and perfecting of the title in
1928 17-  the City of real estate of Howard Briel situate in Maidencreek Township.
     1928
123- 10-  Providing an amicable settlement of damages and perfecting of the title in
1928 17-  the City of real estate of Edwin Briel situate in Maidencreek Township.
     1928
124- 10-  Providing an amicable settlement of damages and perfecting of the title in
1928 17-  the City of real estate of Ammon H. Sponagle situate in Maidencreek
     1928 Township.
128- 10-  Providing an amicable settlement of damages and perfecting of the title in
1928 24-  the City of real estate of Laura B. Remsnyder situate in Maidencreek
     1928 Township.
130- 10-  Providing an amicable settlement of damages and perfecting of the title in
1928 31-  the City of real estate of Blanche Sincox situate in Maidencreek Township.
     1928
132- 11-  Providing an amicable settlement of damages and perfecting of the title in
1928 7-   the City of real estate of Samuel S. Kindt situate in Ontelaunee Township.
     1928
133- 11-  Providing an amicable settlement of damages and perfecting of the title in
1928 7-   the City of real estate of George E. Koszarek situate in Maidencreek
     1928 Township.
136- 11-  Providing an amicable settlement of damages and perfecting of the title in
1928 21-  the City of real estate of Blanche E. Dorsett situate in Maidencreek
     1928 Township.
138- 11-  Providing an amicable settlement of damages and perfecting of the title in
1928 28-  the City of real estate of Wayne S. Lesher situate in Maidencreek
     1928 Township.
139- 11-  Providing an amicable settlement of damages and perfecting of the title in
1928 28-  the City of real estate of William Moore situate in Maidencreek Township.
     1928
141- 12-  Providing an amicable settlement of damages and perfecting of the title in
1928 5-   the City of real estate of George S. Rothermal situate in Maidencreek
     1928 Township.
143- 12-  Providing an amicable settlement of damages and perfecting of the title in
1928 12-  the City of real estate of Leo K. Althouse situate in Maidencreek
     1928 Township.
144- 12-  Providing an amicable settlement of damages and perfecting of the title in
1928 19-  the City of real estate of George S. Rothermel situate in Maidencreek
     1928 Township.
145- 12-  Providing an amicable settlement of damages and perfecting of the title in
1928 12-  the City of real estate of Isaac Schwab situate in Maidencreek Township.
     1928
146- 12-  Providing an amicable settlement of damages and perfecting of the title in
1928 12-  the City of real estate of Joseph S. Pendleton situate in Maidencreek
     1928 Township.
147- 12-  Providing an amicable settlement of damages and perfecting of the title in
1928 12-  the City of real estate of Sailor Lauer, Marguerite Wesner and Elsie
     1928 Bosler situate in Maidencreek Township.
148- 12-  Expressing the willingness of the City to settle amicably damages
1928 12-  resulting from the condemnation of real estate located in Maidencreek
     1928 Township.
151- 12-  Providing an amicable settlement of damages and perfecting of the title in
1928 19-  the City of real estate of Ruth A. and Catherine Rothermel situate in
     1928 Maidencreek Township.
160- 12-  Providing an amicable settlement of damages and perfecting of the title of
1928 26-  real estate of Sallie H. Wily and Mary C. Morris situate in Maidencreek
     1928 Township.
161- 12-  Providing an amicable settlement of damages and perfecting of the title of
1928 26-  real estate of William E. Fisher situate in Maidencreek Township.
     1928
164- 1-9- Providing an amicable settlement of damages and perfecting of the title of
1928 1929 real estate of Samuel N. Potteiger, deceased, situate in the City.
165- 1-9- Providing an amicable settlement of damages and perfecting of the title of
1928 1929 real estate of Edna M. Lockhart situate in Maidencreek Township.
     1-   Providing an amicable settlement of damages and perfecting of the title of
5-   23-  real estate of Mary Heffley, Elmer Heffley, Linden Heffley, Carrie L.
1929 1929 Ziegler, Daniel Wesner, Harvey E. Seidel, James M. Dick, Hiester L. Dick
          and Carrie E. Stubblebine.
7-   2-6- Providing an amicable settlement of damages and perfecting of the title of
1929 1929 real estate of W. Edward Smith situate in Maidencreek Township.
10-  2-   Purchasing real estate in the City from George Elderton for park and
1929 20-  playground purposes.
     1929
21-  4-3- Providing an amicable settlement of damages and perfecting of the title of
1929 1929 real estate of Amos R. Esterly situate in Maidencreek Township.
24-  4-   Providing an amicable settlement of damages and perfecting of the title of
1929 17-  real estate of Warren R. Hunsicker situate in Maidencreek Township.
     1929
25-  5-1- Providing an amicable settlement of damages and perfecting of the title of
1929 1929 real estate of Jennie E. Heilman situate in Maidencreek Township.
26-  5-1- Providing an amicable settlement of damages and perfecting of the title of
1929 1929 real estate of Jennie E. Heilman situate in Maidencreek Township.
27-  5-1- Providing an amicable settlement of damages and perfecting of the title of
1929 1929 real estate of Walter A. and Lilian M. Neihart situate in Maidencreek
          Township.
34-  5-   Purchasing real estate in Maidencreek Township from George H. and
1929 15-  Katherine Barr for watershed purposes.
     1929
49-  7-3- Purchasing real estate in the City from Rudolf W. Herbst for park
1929 1929 purposes.
51-  7-   Providing an amicable settlement of damages and perfecting of the title of
1929 10-  real estate of Sallie H. Wily and Mary C. Morris, et al., situate in
     1929 Maidencreek Township.
69-  9-   Purchasing real estate partly situate in Maidencreek Township and partly
1929 11-  in Richmond Township from the estate of Joel C. Miller for watershed
     1929 purposes.
97-  12-  Providing an amicable settlement of damages and perfecting of the title of
1929 11-  real estate of Frank D. Lauer situate in the City.
     1929
112- 12-  Providing an amicable settlement of damages and perfecting of the title of
1929 31-  real estate of James C. Heist situate in Maidencreek Township.
     1929
21-  3-5- Providing an amicable settlement of damages and perfecting of the title of
1930 1930 real estate of Harry J. and Helen M. Shuman situate in Maidencreek
          Township.
22-  3-5- Providing an amicable settlement of damages and perfecting of the title of
1930 1930 real estate of Irwin H. and Jennie F. Ludgwig situate in Maidencreek
          Township.
29-  4-2- Providing an amicable settlement of damages and perfecting of the title of
1930 1930 real estate of Charles C. Snyder situate in Ontelaunee Township.
30-  4-9- Providing an amicable settlement of damages and perfecting of the title of
1930 1930 real estate of Ammon C. Lesher situate in the City.
32-  4-   Providing an amicable settlement of damages and perfecting of the title of
1930 23-  real estate of Orlando F. Berger and Sallie Berger situate in Maidencreek
     1930 Township.
36-  5-7- Providing an amicable settlement of damages and perfecting of the title of
1930 1930 real estate of Daniel P. Shurr situate in Maidencreek Township.
54-  7-9- Providing an amicable settlement of damages and perfecting of the title of
1930 1930 real estate of George W. Grubb situate in Maidencreek Township.
55-  7-9- Providing an amicable settlement of damages and perfecting of the title of
1930 1930 real estate of Irvin S. Kalbach situate in Maidencreek Township.
70-  9-3- Executing a contract between the City and the Reading Company granting the
1930 1930 City permission to use a strip of land near Lance Place under certain
          conditions.
85-  11-  Providing an amicable settlement of damages and perfecting of the title of
1930 12-  real estate of Frank T. Heyde and Martha E. Heyde situate in Maidencreek
     1930 Township.
99-  12-  Providing an amicable settlement of damages and perfecting of the title of
1930 17-  real estate of Frank Boylan, John Rhodes and Edward Wicklein situate in
     1930 Maidencreek Township.
1-   1-   Purchasing real estate in the City from Reading Trust Company under the
1931 21-  will of Samuel N. Potteiger, deceased, for parks and playground purposes.
     1931
5-   2-   Purchasing real estate in the City from Frederick H. and Mary R.
1931 18-  Muhlenberg and Charles H. and Anna D. Muhlenberg for parks and playground
     1931 purposes.
6-   1-   Purchasing real estate in the Township of Muhlenberg from the Muhlenberg
1931 28-  Township School for watershed purposes.
     1931
11-  2-   Executing a contract between the City and the Reading Company for the City
1931 18-  to use a certain strip of land.
     1931
13-  2-   Providing an amicable settlement of damages and perfecting of the title of
1931 18-  real estate of Hannah I. Davies and Edward Davies situate in Ontelaunee
     1931 Township.
23-  3-   Purchasing real estate in the City from Eureka Family Service Laundry and
1931 25-  from John E. Yorgey, Samuel E. Yorgey and David O. Yorgey for municipal
     1931 machine shop.
26-  4-1- Purchasing real estate in the City from William E. Fisher for parks and
1931 1931 playground purposes.
27-  4-1- Providing an amicable settlement of damages and perfecting of the title of
1931 1931 real estate of Lyle L. and Nellie P. Wagner situate in Maidencreek
          Township.
28-  4-8- Purchasing real estate in the City from Rosa P. Eisenbrown for municipal
1931 1931 machine shop purposes.
29-  4-8- Purchasing real estate in the City from Sarah Rhoads for parks and
1931 1931 playground purposes.
35-  5-6- Providing an amicable settlement of damages and perfecting of the title of
1931 1931 real estate of J.B. Lesher situate in Maidencreek Township.
57-  7-8- Purchasing real estate in the Borough of Wyomissing from Ferdinand Thun
1931 1931 for the use of the Bureau of Water.
69-  8-5- Authorizing the construction of a fire house for the Friendship Fire
1931 1931 Company.
          Authorizing the construction of a field house and shelter, stormwater
70-  8-5- sewer, tennis courts and lighting equipment at the Eleventh and Pike
1931 1931 Streets Playground; and a field house and comfort station at Sixth and
          Amity Streets Playground.
73-  8-   Purchasing real estate in the City from Nicholas H. Muhlenberg,
1931 12-  Frederinand H. Muhlenberg and Charles H. Muhlenberg, Trustees, for the use
     1931 of the Bureau of Highways.
74-  8-   Providing an amicable settlement of damages and the perfecting of title in
1931 19-  the City of real estate of Charles Evans Cemetery Company, situate in the
     1931 City.
75-  8-   Purchasing real estate in the City from Minnie T. Nicolls and Reading
1931 19-  Trust Company, Trustees for Frederick W. Nicolls, deceased, for street and
     1931 playground purposes.
76-  12-  Executing a lease for the rental of the premises known as Tower Hotel
1931 23-  Property, from Adalbert Malusecki, including an option to purchase.
     1931
87-  10-  Purchasing real estate in the City from the Charles S. Summers Estate for
1931 7-   park and playground purposes.
     1931
96-  10-  Purchasing real estate in the City from Alice Wanner for the use of the
1931 21-  Bureau of Highways.
     1931
98-  11-
1931 10-  Amending Ord. No. 96 1931.
     1931
100- 11-  Conveying to Annie M. Kalbach Fry of premises consisting of Lot No. 22,
1931 10-  Block 12, on the west side of Butler Street.
     1931
102- 11-  Authorizing the construction of a mechanical building provided with gas
1931 18-  utilization, compressed air and digestor heating equipment at sewage
     1931 treatment works.
103- 11-  Authorizing the construction of a laboratory, lavatory and office building
1931 18-  at sewage treatment works.
     1931
118- 12-  Purchasing real estate in the City from the Berks County Real Estate
1931 23-  Company for street, park and playground purposes.
     1931
119- 12-  Providing an amicable settlement of damages and perfecting of title of
1931 20-  real estate owned by Mary G. Kerling, situate in Maidencreek Township.
     1931
120- 1-6- Providing an amicable settlement of damages and perfecting of title of
1931 1932 real estate owned by Harry A. Phillips, situate in Maidencreek Township.
19-  4-6- Appropriating and condemning real estate of Marie Rhein, situate in Lower
1932 1932 Alsace Township, for watershed and park purposes.
20-  4-6- Appropriating and condemning real estate of Joseph Bloch and Lucien Bloch,
1932 1932 situate in Lower Alsace Township, for watershed and park purposes.
24-  4-   Appropriating and condemning real estate of William W. Miller, situate in
1932 13-  Lower Alsace Township, for watershed and park purposes.
     1932
25-  4-   Appropriating and condemning real estate of Joseph Franz, situate in Lower
1932 13-  Alsace Township, for watershed and park purposes.
     1932
26-  4-   Appropriating and condemning real estate of Ruppert Bechtel, situate in
1932 13-  Lower Alsace Township, for watershed and park purposes.
     1932
28-  4-   Appropriating and condemning real estate of Tobias Knoblauch, situate in
1932 13-  Lower Alsace Township, for watershed and park purposes.
     1932
29-  4-   Appropriating and condemning real estate of Mary T. Roeper, situate in
1932 13-  Lower Alsace Township, for watershed and park purposes.
     1932
32-  4-   Appropriating and condemning real estate of Labert Bennethum, situate in
1932 20-  the City, for watershed and park purposes.
     1932
33-  4-   Appropriating and condemning real estate of City Realty Insurance Experts,
1932 20-  Inc., situate in Lower Alsace Township, for watershed and park purposes.
     1932
47-  6-   Appropriating and condemning real estate of George J. Kiedeisch, situate
1932 15-  in Lower Alsace Township, for watershed and park purposes.
     1932
48-  6-
1932 15-  Repealed by Ord. No. 22 1965.
     1932
49-  6-   Appropriating and condemning real estate of George J. Kiedeisch, et al.,
1932 15-  situate partly in Lower Alsace Township and partly in the City, for
     1932 watershed and park purposes.
5-   5-   Providing an amicable settlement of damages and perfecting of title of
1933 17-  real estate owned by William and Clara E. Grieshaber, situate in
     1933 Maidencreek Township.
11-  5-   Appropriating and condemning real estate of Caroline M. Nagle and Margaret
1933 17-  Nor Dell, situate in Lower Alsace Township and partly in the City, for
     1933 watershed and park purposes.
14-  6-7- Providing an amicable settlement of damages and perfecting of title of
1933 1933 real estate owned by Calvin O. Berndt and Katie Alice Berndt, situate in
          Maidencreek Township.
15-  6-7- Providing an amicable settlement of damages and perfecting of title of
1933 1933 real estate owned by Katie Alice Berndt, situate in Maidencreek Township.
16-  6-7- Providing an amicable settlement of damages and perfecting of title of
1933 1933 real estate owned by Calvin O. Berndt, situate in Maidencreek Township.
17-  6-   Accepting the gift of three tracts of land located in Lower Alsace
1933 14-  Township from Henry Janssen and Wilhelmina Janssen for park, playground
     1933 and recreational purposes.
21-  7-5- Purchasing real estate in Lower Alsace Township from Adalbert Malusecki
1933 1933 for park purposes.
26-  8-9- Appropriating and condemning real estate of Daniel B. Shepp, et al.,
1933 1933 situate in Alsace Township, for watershed and park purposes.
28-  8-   Appropriating and condemning real estate of Caroline M. Nagle, and
1933 16-  Margaret Nor Dell, situate in Lower Alsace Township, for watershed and
     1933 park purposes.
29-  8-   Providing an amicable settlement of damages and perfecting of title of
1933 16-  real estate owned by City Realty Insurance Experts, Inc., situate in Lower
     1933 Alsace Township.
34-  8-   Providing an amicable settlement of damages and perfecting of title of
1933 16-  real estate owned by Annie E. Adam, et al., situate in Maidencreek
     1933 Township.
38-  9-   Providing an amicable settlement of damages and perfecting of title of
1933 13-  real estate owned by Caroline M. Nagle, and Margaret Nor Dell, situate in
     1933 Lower Alsace Township.
45-  11-  Accepting the gift of a tract of land located partly in Alsace Township
1933 8-   and partly in Lower Alsace Township, from Daniel W. Dietrich and H.
     1933 Richard Dietrich, for park, playground and recreational purposes.
46-  11-  Purchasing real estate in the City from Morris H. Eshbach and Elsie M.
1933 29-  Eshbach et al., for street, park and playground purposes.
     1933
47-  11-  Purchasing real estate in the City from Joseph F. Regenfuse and Mary
1933 29-  Regenfuse for street, park and playground purposes.
     1933
6-   2-7- Appropriating and condemning a portion of real estate of Allentown
1934 1934 Portland Cement Company, situate in Maidencreek Township, for the use of
          the Bureau of Water.
8-   2-   Appropriating and condemning real estate of Daniel B. Wentzel, situate in
1934 14-  Lower Alsace Township, for watershed and park purposes.
     1934
     2-   Appropriating and condemning real estate of Peter B. Olinger and Stella M.
9-   14-  Olinger, situate on Penn's Mount (being Lot No. 60 on the General Plan of
1934 1933 Manor of Penn's Mount) in Lower Alsace Township, for watershed and park
          purposes.
10-  2-   Appropriating and condemning real estate of E. John Feindt, situate in
1934 14-  Lower Alsace Township, for watershed and park purposes.
     1934
     2-   Appropriating and condemning real estate of Charles R. Crum, et al.,
13-  28-  situate on the east slope of Mount Penn, being part of Lot No. 65 in the
1934 1934 General Plan of the Manor of Penn's Mount, in Lower Alsace Township, for
          watershed and park purposes.
14-  2-   Appropriating and condemning real estate of Peter J. Spuhler, situate on
1934 28-  the northern side of the Antietam Lake Road, in Lower Alsace Township, for
     1934 watershed and park purposes.
21-  3-   Appropriating and condemning a portion of real estate of Levi R. Keller,
1934 31-  situate in Perry Township, for the use of the Bureau of Water.
     1934
22-  4-   Purchasing real estate situate in Lower Alsace Township of the estate of
1934 11-  Nicholas A. Felix for watershed and park purposes.
     1934
31-  5-   Purchasing real estate in the City from Annie E. Moser for street, park
1934 23-  and playground purposes.
     1934
40-  6-   Selling premises formerly belonging to Joseph S. Regenfuse and Annie E.
1934 27-  Moser, situate in Hampden Boulevard and North Thirteenth Street, to Vacuum
     1934 Oil Company. Inc., for the sum of $9,000.
51-  8-1- Selling premises formerly belonging to Joseph S. Regenfuse and Annie E.
1934 1934 Moser, situate in Hampden Boulevard and North Thirteenth Street, to Second
          Vacuum Oil Company, Inc., for the sum of $9,000.
          Signifying the consent for the acquisition of property in the Eighteenth
54-  8-8- Ward by the Borough of West Reading for the purpose of making, enlarging
1934 1934 and maintaining public parks, park ways and playgrounds, play fields,
          swimming pools, public baths, bathing places, indoor recreation centers
          and gymnasiums.
63-  9-   Appropriating and condemning a portion of real estate of Carrie J. H.
1934 12-  Parvin, situate in Ontelaunee Township, for the use of the Bureau of
     1934 Water.
64-  9-   Appropriating and condemning a portion of real estate of the Angelica
1934 12-  Water and Ice Company, situate in Cumru Township, for the use of the
     1934 Bureau of Water.
65-  9-   Accepting the gift of a tract of land located in the Eighteenth Ward, from
1934 19-  Edmund Schlegel and Mary M. Schlegel, et al., for park, playground and
     1934 recreational purposes.
81-  11-  Appropriating and condemning a portion of real estate of William Willite,
1934 21-  situate in Maidencreek Township, for the use of the Bureau of Water.
     1934
82-  11-  Appropriating and condemning a portion of real estate of Sailer Lauer and
1934 21-  Irene M. Lauer, et al., situate in Maidencreek Township, for the use of
     1934 the Bureau of Water.
84-  12-  Purchasing real estate situate in Lower Alsace Township from William
1934 5-   McIlvain and Elizabeth B. McIlvain, for watershed and park purposes.
     1934
          Providing an amicable settlement of damages and perfecting of title of
5-   1-   real estate owned by Allentown Portland Cement Company, situate in
1935 30-  Maidencreek Township; and appropriating and condemning real estate in the
     1935 City of 36.1 acres, and purchasing an additional tract adjacent to the
          condemned tract comprising 3.5 acres.
11-  3-   Appropriating and condemning real estate of Charles D. Stetzler and Elsie
1935 20-  S. Stetzler. situate in Perry Township, for the use of the Bureau of
     1935 Water.
12-  3-   Appropriating and condemning real estate of Amos R. Esterly and Missouri
1935 20-  Esterly, situate in Perry Township, for the use of the Bureau of Water.
     1935
13-  3-   Appropriating and condemning real estate of Clarence R. Esterly and
1935 20-  Florence Esterly, situate in Perry Township, for the use of the Bureau of
     1935 Water.
14-  3-   Appropriating and condemning real estate of Annie B. Stoudt, situate in
1935 20-  Perry Township, for the use of the Bureau of Water.
     1935
15-  3-   Appropriating and condemning real estate of James M. Laucks, situate in
1935 20-  Perry Township, for the use of the Bureau of Water.
     1935
16-  3-   Appropriating and condemning real estate of Edna Neider, situate in Perry
1935 20-  Township, for the use of the Bureau of Water.
     1935
17-  3-   Appropriating and condemning real estate of Daniel P. Musket and Elsie E.
1935 20-  Musket, situate in Perry Township, for the use of the Bureau of Water.
     1935
18-  3-   Appropriating and condemning real estate of William F. Moyer, situate in
1935 20-  Perry Township, for the use of the Bureau of Water.
     1935
19-  3-   Appropriating and condemning real estate of Harry J. Shuman and Helen M.
1935 20-  Shuman, situate in Perry Township, for the use of the Bureau of Water.
     1935
20-  3-   Appropriating and condemning real estate of Elmer E. Balthaser and Grace
1935 20-  Balthaser, situate in Perry Township, for the use of the Bureau of Water.
     1935
21-  3-   Appropriating and condemning real estate of Irwin H. Ludwig and Jennie F.
1935 20-  Ludwig, situate in Perry Township, for the use of the Bureau of Water.
     1935
26-  5-   Purchasing real estate in the City from the estate of William A. Sharp,
1935 22-  for use of the Department of Parks and Public Property.
     1935
30-  6-5- Executing lease between the City and the Reading Council of Boy Scouts of
1935 1935 America, for a tract of land situate on Mount Penn, and known as the Marie
          Rhein Tract, for a Boy Scout camp.
40-  9-7- Appropriating and condemning real estate of the estate of William A.
1935 1935 Sharp, situate in the City, for the use of the Department of Parks and
          Public Property.
49-  10-  Appropriating and condemning real estate of Rebecca Goodhart, situate in
1935 30-  Lower Alsace Township, for watershed and park purposes.
     1935
48-  10-  Purchasing real estate situate in Perry Township from Amos R. Esterly and
1935 23-  Missouri Esterly, for use of the Bureau of Water.
     1935
59-  12-  Assigning the property known as Egelman Reservoir to the use of the Bureau
1935 11-  of Parks, Department of Parks and Public Property.
     1935
60-  12-  Executing a contract between the City and Standard Investments Corporation
1935 11-  to purchase real estate in Lower Alsace Township for the sum of $800.
     1935
61-  12-  Accepting from Melvin H. Nuss an assignment of his right, title and
1935 18-  interest in and to an option to purchase real estate, situate in Bern
     1935 Township, from Wayne L. Shearer.
          Appropriating and condemning real estate of Farmers National Bank and
67-  12-  Trust Company, testamentary trustee of Katie N. Althouse, under the will
1935 18-  of Adam T. Althouse, situate in Bern Township, for the purpose of
     1935 establishing and maintaining a municipal airdrome and/or aviation landing
          field.
9-   2-   Appropriating and condemning real estate of Charles L. Oaks and Laura C.
1936 24-  Oaks. situate in Bern Township, for the purpose of establishing and
     1936 maintaining a municipal airdrome or aviation landing field.
          Appropriating and condemning real estate of Farmers National Bank and
10-  2-   Trust Company, testamentary trustee of Katie N. Althouse, under the will
1936 24-  of Adam T. Althouse, situate in Bern Township, for the purpose of
     1936 establishing and maintaining a municipal airdrome or aviation landing
          field.
11-  2-   Purchasing real estate situate in Bern Township from Wayne L. Shearer, for
1936 24-  the purpose of establishing and maintaining a municipal airdrome or
     1936 aviation landing field.
16-  2-   Purchasing real estate situate in Lower Alsace Township from Standard
1936 24-  Investments Corporation, for watershed and park purposes.
     1936
24-  4-   Designating and reserving as a game refuge and bird sanctuary lands of the
1936 15-  City adjacent to Ontelaunee Lake, and as nursery waters a portion of
     1936 Maidencreek bounded by lands of the City.
36-  8-   Executing a contract between the City and the Reading Trust Company
1936 12-  providing for the purchase of two tracts of real estate situate in Lower
     1936 Alsace Township.
     10-  Executing a contract with the Board of Game Commissioners of the
46-  6-   Commonwealth of Pennsylvania for the leasing of the Maidencreek Watershed
1936 1936 Area to said Commission as an auxiliary game refuge, for the consideration
          of $1 for the period of one year.
47-  10-  Purchasing and installing a truck platform scale at municipal asphalt
1936 7-   plant.
     1936
53-  10-  Authorizing the immediate payment of the City's obligation to purchase the
1936 6-   plant and franchises of the Angelica Water and Ice Company.
     1936
     10-  Executing an agreement with the Board of Game Commissioners of the
59-  17-  Commonwealth of Pennsylvania for the leasing of the Maidencreek Watershed
1936 1936 Area to said Commission as an auxiliary game refuge, for the consideration
          of $1 for the period of 10 years.
67-  10-  Purchasing two tracts of real estate situate in Lower Alsace Township from
1936 21-  the Reading Trust Company, for watershed and park purposes.
     1936
68-  10-  Purchasing real estate situate in Lower Alsace Township from John C. Crum
1936 21-  and Charles R. Crum, executors under the will of John W. G. Crum, for
     1936 watershed and park purposes.
69-  10-  Purchasing real estate situate in Lower Alsace Township from Alice Geis,
1936 21-  et al., for watershed and park purposes.
     1936
     12-  Executing a contract between the City and the executors of the last will
84-  2-   and testament of William Sharp and George A. Ravel for the purchase of
1936 1936 real estate situate on the west side of South Fifteenth Street for the sum
          of $2,000.
     12-  Submitting an offer of $4,500 to George D. Snyder, Trustee of Charles H.
85-  2-   Schlegel, Bankrupt estate, to purchase three tracts of real estate,
1936 1936 situate on the south side of Fairview Street, between Fourteenth Street
          and Fifteenth Street.
89-  12-  Purchasing a tract of real estate situate in Lower Alsace Township from
1936 23-  Clara Kutz, wife of Ira G. Kutz, for watershed and park purposes.
     1936
     2-   Appropriating and condemning real estate of Emma L. Miller, deceased,
2-   24-  William H. Calvert, Administrator C.T.A., situate on the western side of
1937 1937 South Fourteenth and One Half Street, south of Fairview Street, for park,
          playground and other public purposes.
     2-   Appropriating and condemning real estate of Jennie Knoblauch, wife of
3-   24-  Tobias Knoblauch, situate on the eastern side of South Fourteenth and One
1937 1937 Half Street, south of Fairview Street, for park, playground and other
          public purposes.
4-   2-   Appropriating and condemning real estate of Emma L. Boyer, situate on the
1937 24-  eastern side of South Fourteenth and One Half Street, south of Fairview
     1937 Street, for park, playground and other public purposes.
5-   2-   Appropriating and condemning real estate of Clara S. Baer Boyer, situate
1937 24-  on the eastern side of South Fourteenth and One Half Street, south of
     1937 Fairview Street, for park, playground and other public purposes.
     2-   Appropriating and condemning real estate of executors of the last will and
6-   24-  testament of William Sharp and George A. Ravel, situate on the western
1937 1937 side of South Fifteenth Street, south of Fairview Street, for park,
          playground and other public purposes.
          Appropriating and condemning real estate of Penn Wrecking Company, Inc.,
13-  4-7- located between Pennsylvania Avenue, East Wyomissing Boulevard and
1937 1937 Brookline Street, in the Eighteenth Ward of the City, for park, playground
          and other public purposes.
          Appropriating and condemning real estate of Morris Knoblauch and Bessie
14-  4-7- Knoblauch, and Philip Knoblauch and Rosie Knoblauch, being the northwest
1937 1937 corner of East Wyomissing Boulevard and Brookline Street, in the
          Eighteenth Ward of the City, for park, playground and other public
          purposes.
37-  7-7- Purchasing real estate situate partly in the City and partly in Lower
1937 1937 Alsace Township from George Kiedelsch, et al., for watershed, park and
          other public purposes.
46-  8-4- Purchasing real estate situate on the northern side of Antietam Lake Road,
1937 1937 in Lower Alsace Township, from Peter J. Spuhler and Lillian M. Spuhler,
          for watershed, park and other public purposes.
     8-   Purchasing real estate on the south side of Fairview Street, between
47-  11-  Fourteenth Street and Fifteenth Street, from George D. Snyder, Trustee of
1937 1937 Charles H. Schlegel, bankrupt estate, for park, playground and other
          public purposes.
49-  8-   Purchasing real estate situate in Lower Alsace Township from Daniel B.
1937 18-  Wentzel, for watershed, park and other public purposes.
     1937
51-  9-8- Purchasing real estate situate in Ontelaunee Township from Carrie J. H.
1937 1937 Parvin, for watershed, park and other public purposes.
61-  10-  Purchasing real estate situate on the eastern side of South Third Street
1937 20-  south of Pine Street, from Paul B. Hendel, for park, playground and other
     1937 public purposes.
63-  10-  Purchasing real estate situate on the southwest corner of Front Street and
1937 27-  Schiller Street, from Berks County Trust Company for park, playground and
     1937 other public purposes.
10-  4-   Purchasing real estate situate in Lower Alsace Township from Rebecca
1938 20-  Goodhart, for watershed and park purposes.
     1938
17-  6-1- Purchasing real estate situate on the eastern side of South Fourteenth and
1938 1938 One Half Street, south of Fairview Street, from Emma L. Boyer, for park,
          playground and other public purposes.
18-  6-1- Purchasing real estate situate on the eastern side of South Fourteenth and
1938 1938 One Half Street, south of Fairview Street, from Clara S. Barr, for park,
          playground and other public purposes.
40-  8-   Purchasing real estate situate in Lower Alsace Township from Joseph Franz,
1938 31-  for watershed, park and other public purposes.
     1938
57-  11-  Purchasing real estate situate at the southwest corner of Nicolls Street
1938 30-  and Windsor Street, from Socony Vacuum Oil Company, for storage yard and
     1938 other public purposes.
     12-  Appropriating and condemning real estate of Emma H. Horst and A. Caroline
61-  21-  Horst Sullivan, trustees under the last will and testament of George D.
1938 1938 Horst, situate in Lower Alsace Township, for the purpose of constructing
          an observation tower and for park and other public purposes.
62-  12-  Authorizing the sale of 1004 Hampden Boulevard to Frank W. Satterthwaite
1938 21-  for the sum of $1,963.
     1938
7-   1-   Purchasing real estate situate on the east side of South Seventeenth
1940 31-  Street, South of Highland Street, from the Reading Trust Company for
     1940 standpipe and other public purposes.
8-   1-   Purchasing real estate situate along Neversink Mt. Railway, east of South
1940 31-  Seventeenth Street, from George W. and Mary R. Green for standpipe and
     1940 other public purposes.
60-  12-  Purchasing real estate situate in Lower Alsace Township from George J.
1940 24-  Kiedeisch for watershed and park purposes.
     1940
3-   1-   Authorizing execution of easement by City to Metropolitan Edison Company
1941 22-  over lands owned by City in the Borough of Wyomissing.
     1941
4-   1-   Purchasing real estate situate in Richmond Township from Earl Sheble for
1941 22-  watershed purposes.
     1941
5-   1-   Purchasing real estate situate partly in Richmond and Perry Townships,
1941 22-  from R. Willard Baer, for watershed purposes.
     1941
6-   1-   Purchasing real estate situate partly in Lavale, Maidencreek Township,
1941 22-  from Earle I. Koch, for watershed purposes.
     1941
13-  4-   Appropriating and condemning real estate of the Reading Trust Company for
1941 30-  the purpose of establishing and maintaining a municipal airdrome or
     1941 aviation landing field.
14-  4-   Appropriating and condemning real estate of Herbert W. S. Gehrke, situate
1941 30-  in Bern Township, for the purpose of establishing and maintaining a
     1941 municipal airdrome or aviation landing field.
15-  4-   Authorizing execution of easement by City to Metropolitan Edison Company
1941 23-  over lands owned by the City in the Township of Muhlenberg.
     1941
17-  4-   Appropriating and condemning real estate of George E. Henry and George J.
1941 30-  Schindlebeck, situate in Bern Township, for the purpose of establishing
     1941 and maintaining a municipal airdrome or aviation landing field.
21-  5-
1941 28-  Amending Ord. No. 65 1934.
     1941
36-  7-   Purchasing real estate situate in Bern Township, from Melvin H. Nuss, for
1941 30-  the purpose of obtaining fill necessary for constructing a proposed
     1941 extension to "C" Runway at the Reading Municipal Airport.
36-  7-   Purchasing real estate situate in Bern Township, from Melvin H. Nuss, for
1941 30-  the purpose of obtaining fill necessary for constructing a proposed
     1941 extension to "C" Runway at the Reading Municipal Airport.
77-  12-  Purchasing real estate situate in Lower Alsace Township, from Rudy Reitz.
1941 24-  for watershed purposes.
     1941
          Execution of supplemental agreement with the Pennsylvania Game Commission
9-   4-1- providing for the revision of acreage and extension of the area under the
1942 1942 terms of the lease relative to the auxiliary State Game Refuge on the
          Maidencreek Watershed, for the period ending October 19, 1946.
     4-   Purchasing real estate situate on the south side of Spring Street between
12-  22-  Reading Company Railroad and North Eighth Street, from the Ernst Epp
1942 1942 Estate, for the purpose of the relief of the municipal scales at the
          asphalt plant.
19-  6-   Authorizing the settlement of damages due Esther P. Rothermel Estate due
1942 17-  to the taking of certain land in Maidencreek Township for watershed
     1942 purposes.
20-  6-   Authorizing the sale of real estate situate in the Borough of Kenhorst, a
1942 17-  vacant lot known as Lot Numbers 381 and 382, to Mr. Charles M. Vickery.
     1942
21-  6-   Authorizing the purchase of real estate situate in Bern Township, from the
1942 24-  estate of George E. Henry, for the purpose of establishing and maintaining
     1942 a municipal airdrome and aviation landing field.
25-  7-8- Purchasing real estate situate in Maidencreek Township, from Harry P.
1942 1942 Rothermel, for watershed purposes.
     10-  Purchasing real estate situate in Bern Township, from Allan M. Cullum and
37-  6-   Kathyrn R. Cullum, and Samual G. King and Grace King, for the purpose of
1942 1942 establishing and maintaining a municipal airdrome and aviation landing
          field.
15-  7-7- Transferring Deed Lot No. 34 in Block No. 12, located on the east side of
1943 1943 Carbon Street between Columbia and Lehigh Avenues, from the City of
          Reading to Warren Schuler and Forence E. Schuler.
10-  4-   Authorizing the sale of real estate situate in the Bern Township to Leo C.
1944 19-  Knoblauch.
     1944
21-  8-   Authorizing the sale of real estate situate in the City, a vacant lot
1944 23-  known as 509 South Tenth Street, to Harry J. Miller, Jr.
     1944
8-   4-   Execution of agreement for the granting of an easement by the City to
1945 25-  Metropolitan Edison Company over lands owned by the City at the
     1945 Maidencreek Pumping Station in Ontelaunee Township.
          Condemning the real estate of Sallie R. Yerger and J. Authur Yerger,
11-  3-6- situate in Bern Township, for the purpose of erecting and maintaining
1946 1946 instrument landing facilities to be used in connection with the operation
          of the Reading Municipal Airport.
          Condemning the real estate of Daniel Pauley and Hannah Pauley, situate in
12-  3-6- Bern Township, for the purpose of erecting and maintaining instrument
1946 1946 landing facilities to be used in connection with the operation of the
          Reading Municipal Airport.
          Condemning the real estate of Wayne Keller and Sallie Keller, situate in
13-  3-6- Bern Township, for the purpose of erecting and maintaining instrument
1946 1946 landing facilities to be used in connection with the operation of the
          Reading Municipal Airport.
          Condemning the real estate of Katie L. Knoll, situate in Bern Township,
14-  3-6- for the purpose of erecting and maintaining instrument landing facilities
1946 1946 to be used in connection with the operation of the Reading Municipal
          Airport.
     3-   Purchasing real estate situate in Cumru Township, from Clint C. Ebert and
19-  20-  Miriam E. Ebert, for the purpose of erecting and maintaining instrument
1946 1946 landing facilities to be used in connection with the operation of the
          Reading Municipal Airport.
     3-   Purchasing real estate situate in Bern Township, from Harry J. O'Neill and
21-  20-  Anna O'Neill, for the purpose of erecting and maintaining instrument
1946 1946 landing facilities to be used in connection with the operation of the
          Reading Municipal Airport.
22-  3-   Purchasing real estate situate in Bern Township, from Ida DeMaio, for the
1946 20-  purpose of erecting and maintaining instrument landing facilities to be
     1946 used in connection with the operation of the Reading Municipal Airport.
     4-   Purchasing playground lot in the City known as 124, 126 and 126 1/
28-  17-  2 Franklin Street and 127, 129, 131 and 311 Grape Street, from the Berks
1946 1946 County Trust Company, for playground and other public purposes, for the
          sum of $1,900.
39-  8-7- Execution of agreement for the granting of an easement by the City to
1946 1946 Metropolitan Edison Company over lands owned by the City at the
          Maidencreek Pumping Station in Ontelaunee Township.
52-  10-  Execution of agreement with the Pennsylvania Game Commission providing for
1946 16-  the leasing of the Maidencreek Watershed Area to said Commission as an
     1946 auxiliary game refuge, for $1 for a period of five years.
          Purchasing real estate situate in Bern Township, from the estate of G.
15-  6-4- Howard Bright, for the purpose of erecting and maintaining instrument
1947 1947 landing facilities to be used in connection with the operation of the
          Reading Municipal Airport.
16-  6-   Condemning the real estate of City Bank and Trust Company, Trustee of
1947 25-  Stanley Hendel, situate in the City, for the purpose of constructing and
     1947 maintaining a public municipal memorial stadium.
19-  7-9- Accepting offer of Walter G. Heim, made on behalf of the George K. Levan
1947 1947 Estate, for the purchase of 12 acres, 55.4 perches of land located on the
          western slope of Mt. Penn, for the sum of $100 per acre.
27-  8-   Execution of agreement for the granting of an easement by the City to
1947 27-  Susquehanna Pipe Line Company over lands owned by the City at the Antienam
     1947 Lake property in Alsace Township.
          Execution of agreement between the City and the Bell Telephone Company for
     10-  the sale of a concrete manhole located in the northwest portion of the
48-  27-  intersection of Washington and Cedar Streets in the City, which is owned
1948 1948 and maintained by the City, to the Bell Telephone Company; and 19 poles on
          Schuylkill Avenue and on Buttonwood Street in the City, to the City, which
          is now owned and maintained by the Bell Telephone Company.
1-   1-   Accepting real estate in the City from Barbey Real Estate Company, for
1949 26-  public park, public playground, and a place of public resort and
     1949 recreational purposes, to be known as Barbey Playground.
8-   4-   Condemning the real estate of Valentine Blum, situate adjacent to Hampden
1949 13-  Park, mainly in the Thirteenth Ward of the City and partly in Lower Alsace
     1949 Township, for the use of the Bureau of Water.
     11-  Execution of agreement with the Pennsylvania Game Commission providing for
54-  2-   the leasing of the Maidencreek Watershed Area to said Commission as a
1949 1949 State Game Propagation Area, for $1, for a period of one year and renewal
          thereof from year to year.
8-   3-   Condemning the real estate of Aura May Gehris and Ruth E. Dohner, situate
1951 28-  within the Fourteenth Ward of the City, for the use of the Department of
     1951 Parks and Public Property, as a public playground.
9-   3-   Condemning the real estate of Sam Cohen and Yetta Cohen, situate within
1951 28-  the Fourteenth Ward of the City, for the use of the Department of Parks
     1951 and Public Property, as a public playground.
10-  3-   Condemning the real estate of Tobias Knoblauch and Jennie Knoblauch,
1951 28-  situate within the Fourteenth Ward of the City, for the use of the
     1951 Department of Parks and Public Property, as a public playground.
11-  3-   Condemning the real estate of Joseph M. Liever, situate within the
1951 28-  Fourteenth Ward of the City, for the use of the Department of Parks and
     1951 Public Property, as a public playground.
12-  3-   Condemning the real estate of Frederick M. Christman, situate within the
1951 28-  Fourteenth Ward of the City, for the use of the Department of Parks and
     1951 Public Property, as a public playground.
13-  3-   Condemning the real estate of Howard C. Faust and Ellenora E. Faust,
1951 28-  situate within the Fourteenth Ward of the City, for the use of the
     1951 Department of Parks and Public Property, as a public playground.
14-  3-   Condemning the real estate of Franklin E. Kantner, situate within the
1951 28-  Fourteenth Ward of the City, for the use of the Department of Parks and
     1951 Public Property, as a public playground.
6-   3-4- Purchasing land situate on Eckert Street, between West Douglass Street and
1953 1953 West Windsor Streets, for the sum of $1,800, for public purposes.
9-   5-6- Purchasing land situate on the northwest corner of Upland Avenue, and
1953 1953 Crestment Street, known as 301 Upland Avenue, for the sum of $2,700, from
          Daniel Damato and Esther E. Damato.
13-  3-   Purchasing certain land, which is a portion of the Schuylkill Canal,
1954 17-  within the City, from the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, for the sum of
     1954 $3,000.
33-  7-7- Amending Ord. No. 27 1947.
1954 1954
     10-  Condemning a temporary right of way over property of Jacob Ebling, situate
40-  7-   in Muhlenberg Township, for the purpose of making certain test borings, to
1954 1954 determine rock elevations along the possible route of the proposed
          Northwest Pumping Main of the City.
41-  10-  Purchasing real estate situate on the east side of North Fifth Street
1954 13-  between Amity Street and Union Street in the City, from Charles E. Nawa
     1954 and Catharine M. Nawa, for public playground purposes.
          Approving the proposed action of Reading Parking Authority to acquire and
          construct certain parking lots, authorizing the executing and delivery of
49-  12-  a lease by the City as Lessee of the parking lots hereafter to be acquired
1954 1-   by, the Authority, to said Authority as Lessor, and the payment of rental
     1954 thereunder; and in connection with parking lot project of Authority,
          undertake the acquisition, by the City, through condemnation proceedings
          or otherwise of certain real estate along the south side of Cherry Street.
     5-   Purchasing of premises 146 North Front Street and Lot No. 31 known as 144
14-  18-  North Front Street, from Joseph Tidona and Jennie Tidona, for the purpose
1955 1955 of opening West Walnut Street between Front Street and Schuylkill Avenue
          within the City.
18-  6-8- Purchasing of premises 150 North Front Street from Harold A. Young and
1955 1955 Sarah R. Young, for the purpose of opening West Walnut Street between
          Front Street and Schuylkill Avenue within the City.
20-  6-   Purchasing of premises 123 Schuylkill Avenue from Berks County Trust
1955 15-  Company, for the purpose of opening West Walnut Street between Front
     1955 Street and Schuylkill Avenue within the City.
21-  6-   Purchasing of premises 125 Schuylkill Avenue from Walter D. Huey, for the
1955 15-  purpose of opening West Walnut Street between Front Street and Schuylkill
     1955 Avenue within the City.
22-  6-   Purchasing of premises 127 Schuylkill Avenue from Dorothy M. Smith, for
1955 15-  the purpose of opening West Walnut Street between Front Street and
     1955 Schuylkill Avenue within the City.
          Condemning a right of way over, across, under and through real estate of
27-  6-   Harry D. Whitner Estate, in Muhlenberg Township, for the purpose of
1955 29-  laying, constructing, establishing and maintaining a pipe line being a
     1955 part of the Northwest Pumping Main of the water supply and distribution
          system of the City.
          Condemning a right of way over, across, under and through real estate of
28-  6-   John C. M. Bemesderfer and Mary H. Bemesderfer, situate in Bern Township,
1955 29-  for the purpose of laying, constructing, establishing and maintaining a
     1955 pipe line being a part of the Northwest Pumping Main of the water supply
          and distribution system of the City.
          Purchasing real estate situate on the south side of Ventnor Avenue between
     9-   Ardsley Street and Berkley Street, being Lots Nos. 202 and 203, in Bern
42-  21-  Township, from George L. Moore and Carrie L. Moore, for the purpose of
1955 1955 laying, constructing, establishing and maintaining a pipe line being part
          of the thirty inch pumping transmission line, from the Maidencreek Pumping
          Station to the Northwest Reservoir of the City.
     12-  Condemning real estate of Adam Fisher and Minnie A. Fisher, situate within
66-  28-  Bern Township, for use of the Department of Parks and Public Property in
1955 1955 connection with the construction of the Northwest Reservoir of the Water
          Bureau.
     1-   Condemning certain rights of way over and across certain real estate owned
65-  25-  by Henry A. Gantert and Isavle M. Gantert, for the use of the Department
1956 1956 of Streets and Public Improvements in order to carry out the terms and
          provisions of Ord. No. 9 1955.
5-   1-   Condemning real estate of the estate of Caroline Archer, situate within
1957 16-  Cumru Township, for the use of the Department of Public Affairs, for the
     1957 extension of the sewage treatment works of the City.
28-  7-   Transferring from the City to the Reading Municipal Airport Authority of
1957 10-  all real estate and personal property used in the operation of the General
     1957 Carl A. Spaatz Field, Reading Municipal Airport.
          Condemning real estate of Hettie C. Martin, Sallie A. Weber, Helen M.
          Gundry, Sarah Loretta Shuker, Charles E. Shuker, Alma L. Otto, John J.
32-  9-4- Shuker and Bertha B. Shuker, Raymond D. Shuker and Ruth C. Shuker,
1957 1957 Sylvanius L. Shuker, H. Kathryn Bauer, Robert H. Shuker and Margaret M.
          Shuker and E. Clinton Weber, Attorney in Fact for all the owners, situate
          in Muhlenberg Township, for the use of the Department of Public Safety, as
          a public playground.
21-  10-
1959 14-  Repealing Ord. No. 24 1932.
     1959
          Approving an agreement between the City, Cumru Township and Cumru Township
          Authority, providing for the sharing of cost of a certain sanitary sewage
          collection trunk line to be constructed by Cumru Township Authority in the
15-  3-   Eighteenth Ward of the City, as shown on Plan B 2746 1 A, and granting to
1960 23-  Cumru Township Authority and to the Township of Cumru a perpetual fifteen
     1960 foot wide right of way and an additional twenty foot temporary
          construction right of way, in, over and under such portion of such land
          shown on the aforesaid plan, which are owned by the City or are included
          in any City street or right of way.
     4-   Granting to Muhlenberg Township Authority certain rights of way over and
16-  20-  across lands owned by the City as set forth in plan of Gannett, Fleming,
1960 1960 Corddry and Carpenter, Inc., registered professional engineers, as revised
          April 5, 1960.
          Condemning real estate of Edgar G. Zeller and Mabel W. Zeller, situate on
14-  7-5- Orrton Avenue in the Eighteenth Ward of the City, for the use of the
1961 1961 Department of Streets and Public Improvements, for an easement over and
          across said real estate, for the installation thereon of a sanitary sewer
          collection line of the City.
     9-   Execution of a lease by and between the Reading Parking Authority, as
24-  20-  lessor, and the City, as lessee, for a municipal off street parking
1961 1961 facility to be erected by the Authority between South Seventh Street,
          South Eighth Street, Cherry Street and Franklin Street in the City.
14-  5-   Authorizing expenditure of a sum not to exceed $200 for the purchase of
1962 16-  underwater diving equipment for underwater rescue work by the Bureau of
     1962 Police.
     1-   Purchasing real estate situate on the western side of Neversink Alley
4-   15-  opposite McIllvain Street (being House No. 746 Neversink Alley), from Max
1964 1964 Tomezyk, for use of the Bureau of Recreation, Department of Public
          Affairs.
     9-   Purchasing real estate situate on the eastern side of Pearl Street between
31-  23-  Laurel and Willow Streets and numbered 521 - 535 Pearl Street, from the
1964 1964 Slovak Catholic Sokol Home Association, for use of the Bureau of
          Recreation, Department of Public Affairs.
22-  4-7- Repealing Ord. No. 48 1932.
1965 1965
13-  3-   Selecting and appropriating certain lands situate in the Eighteenth Ward
1970 11-  of the City, for park and recreational purposes.
     1970
14-  3-   Selecting and appropriating certain lands situate in the Eighteenth Ward
1970 11-  of the City, for park and recreational purposes.
     1970
22-  5-   Approving the award by the Reading Parking Authority of certain contracts
1970 13-  in connection with the construction of a multilevel parking structure and
     1970 facilities at its property.
57-  12-  Approving the surrender of certain leases heretofore entered into between
1970 23-  the Reading Parking Authority and the City.
     1970
     4-   Approving the acquisition of certain lands and the payment of certain
17-  14-  design fees by the Reading Parking Authority and approving the award of
1971 1971 certain contracts in connection with the construction of a multilevel
          parking structure and facilities.
25-  5-   Execution of an amendment of lease for facilities located at Fourth and
1972 24-  Cherry Streets and Plum and Franklin Streets, together with the parking
     1972 structures erected thereon.
33-  7-   Selecting and appropriating of an easement in certain lands situate in the
1975 30-  Eighteenth Ward of the City for the installation of storm sewers.
     1975
52-  1-5- Selecting and appropriating of an easement in certain lands situate in the
1977 1977 Eighteenth Ward of the City for the installation of storm sewers.
     10-  Selecting and appropriating certain tracks of land, with the buildings and
43-  12-  improvements erected thereon, situate in the Sixth Ward of the City, for
1977 1977 the purpose of installing and maintaining a public right of way over and
          across said premises.
     4-   The supplemental appropriation for the payment of the City's mortgage
24-  30-  obligation to American Casualty Company, which shall be derived from sums
1980 1980 received from Continental Casualty Company on a lease agreement for the
          premises situate at 412 Washington Street.
122- 10-
1990 3-   Authorizing the condemnation of certain lands in the City.
     1990
170- 11-
1990 21-  Authorizing and directing the sale of 816 Penn Street.
     1990
6-   1-
1991 23-  Authorizing and directing the sale of 445 Schuylkill Avenue.
     1991
18-  3-
1991 13-  Authorizing and directing the sale of 226 North Fourth Street.
     1991
90-  9-
1991 11-  Authorizing and directing the sale of 821 Schuylkill Avenue.
     1991
          Authorizing the Mayor and other officials to execute a deed from the City
          of Reading conveying a parcel of land being bounded on the west by the
          party wall between 422 and 424 Penn Street, on the north by Penn Street,
46-  11-  on the east by Fifth Street, and on the south by Cherry Street and being
2004 8-   424-454 Penn Street and also 8-10-12 South Fifth Street, 16-18-20-22 South
     2004 Fifth Street to Our City Reading, Inc., so that said parcel can be
          developed by Our City Reading, Inc., to lease the entire building to be
          built containing 120,257 square feet to Sovereign Bank for its operation
          center.
     3-   Authorizing the Mayor and other officials to execute a certificate of
28-  28-  completion in recordable form when the City of Reading issues a
2005 2005 certificate of occupancy for the building constructed on the property
          purchased from the City of Reading by Our City Reading, Inc.
     8-   Authorizing the Mayor to take any and all steps necessary to purchase the
47-  25-  property known as 970 Morgantown Road from Joseph Stajkowski for the
2005 2005 amount of $225,000 for use by the City of Reading to construct laboratory
          facilities in connection with its Sanitary/Sewer Department.
61-  9-   Authorizing the Mayor to execute a deed from the City of Reading to the
2005 26-  "Concerned Citizens of the Sixth Ward".
     2005
63-  10-  Authorizing the Mayor to execute a deed from the City of Reading to the
2005 24-  Lobos Four, LLC, a Pennsylvania limited liability company.
     2005
66-  10-  Authorizing the Mayor to execute a deed from the City of Reading to the
2005 10-  Reading Housing Authority, a municipal authority.
     2005
67-  10-  Authorizing the Mayor to execute deeds from the City of Reading to James P
2005 24-  Halkias.
     2005
71-  10-  Authorizing the Mayor to execute a deed from the City of Reading to the
2005 24-  Berks Area Reading Transportation Authority (BARTA).
     2005
76-  11-  Authorizing the Mayor to execute a deed from the City of Reading to the
2005 14-  Reading Housing Authority, a municipal authority.
     2005
2-   1-9- Authorizing the Mayor to execute any and all documents, agreements, and a
2006 2006 deed from the City of Reading to the County of Berks for the conveyance of
          a parcel of land commonly known as the "Antietam Lake Property."
3-   1-   Authorizing the Mayor to execute a deed from the City of Reading to
2006 23-  Douglas Miller, thereby conveying premises situate at 901 Hampden
     2006 Boulevard, Reading, Berks County, Pennsylvania.
12-  2-   Authorizing the Mayor to execute a deed from the City of Reading to the
2006 27-  Reading Redevelopment Authority, thereby conveying premises situate at 207
     2006 1/2 North Third Street, Reading, Berks County, Pennsylvania.
13-  2-   Authorizing the Mayor to execute a deed from the City of Reading to the
2006 27-  Reading Redevelopment Authority, thereby conveying premises situate at 840
     2006 Muhlenberg Street, Reading, Berks County, Pennsylvania.
     2-   Authorizing the Mayor to execute any and all documents required to
14-  27-  effectuate the transfer of ownership of premises known as the "Market
2006 2006 House Property" from the South Reading Market Associates, LLC, a
          Pennsylvania limited liability company, to the City of Reading.
17-  2-   Authorizing the Mayor to execute any and all documents including, but not
2006 27-  limited to, agreements of sale and deeds, thereby conveying premises
     2006 described in the "Neversink Mountain Area" project.
     3-   Approving and authorizing the Mayor to execute an agreement of lease
19-  13-  between the County of Berks and City of Reading for utilization of space
2006 2006 for installation of communication equipment at Mt. Penn Tower and County
          Courthouse/Services Center.
73-  11-  Entering into an agreement with Elks Club Associates L.P. for the
2006 13-  acquisition of the property situate at 46 South Sixth Street, Reading,
     2006 Berks County, Pennsylvania.
          Authorizing the Mayor to execute any and all documents required to
87-  11-  effectuate the transfer of ownership of premises known as the "Trexler
2006 27-  Mansion" or the "Elks Club Property" (46 South Fifth Street, Reading,
     2006 Berks County, Pennsylvania) from the City of Reading to Our City Reading,
          Inc.
          Authorizing the Mayor to take any and all actions necessary to purchase
          the property known as 946 Morgantown Road from Marlis Pritz and Robin
8-   1-   Pritz for the amount of $125,000 and ratifying the action taken by the
2007 22-  Mayor in executing the agreement of sale for said property in December
     2007 2006. Said property shall be utilized by the City of Reading to construct
          laboratory and administrative office facilities in connection with its
          Sanitary/Sewer Department.
32-  5-   Authorizing the Mayor to execute a deed from the City of Reading to Our
2007 14-  City Reading, Inc., thereby conveying premises situate at 328 Mulberry
     2007 Street, Reading, Berks County, Pennsylvania.
36-  5-   Authorizing the Mayor to execute the lease between the City of Reading and
2007 29-  the Berks County Chapter of the Izaak Walton League of America for
     2007 premises situate in the vicinity of Egelman's Dam.
40-  7-   Authorizing the sale of the property at 1117 Chester Street, Reading,
2007 23-  Berks County, Pennsylvania, to Mr. John Weidner for the amount of $500.
     2007
     6-   Authorizing the Mayor to execute any and all documents required
43-  12-  effectuating the transfer of ownership of premises known as 101 Lancaster
2007 2007 Avenue, Reading, Berks County, PA, from the National Penn Bank to the City
          of Reading.
46-  6-   Authorizing the Mayor to execute the lease between the City of Reading and
2007 25-  the Easter Seals of Eastern Pennsylvania for premises known as "Camp
     2007 Lily."
47-  6-   Authorizing the Mayor to execute the lease between the City of Reading and
2007 25-  Alvernia College for premises being a portion of Angelica Park.
     2007
50-  6-   Authorizing the Mayor to execute the lease between the City of Reading and
2007 25-  Alvernia College for portions of buildings located on campus for the
     2007 purpose of operating the Reading Police Academy.
51-  6-   Authorizing the conveyance of 1900 Centre Avenue to Colonial Electric
2007 25-  Supply pursuant to the terms of the purchase and sales agreement.
     2007
62-  9-   Authorizing the Mayor to execute the lease between the City of Reading and
2007 10-  Citizens Bank of Pennsylvania by extending the terms of the agreement for
     2007 four additional five year terms.
     9-   Authorizing the Mayor to execute an agreement between the City of Reading
66-  10-  and Land Displays, Inc., to provide a twenty year lease for an off
2007 2007 premises sign on City owned property in exchange for the purchase and
          installation of a digital sign.
          Authorization for the Mayor to execute any and all documents required to
     10-  convey certain premises situate in the vicinity of the eastern side of
74-  8-   North Third Street (between North Third and North Fourth Streets) and
2007 2007 north of Buttonwood Street (between Buttonwood and Green Streets) in the
          City of Reading, Berks County, Pennsylvania, from the City of Reading to
          the Reading Redevelopment Authority.
84-  12-  Authorizing the Mayor to execute the condemnation settlement agreement for
2007 10-  the parcel of land commonly known as the "Antietam Lake Property."
     2007
     3-   Authorizing the Mayor to execute any and all documents required to
18-  10-  effectuate the transfer of ownership of premises known as 1019 1021 Penn
2008 2008 Street, 1016, 1022 and 1028 Court Street, Reading, Berks County, PA, from
          St. Joseph Hospital to the City of Reading.
     5-   Authorizing the Mayor to execute an easement and right of way instrument
36-  12-  between the City of Reading to Metropolitan Edison Company and located
2008 2008 over a portion of premises known as Berks County, Alternate APN
          18530616947572.
40-  5-   Authorizing the Mayor to execute a deed from the City of Reading to the
2008 27-  Reading Redevelopment Authority, thereby conveying premises situate at 400
     2008 South Sixth Street.
41-  5-   Authorizing the Mayor to execute a deed from the City of Reading to the
2008 27-  Reading Redevelopment Authority, thereby conveying premises situate at 401
     2008 - 403 South Sixth Street.
42-  5-   Authorizing the Mayor to execute a deed from the City of Reading to the
2008 27-  Reading Redevelopment Authority, thereby conveying premises situate at 422
     2008 South Sixth Street.
          Authorizing the Mayor to execute a "Certification and Consent of
          Landlord," thereby evidencing the City of Reading's consent to the
67-  10-  assignment of the revised and restated lease agreement for Reading
2008 27-  Municipal Memorial Stadium dated October 25, 1999, as amended on August
     2008 28, 2000, and January 26, 2004, from E & J Baseball Club, Inc., trading as
          the Reading Phillies Baseball Club, a Pennsylvania Corporation, to Reading
          Baseball LP, a Pennsylvania limited partnership.
     3-   Authorizing the Mayor to execute a deed from the City of Reading to the
12-  23-  Reading Redevelopment Authority conveying premises situated at 1019 Penn
2009 2009 Street, 1021 Penn Street, 1016 Court Street, 1022 Court Street, and 1028
          Court Street.
          Authorizing the Mayor to execute a deed, temporary easement from the City
23-  4-   of Reading to the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, Department of
2009 27-  Transportation, and other documents (agreement of sale and settlement
     2009 statement), thereby conveying premises situate at Route 183, Bern
          Township, Berks County.
          Authorizing the Mayor to execute an easement agreement between the City of
          Reading and the Reading Area Water Authority, thereby conveying unto the
30-  6-8- Reading Area Water Authority a nonexclusive, perpetual easement in gross
2009 2009 upon that portion of premises known and designated as Easement 101-
          2 located within Parcel ID No. 530773-51-0576, along River Road, Reading,
          Berks County.
          Authorizing the Mayor to execute an easement agreement between the City of
     7-   Reading and the Reading Area Water Authority, thereby conveying unto the
37-  27-  Reading Area Water Authority a nonexclusive, perpetual easement in gross
2009 2009 upon that portion of premises known and designated as Easement 101-
          2 located within Parcel ID No. 530773-51-0576, along River Road, Reading,
          Berks County.
     9-   Authorizing the Mayor to execute any and all documents required to
46-  14-  effectuate the transfer of ownership of premises known as 501 South Fifth
2009 2009 Street, Reading, Berks County, from the Liberty Steam Fire Company to the
          City of Reading.
          Authorizing the Mayor to execute a temporary construction easement from
          the City of Reading to the Schuylkill Valley School District conveying
     11-  unto said school district a temporary construction easement in and over a
69-  23-  portion of land being part of Tax Pin Number 540100609178 that portion of
2009 2009 premises designated as a temporary construction easement on the "Highway
          Occupancy Permit Plans, Roadway Improvements for Schuylkill Valley School
          District," dated July 20, 2009, being Project No. 080890 prepared by Derck
          & Edson Associates, situate in Ontelaunee Township, Berks County.
          Authorizing the Mayor to execute an easement agreement between the City of
          Reading and Ontelaunee Township (both situate in Berks County) thereby
          conveying unto Ontelaunee Township two nonexclusive, perpetual easements
70-  11-  in gross upon that portion of premises shown and designated as two twenty
2009 23-  foot strips of land and shown as a permanent stormwater easement on the
     2009 "Highway Occupancy Permit Plans, Roadway Improvements for Schuylkill
          Valley School District," dated July 20, 2009, being Project No. 080890,
          prepared by Derck & Edson Associates, situate in Ontelaunee Township,
          Berks County.
          Authorizing the Mayor to execute a deed from the City of Reading to the
23-  4-   Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, Department of Transportation, and other
2010 26-  documents (agreement of sale and settlement statement), thereby conveying
     2010 premises situate at Route 61, Ontelaunee Township, Berks County,
          Pennsylvania.
     10-  Authorizing the Mayor to execute any and all documents required to
55-  11-  effectuate the transfer of ownership of premises known as the "Fire
2010 2010 Training Center," Reading, Berks County, PA from the City of Reading to
          the County of Berks.
          Authorizing the Mayor to execute agreements to obtain the necessary rights
10-  1-   of way and easements for the purpose of installing, constructing,
2012 23-  maintaining and operating the sanitary sewer conveyance system and
     2012 upgrades between the Sixth and Canal Pump Station and Fritz Island
          Wastewater Treatment Plant.
26-  3-   Authorizing the Mayor to acquire the properties from the Berks County Tax
2012 12-  Claim Bureau's current repository list.
     2012
29-  3-   Authorizing the Mayor to attempt to acquire ownership of the premises
2012 12-  known as 405A South Seventh Street, Reading, Berks County, Pennsylvania,
     2012 from the Berks County Sheriff's Judicial Sale.
          Authorizing the Mayor to execute the third addendum to the lease and
          operating agreement between the City of Reading and the Reading Area Water
36-  6-   Authority, including a deed conveying to the Reading Area Water Authority
2012 22-  a parcel of land of approximately 120 acres located in Ontelanuee Township
     2012 owned by the City and a deed conveying to the Reading Area Water Authority
          a parcel of land of approximately 2.39 acres owned by the City and located
          at 1801 Moss Street in the City of Reading.
19-  4-8- Authorizing the Mayor to execute the lease between the City of Reading and
2013 2013 Egelman's Park Association for a portion of premises known as "Egelman's
          Park."
          Authorizing the Mayor to execute a tri party lease agreement between the
     9-   City of Reading, the Berks County Conservancy and Alvernia University; a
43-  23-  lease agreement between the City of Reading and Alvernia University and a
2013 2013 lease agreement between the City of Reading and the Berks County
          Conservancy to provide for the leasing of certain portions of Angelica
          Park.
50-  10-  Authorizing the Mayor to execute the first amendment to the lease
2013 14-  agreement between the City of Reading and Alvernia University for Angelica
     2013 Park baseball facilities.
          Authorizing the Mayor to execute an easement agreement to convey unto the
56-  11-  Muhlenberg Township Authority a nonexclusive, perpetual easement in gross
2013 12-  and temporary sanitary sewer construction easement upon that portion of
     2013 premises known and designated as Tax Parcel # 66531810461680, generally
          located to the northeast of Spring Valley Road, Muhlenberg Township.
     4-   Authorizing the Mayor to execute a temporary easement for construction
10-  14-  purposes between the City of Reading and the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania,
2014 2014 Department of Transportation, thereby conveying unto the Commonwealth of
          Pennsylvania, Department of Transportation, said temporary easement.
          Authorizing the Mayor to execute a agreement of sale, deed and any other
     4-   required documents to effectuate the conveyance of certain real property
11-  14-  situate in Perry/ Richmond Townships, Berks County, Pennsylvania,
2014 2014 consisting of approximately 0.621 acre (right of way) and approximately
          0.067 acre (private access easement), between the City of Reading and the
          Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, Department of Transportation.
62-  8-   Directing the Mayor to execute the fourth addendum to the lease agreement
2014 11-  with the Reading Area Water Authority.
     2014
          Authorizing the Mayor to execute a right of way grant between the City of
     11-  Reading and the UGI Utilities, Inc., thereby conveying unto the UGI
89-  24-  Utilities, Inc., a permanent easement and uninterrupted right of access as
2014 2014 described in said easement upon that portion of premises along 14th Street
          and Green Street, for installation of a gated and fenced in regulator
          station.
          Authorizing the Mayor to execute a grant of right of way and easement
     11-  between the City of Reading and the Schuylkill River Greenways
96-  24-  Association, thereby conveying unto the Schuylkill River Greenways
2014 2014 Association a nonexclusive, perpetual access easement upon that portion of
          premises within parcel identification number 530616947572 along Morgantown
          Road.
99-  12-  Repealing Ord. No. 62 2014 and directing the Mayor to execute the fourth
2014 8-   addendum to the lease agreement with the Reading Area Water Authority.
     2014
53-  10-  Authorizing a lease agreement with the "Reading's Christmas on the
2015 12-  Mountain" organization to operate the Hillside holiday light display at
     2015 Hillside playground.
75-  12-  Directing the Mayor to execute the fifth addendum to the lease agreement
2015 21-  with the Reading Area Water Authority.
     2015
          Authorizing the Mayor to execute a right of way between the City of
9-   2-   Reading and the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, Department of
2016 22-  Transportation, thereby conveying unto the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania,
     2016 Department of Transportation, right-of-way upon that portion of premises
          situate in Cumru Township (area of 0.041 acres along State Route 625).
          Authorizing the Mayor to execute a temporary easement between the City of
     2-   Reading and the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, Department of
10-  22-  Transportation, thereby conveying unto the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania,
2016 2016 Department of Transportation, temporary easement upon that portion of
          premises situate in Cumru Township (area of 0.056 acres along State Route
          625).
35-  8-   Authorizing the administration to negotiate the purchase of the East
2016 22-  Reading pool site.
     2016
          Authorizing the Mayor to execute an easement agreement between the City of
83-  8-   Reading and the Reading Area Water Authority conveying a non-exclusive
2017 28-  perpetual easement upon that portion of premises known and designated as
     2017 Easement No. 18-5306-20-90-1580-1 located within Parcel ID# 18-5306-20-90-
          1580.
          Authorizing the Mayor to execute an easement agreement between the City of
84-  8-   Reading and the Reading Area Water Authority conveying a non-exclusive
2017 28-  perpetual easement upon that portion of premises known and designated as
     2017 Easement No. 18-5306-20-90-1580-1 located within Parcel ID# 18-5306-20-90-
          1580.
          Authorizing the Mayor and Managing Director to negotiate terms and to
85-  8-   execute any and all documents to effectuate the conveyance of certain
2017 28-  properties to the City of Reading. The properties are: 924 Penn Street,
     2017 926 Penn Street, 928 Penn Street, 930 Penn Street, 932 Penn Street, and
          927 Cherry Street.
          Authorizing the Mayor to execute an easement agreement between the City of
88-  9-   Reading and Albright College, thereby conveying unto Albright an
2017 11-  exclusive, perpetual easement in gross upon that portion of premises known
     2017 and designated as easement No. 2 located within Parcel ID# 5318-77-00-
          4325.
117- 12-  Authorizing the Mayor to execute any and all documents required to
2017 18-  effectuate the transfer of ownership of premises known as 932 A Penn
     2017 Street, from Robert Ekvall to the City of Reading.
          Authorizing the Mayor to execute a utility easement agreement between the
     1-   City of Reading and Masano Corporation, thereby conveying unto the city a
1-   10-  utility easement located within Parcel ID# 530663325674, and to execute a
2018 2018 utility easement between the City of Reading and Tom Masano Motors, Inc.,
          conveying unto the City of Reading a utility easement located within
          Parcel ID# 530664423928.
9-   3-   Authorizing the Mayor to execute an agreement of sale with Community
2019 25-  Properties, LLC
     2019
16-  5-   Dedicating city property for the use of road right of way and temporary
2019 28-  construction easements for the River Road extension project
     2019
Res. 8-   Authorizing acceptance of delivery of deed transferring ownership for the
81-  12-  50 acre former Dana Corp site from Reading Development Authority to the
2019 2019 City of Reading.
64-  12-
2019 9-   Authorizing the purchase of the Dana South property.
     2019
32-  4-   Authorizing the Mayor to execute an agreement of sale between the city and
2021 26-  Trinidad Cedeno conveying unto Trinidad Cedeno Parcel ID 02530636986404.
     2021
33-  4-   Authorizing the Mayor to execute an agreement of sale between the city and
2021 26-  the Reading Parking Authority for the city-owned property at 423
     2021 Schuylkill Avenue.
100- 12-  Authorizing the Mayor to execute an agreement of sale between the City and
2021 27-  the Reading Parking Authority for the real property at 623 Wool Alley.
     2021
101- 12-  Authorizing construction easements on City property for the Schuylkill
2021 27-  Avenue Railroad Bridge Project.
     2021
16-  2-   Authorizing construction easements on City property for the reconstruction
2022 28-  of Ebling Memorial Bridge on Spring Valley Road over Bernhardt Creek in
     2022 Muhlenberg Township.
30-  4-   Authorizing the Mayor to accept donated land at 2049 Hessian Boulevard,
2022 11-  Parcel ID 16531719602692.
     2022
59-  6-   Approving and authorizing the Mayor to execute an agreement of lease
2022 27-  between the Reading Parking Authority and the City of Reading of certain
     2022 City-owned properties for use a parking lot.
66-  7-   Authorizing the Mayor to accept the conveyance of 140 Schiller Street,
2022 11-  Parcel ID 065307655523615 from the Reading Redevelopment Authority.
     2022
121- 10-  Authorizing the Mayor to accept the conveyance of 131 Schuylkill Avenue
2022 24-  and 133 Schuylkill Avenue from Berks Nature/Berks County Conservancy
     2022 Properties, Inc.
10-  1-   Approving and authorizing the Mayor to execute an agreement of lease
2023 23-  between Representative Christina Houlahan of Berks and City of Reading for
     2023 utilization of space in City Hall for office space.
43-  5-8- Authorizing the City to purchase the property at 951 Morgantown Road,
2023 2023 Parcel ID 39530502892847 from Alvernia University.
48-  5-   Approving the amendment to the lease agreement with the Reading Area Water
2023 23-  Authority (RAWA).
     2023
54-  6-   Authorizing the City to purchase the property at 301 South 3rd Street,
2023 12-  Parcel ID 01530634688457 from the Reading Redevelopment Authority.
     2023
62-  6-   Authorizing the City to enter into an agreement of sale with Newcold USA
2023 26-  RE Holding, LLC to sell the property owned by the City at 1 Berkshire
     2023 Place Parcel ID 15530713234217.
65-  8-   Authorizing the City to enter into an agreement of sale with Colin Wyatt
2023 14-  to sell the property owned by the City on West Shore Drive Parcel ID
     2023 27439808883908.
67-  7-   Approving the lease agreement with the Reading Parking Authority (RPA),
2023 10-  for 213 South 11th Street.
     2023
78-  9-   Authorizing the City to enter into an agreement of sale with DCP
2023 11-  Investment Properties, LLC, to sell the properties owned by the City at
     2023 946-970 Morgantown Road.
83-  9-   Authorizing the Mayor to execute an amended agreement of lease between the
2023 25-  Rotary Park Association and the City for the leasing of a certain tract of
     2023 land used for recreational purposes described as the Sherman Tract.
     3-   Authorizing the Mayor to execute a deed of dedication conveying unto the
19-  25-  Township of Ontelaunee of the County of Berks a portion of property Kindt
2024 2024 Corner Road with a parcel identification number of 68540100609178 in the
          Township of Ontelaunee for the Township’s reconstruction of Bowers Road.
     6-   Authorizing construction easements on city property, deed in lieu of
39-  23-  condemnation for right-of-way and instrument for declaration of
2025 2025 restrictions and covenants for improvements on and along Lake Shore Drive
          and Ontelaunee Drive.
         
 
 
Chapter A616
SEWERS
§
A616-101. Sewers.
[Below is a listing of ordinances adopted by the City of Reading regarding
sewers. Full copies of said ordinances can be found in the City Clerk's Office.
Regulations regarding sewers and sewage disposal are located in
Chapter 467 of the Code of the City of Reading.]
§ A616-101. Sewers.
Ord. No./ Res. No. Date Description
Ord.
No./  Date Description
Res.
No.
28-   5-   Constructing a house sewage filtration bed and appurtenances on Fritz's Island
1915  17-  and making an appropriation to the Department of Streets and Public Improvements,
      1915 Bureau of Sewers.
16-   3-1- Granting the Carpenter Steel Company permission to construct upon Bern and East
1916  1916 McKnight Street a private house sewer line.
34-   6-
1916  21-  Dividing the City into sewer districts for house drainage purposes.
      1916
51-   7-   Constructing house drain sewers, house connections and branches in Sewer District
1916  19-  No. 14.
      1916
62-   9-   Permitting Messrs. Diener, Endy and Fisher to construct a house sewer on
1916  27-  Eighteen-and-a-half Street at their own expense.
      1916
33-   5-   Constructing a portion of a twenty-inch relief house sewer trunk line and
1917  29-  appurtenances for the northeastern section of the City.
      1917
57-   12-  Providing for the construction of lateral house sewers and house connections on
1917A 19-  Hill Road.
      1917
7-    2-   Permitting the Reading Steel Casting Company to construct a house sewer on the
1918  13-  north side of Bayonne Street.
      1918
      5-   Providing for an application of assessments falling due and payable in House
14-   29-  Sewer District No. 2 1/2 to a rotary fund to be designated "SWS-B2" for the
1918  1918 purpose of meeting expenditures in the construction of lateral house sewers and
           house connections.
19-   7-   Permitting Reading Steel Casting Company to construct two catch basins and to
1918  10-  have basins connected by a ten-inch vitrified pipe to the storm sewer.
      1918
21-   4-   Permitting the Reading Steel Casting Company to construct a house sewer and
1919  23-  manhole at their own expense under certain conditions.
      1919
28-   6-   Permitting E. Richard Meinig Company to construct a house sewer manhole, a
1919  11-  connection and lay conduits with manholes for hot water, cables and sprinkler
      1919 filter attachment at their own expense under certain conditions.
      7-   Permitting William McCormick to construct a six-inch house sewer connection and
31-   30-  to connect with house sewers on Tulpehocken Street in accordance with a plan
1919  1919 entitled "Plan of Proposed Connection to Tulpehocken House Sewer, Natatorum for
           William McCormick," at his own expense under certain conditions.
40-   8-   Permitting the Reading Armory Board to construct at its own expense and under
1919  29-  conditions a four-inch vitrified
      1919 stormwater sewer connection.
44-   9-   Permitting William H. Lunden to construct a storm sewer manhole and connection to
1919  17-  the stormwater sewer.
      1919
42-   7-   Providing for the construction of the completion of a twenty- inch relief house
1920  21-  sewer trunk line and appurtenances for the northeastern section of the City.
      1920
30-   4-   Authorizing the Superintendent of the Department of Streets and Public
1921  27-  Improvements to make betterments to septic tanks for sewage disposal at the
      1921 sewage disposal plant.
35-   6-8- Providing for the construction of the completion of a relief house sewer trunk
1921  1921 line and appurtenances for the northeastern section of the City.
48-   8-
1921  31-  Constructing storm sewers and appurtenances.
      1921
49-   9-7- Permitting Harry S. Reeser to construct a house sewer on the ten-foot-wide alley
1921  1921 on the rear of his property at his own expense.
38-   6-   Constructing a storm sewer and appurtenances through the property of Thos.
1923  20-  Jackson and Sons Co., Inc.
      1923
59-   7-9- Permitting George D. Horst to construct house sewers and connections.
1924  1924
64-   7-   Permitting H. Denton Stryker to construct house sewers and connections at his own
1924  16-  expense.
      1924
80-   9-3- Permitting George D. Horst to construct house sewers and connections at his own
1924  1924 expense.
85-   10-  Permitting Solon D. Bausher to construct storm sewer main, connections and
1924  1-   appurtenances at his own expense.
      1924
88-   10-  Permitting George D. Horst to construct house sewers and connections at his own
1924  8-   expense.
      1924
108-  12-  Permitting George D. Horst to construct house sewers and connections at his own
1924  31-  expense.
      1924
111-  1-7- Permitting the Harmony Volunteer Beneficial Association to construct a house
1924  1925 sewer and connection.
17-   4-8- Permitting George D. Horst to construct house sewers and connections at his own
1925  1925 expense and under certain conditions.
56-   11-  Permitting D.F. Haupt to construct house sewers and connections at his own
1925  20-  expense under certain conditions.
      1925
87-   7-6- Permitting Solomon Boscor to construct an extension of house sewer main
1927  1927 connections and appurtenances.
119-  9-7- Permitting Reading Dyeing Company to construct storm sewer main, connections and
1927  1927 appurtenances under certain conditions.
79-   6-   Permitting Warren G.M. Binckley and Daniel S. Krick to construct an extension of
1928  27-  house sewer main, connection and appurtenances.
      1928
119-  10-  Permitting Reading Home Construction Company, Inc., to construct extension of
1928  3-   house sewer main, connections and appurtenances.
      1928
59-   8-   Permitting George D. Horst to construct an extension of a house sewer main and
1929  14-  connections appurtenances under certain conditions.
      1929
61-   8-   Authorizing the internal reconstruction and capacity expansion of the sewage
1929  14-  pumping station.
      1929
75-   9-   Executing an agreement between the City and the Reading Company to provide for
1929  18-  the placing and maintaining of a sanitary sewer pipeline under and across the
      1929 tracks.
26-   3-   Constructing a primary sanitary collection trunk line sewer extension and
1930  26-  constructing an appurtenant, adjusted replacement for local frontage service
      1930 mains and house service connections.
28-   4-2- Permitting the Young Men's Christian Association to construct an eight-inch- and
1930  1930 ten-inch-diameter storm sewer, manhole and connections to connect with present
           the present storm sewer.
50-   7-2- Permitting George D. Bucks and Edward J. Heckman to construct an extension of a
1930  1930 house sewer main.
61-   8-6- Constructing additional improvements and appurtenances to the sewage treatment
1930  1930 works.
           Executing certain agreements with the Reading Company, the Pennsylvania Railroad,
62-   8-6- Oakbrook Hosiery Mills and the Pennsylvania Trust Company. Trustee of the Mary
1930  1930 Ann Boyer estate to provide for the installation and maintenance of a storm sewer
           line.
10-   2-   Permitting George D. Horst to construct house local collection mains and
1931  11-  connections.
      1931
           Amending Sewer District No. 7 to comprise all that part of the City bounded on
53-   7-1- the north by the present northern City line, on the east by the center line of
1931  1931 the Reading Company's main line railroad tracks, on the South by the northern
           building line of Robeson Street, and the west by the Schuylkill River.
26-   5-2- Authorizing the construction and reconstruction of the portion of Rose Valley
1934  1934 Creek storm sewer approximately between Neversink Alley and Ninth Street and
           Culvert Streets.
35-   6-6- Amending Ord. No. 26-1934.
1934  1934
55-   12-  Executing an agreement between the City and the Borough of Mt. Penn granting the
1935  11-  Borough the privilege of discharging its sewage into the City's sewer system.
      1935
63-   12-  Executing an agreement between the City and Wyomissing Valley Disposal Company
1935  18-  providing for the disposal by the company of house sewage from a certain portion
      1935 of the Eighteenth Ward for the sum of $840 per year.
      2-   Executing an agreement with the Pennsylvania Railroad Company, providing for the
15-   26-  placing and maintaining of storm sewer pipes below and across the tracks and
1936  1936 property of the company; twenty-inch pipeline under the tracks on line of Robeson
           Street and twenty-four-inch pipeline under tracks on line of Perry Street.
44-   9-   Execution of an agreement between the City and the Glidden Company for Glidden
1941  10-  Company to construct an eight-inch pipe duct to carry steam.
      1941
           Execution of an agreement between the City and the Brookline Manor Apartments,
8-    3-   Inc., granting Brookline Manor Apartments permission to construct storm and
1950  15-  sanitary sewers connecting their property in the Eighteenth Ward with the City's
      1950 storm and sanitary sewers on Old Wyomissing Road and Margaret Street and
           designating the ownership of the sewer lines when completed.
19-   7-   Execution of an agreement between the City and the Carpenter Steel Company for
1953  29-  Carpenter Steel to construct a sanitary sewer line on River Road in accordance
      1953 with certain plans and specifications prepared by the City Engineer.
           Execution of an agreement between the City, Laureldale Municipal Authority and
      12-  Laureldale Borough, providing for the connection with the City's sewage
43-   11-  collection system of sewage collected in a sanitary sewage system to be
1957  1957 constructed by the Laureldale Municipal Authority and leased to the Borough of
           Laureldale and setting rates and charges to be received by the City for the
           treatment and disposal of sewage received.
5-    2-   Execution of an agreement between the City and the Dana Corporation, for land for
1958  19-  the purpose of constructing a water main and a storm sewer.
      1958
5-    4-   Entering an agreement between Township of Cumru, Cumru Township Authority and the
1959  22-  City to dispose the Township's sewage in the Reading Sewage Disposal Plant.
      1959
19-   10-  Entering an agreement between Borough of Kenhorst, Kenhorst Municipal Authority
1959  7-   and the City to dispose the Township's sewage in the Reading Sewage Disposal
      1959 Plant.
20-   10-  Entering an agreement between Township of Spring, Municipal Authority of Spring
1959  7-   Township and the City to dispose the Township's sewage in the Reading Sewage
      1959 Disposal Plant.
           Execution of an agreement between the City and the Muhlenberg Township Authority,
5-    1-   providing for the connection with the City's sewage collection system of sewage
1960  27-  collected in a sanitary sewage system to be constructed by the Muhlenberg
      1960 Township Authority and setting rates and charges to be received by the City for
           the treatment and disposal of sewage received.
           Authorizing the construction of improvements, additions and extensions to the
31-   9-   sanitary sewage system of the City, in the Eighteenth Ward, by assessment of part
1960  28-  of the costs thereof according to the front foot rule for the properties
      1960 benefited, providing for the payment in part out of the General Revenue Funds,
           and providing for the collection of the assessments.
           Authorizing the construction of improvements, additions and extensions to the
      10-  sanitary sewage system of the City, in that portion of the Sixteenth Ward without
32-   11-  a sewage system, by assessment of part of the costs thereof according to the
1960  1960 front foot rule for the properties benefited, providing for the payment in part
           out of the General Revenue Funds, and providing for the collection of the
           assessments.
           Execution of an agreement between the City, the Temple Borough Authority and
           Temple Borough, providing for the connection with the City's sewage collection
42-   12-  system of sewage collected through the Muhlenberg Township Authority trunk lines,
1960  28-  for treatment and disposal in the City sewage treatment plant, to be constructed
      1960 by the Temple Borough Authority and leased to the Borough of Temple and setting
           rates and charges to be received by the City for the treatment and disposal of
           sewage received.
           Execution of an agreement between the City, the Cumru Township Authority and
           Cumru Township, amending the agreement of 9-1-1959 between the parties, by
10-   3-   granting permission for the extension of sewage system of Authority and Township,
1962  21-  providing for the receiving through the City's sewage system to the City's sewage
      1962 treatment plant for treatment and disposal of such additional sewage collected by
           Authority and Township, providing for the payment by Township to City in addition
           to rates and charges for sewage treatment.
      1-   Levying and assessing the costs and expenses for the construction of
2-    16-  improvements, additions and extensions to the sanitary sewage system of the City,
1963  1963 in the Sixteenth Ward, against the properties benefited, improved or accommodated
           thereby according to the front foot rule.
      1-   Levying and assessing the costs and expenses for the construction of
6-    30-  improvements, additions and extensions to the sanitary sewage system of the City,
1963  1963 in the Eighteenth Ward, against the properties benefited, improved or
           accommodated thereby according to the front foot rule.
           Levying and assessing the costs and expenses for the construction of
25-   11-  improvements, additions and extensions to the sanitary sewage system of the City,
1963  6-   in the Nineteenth Ward, against abutting properties according to the front foot
      1963 rule, providing for the payment in part out of the General Revenue Funds, and
           providing for the collection of the assessments.
           Execution of an agreement between the City, the Cumru Township Authority and
           Cumru Township, amending the agreement of between the parties dated 9-1-1959, as
      8-   amended by an agreement of amendment dated 3-21-1962, providing for the extension
25-   26-  of sewage system of Authority and Township by permitting sewage collected by
1964  1964 Shillington Municipal Authority and/or Borough of Shillington from a certain
           portion of the Borough of Shillington to be transported through the sewage
           collection lines and sewage trunk lines of said Authority and the City to the
           sewage treatment plant of the City.
50-   1-5- Entering an agreement between Borough of Wyomissing Hills, Borough of Wyomissing
1966  1966 Hills Authority and the City to dispose the Borough's sewage in the Reading
           Sewage Disposal Plant.
           Levying and assessing the costs and expenses for the construction of
4-    3-8- improvements, additions and extensions to the sanitary sewage system of the City,
1967  1967 in the Nineteenth Ward, against the properties benefited, improved or
           accommodated thereby according to the front foot rule.
44-   8-   Permitting the Interstate Container Corporation to construct a sanitary sewer and
1968  14-  appurtenances between a manhole at the intersection of Noble Street and Gregg
      1968 Avenue at their own expense.
      8-   Providing for the assessment of the costs and expenses for extending the sanitary
45-   14-  sewers in the Twelfth Sewer District against abutting properties, by assessment
1968  1968 according to the front foot rule, and providing for the collection of assessments
           made.
2-    1-   Selecting and appropriating an easement in certain lands situate in the
1969  22-  Eighteenth Ward for the installation of storm and sanitary sewers.
      1969
33-   7-   Providing for the assessment of the costs and expenses for extending the sanitary
1970  15-  sewers in Twelfth Sewer District against the properties benefited, improved or
      1970 accommodated thereby according to the front foot rule.
           Providing for the sewer service rental for the operation, maintenance, repair,
55-   12-  alteration, inspection and depreciation and other expenses arising out of or
1970  30-  connected with the sewerage and sewage disposal system of the City of owners of
      1970 properties from which sewage is drained or transported to and treated at the
           sewage treatment works of the City.
39-   11-  Execution of an agreement between the City, the Municipal Authority of the
1971  3-   Township of Spring and the Township of Spring amending the agreement between the
      1971 parties dated 10-7-1959.
19-   4-   Authorizing the construction of improvements, additions and extensions to the
1975  30-  public sanitary sewerage system of the City in Geiger's Court in the Third Ward.
      1975
59-   12-  Levying and assessing the costs and expenses for the construction of
1975  31-  improvements, additions and extensions to the public sanitary sewage system of
      1975 the City at Geiger's Court in the Third Ward.
80-   8-7- Confirming and approving certain intermunicipal sewage agreements, negotiations
1991  1991 and providing compensation therefor.
           Authorizing the Mayor to acquire a fee or easement interest in the parcels of
      3-   land identified as Property Identification Numbers 18530651852796 and
23-   12-  18530616947572, located along the west shore of the Schuylkill River between the
2012  2012 Sixth and Canal Pump Station and Fritz Island Wastewater Treatment Plant for the
           purpose of constructing and maintaining such sanitary sewer facilities required
           for the efficient transportation of sewage to the Wastewater Treatment Plant.
8-    2-   Authorizing the City of Reading to enter into an agreement with Laureldale
2013  11-  Borough for cooperation with regard to transportation, treatment and disposal of
      2013 sewage as designated in the intergovernmental cooperation agreement.
3-    1-   Authorizing a reconciliation payment to Laureldale Borough and Muhlenberg
2019  28-  Township Authority for overpayments of treatment and transportation of
      2019 wastewater.
10-   4-8- Authorizing a reconciliation payment to City of Reading for overpayments of
2019  2019 treatment and transportation of wastewater.
Res.  12-  Sewage module review for Hope Rescue Mission - Women’s and Children’s Shelter
128-  23-  land development.
2019  2019
Res.  6-
59-   14-  Sewage module review for new land development.
2021  2021
Res.  6-
65-   28-  Sewage module review for new land development.
2021  2021
Res.  2-
12A-  14-  Sewage module review for the 1325-1341 Scott Street Subdivision.
2022  2022
Res.  2-
13-   14-  Sewage module review for the Overload Real Estate Holdings Apartments.
2022  2022
Res.  2-   Sewage module review for the 234 N. 4th Street - Supernatural Foods III
14-   14-  Development.
2022  2022
Res.  2-
15-   14-  Sewage module review for the 650 Spring Street Go-Puff Development.
2022  2022
Res.  2-
16-   14-  Sewage module review for the Albright College Exeter Hall.
2022  2022
Res.  2-
17-   14-  Sewage module review for the 1010 Elm St. Daycare.
2022  2022
Res.  9-
139-  12-  Sewage module review for new land development.
2022  2022
Res.  11-
171-  28-  Sewage module review for new land development.
2022  2022
Res.  11-
172-  28-  Sewage module review for new land development.
2022  2022
Res.  12-
187-  19-  Rescinding Res. 171-2022 for sewage module review for new land development.
2022  2022
Res.  12-
188-  19-  Sewage module review for new land development.
2022  2022
Res.  2-
21-   13-  Sewage module review for new land development.
2023  2023
Res.  2-
22-   13-  Sewage module review for new land development.
2023  2023
Res.  2-
23-   13-  Sewage module review for new land development.
2023  2023
      3-   Authorizing the filing of a declaration of taking to condemn easement rights in
22-   25-  certain lands owned by Eastern Rigging and Construction, Inc., located in the
2024  2024 City of Reading being parcel ID 19530713141189 for the purpose of installation
           and maintenance of a sewer force main.
Res.  5-
83-   13-  Sewage module review for new land development.
2024  2024
Res.  6-
99-   10-  Sewage module review for new land development.
2024  2024
Res.  11-
164-  12-  Sewage module review for new land development.
2024  2024
Res.  11-
165-  12-  Sewage module review for new land development.
2024  2024
Res.  11-
166-  12-  Sewage module review for new land development.
2024  2024
Res.  2-
16-   10-  Sewage module review for new land development.
2025  2025
Res.  2-
17-   10-  Sewage module review for new land development.
2025  2025
Res.  3-
38A-  24-  Sewage module review for new land development.
2025  2025
Res.  4-
52-   28-  Sewage module review for new land development.
2025  2025
Res.  4-
53-   28-  Sewage module review for new land development.
2025  2025
Res.  4-
54-   28-  Sewage module review for new land development.
2025  2025
Res.  6-
73-   23-  Sewage module review for new land development.
2025  2025
Res.  7-
80-   14-  Sewage module review for new land development.
2025  2025
Res.  7-
86-   28-  Sewage module review for new land development.
2025  2025
Res.  7-
87-   28-  Sewage module review for new land development.
2025  2025
Res.  8-
95-   11-  Sewage module review for new land development.
2025  2025
Res.  10-
119-  13-  Sewage module review for new land development.
2025  2025
Res.  11-
135-  24-  Sewage module review for new land development.
2025  2025
Res.  11-
136-  24-  Sewage module review for new land development.
2025  2025
 
 
Chapter A617
STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
§
A617-101. Streets and sidewalks.
[Below is a listing of ordinances adopted by the City of Reading regarding
specific street vacations, street openings, grading, surfacing, widening,
renaming, accepting, curbs, etc. Full copies of said ordinances can be found in
the City Clerk's Office. Regulations on streets and sidewalks are located in
Chapter 508 of the Code of the City of Reading.]
§ A617-101. Streets and sidewalks.
Screening of all dumpsters and trash receptacles shall be required for the
purpose of improving the aesthetic and functional quality of every City
neighborhood. This part shall apply to all permitted permanent dumpsters,
carts, toters and trash receptacles located within public view, new and
existing, including temporary dumpsters.
This appendix contains an alphabetical listing of streets and, under each
street, a listing of all ordained activities.
Name Activity Location Ord. No. Date
Name             Activity             Location              Ord. No. Date
Adams Street     Revising curb grades Between Berks Street  44-1973  8-15-1973
                                      and north City line
                                      From the north
                                      building line of
Adams Street     Vacating             Hiester's Lane to the 19-1974  5-15-1974
                                      south building line
                                      of Berks Street
Alexander Street Vacating             From Baker Street to  37-1928  4-25-1928
                                      Gerry Street
                 Revising grades and  From Lackawana Street
Allegheny Avenue elevations           to the northern City  87-1926  6-23-1926
                                      line
Allegheny Avenue Opening              Between Lehigh Street 11-1944  5-10-1944
                                      and Warren Street
                                      Between Columbia
Allegheny Avenue Opening              Street and Lehigh     15-1944  6-28-1944
                                      Street
                                      Between Blair Avenue
Allegheny Avenue Opening              and the Reading Belt  39-1949  8-3-1949
                                      Railroad
                                      From the south
                                      building line of
Allegheny Avenue Opening              Lackawanna Street to  28-1966  6-1-1966
                                      a point 103.43 feet
                                      south
                                      From the north
                                      building line of
                                      Warren Street to a
                                      point 426.57 feet
Allegheny Avenue Opening              north along the west  70-1966  12-14-1966
                                      building line and
                                      434.18 feet north
                                      along the east
                                      building line of
                                      Allegheny Avenue
                                      From the north
                                      building line of
Allegheny Avenue Vacating             Mercer Street north   37-1967  11-22-1967
                                      48.43 feet to the
                                      City of Reading/Bern
                                      Township line
                                      From the southern
                                      building line of
Allegheny Avenue Vacating             Lackawanna Street to  1-1980   9-10-1980
                                      the northern building
                                      line of Warren Street
                 Placing on           From Mercer Street to
Allegheny Street topographical survey the northern City     86-1926  6-23-1926
                                      line
                                      Between the south
                                      building line of
Allegheny Street Vacating             Columbia Street and   12-1975  4-9-1975
                                      the right-of-way line
                                      of the Reading
                                      Company
Alsace Road      Placing on           From Perry Street to  191-1927 12-28-1927
                 topographical survey Oak Lane
Alsace Road      Opening and grading  From Perry Street to  33-1929  6-12-1929
                                      Oak Lane
                                      From Berks Street to
Alsace Road      Opening and grading  northward             8-1931   3-4-1931
                                      approximately 143
                                      feet
Alton Avenue     Opening              From Northmont Avenue 82-1915  2-2-1916
                                      to Kerper Estate
Alton Avenue     Placing on           From Northmont Avenue 81-1915  2-2-1916
                 topographical survey to Kerper Estate
                                      From Belmont Avenue
Alton Avenue     Vacating             southwestward 125     10-1935  4-17-1935
                                      feet
Amity Street     Opening, grading and Between Linden Street 29-1917  5-23-1917
                 paving               and Pricetown Road
                                      Between Eleventh
Amity Street     Opening              Street and Linden     53-1922  10-4-1922
                                      Street
Amity Street     Vacating             Between Oak Lane and  95-1924  11-12-1924
                                      eastern City line
Amity Street     Vacating             Between River Road    109-1924 3-25-1925
                                      and McKnight Street
Amity Street     Storm sewers         From Church Street to 163-1926 9-22-1926
                                      Sixth Street
Amity Street     Storm sewers         From Twelfth Street   163-1926 9-22-1926
                                      to Thirteenth Street
Amity Street     Revising elevations  From Church Street to 179-1927 12-31-1927
                 and grades           Fifth Street
Amity Street     Storm sewers         From Fifth Street to  77-1930  10-8-1930
                                      Church Street
                                      From 10-foot-wide
                                      alley west of Front
Amity Street     Opening and grading  Street to west        66-1931  8-26-1931
                                      building line of
                                      McKnight Street
Amity Street     Sewers               From Church Street to 21-1932  4-13-1932
                                      Sixth Street
Amity Street     Sewers               From River Road to    21-1932  4-13-1932
                                      Pear Street
                                      From the west
                                      building line of
Amity Street     Vacating             McKnight Street to a  6-1951   4-18-1951
                                      point 139 feet west
                                      of the west building
                                      line of Front Street
                                      Between North Fifth
Amity Street     Vacating             Street and Church     19-1954  4-7-1954
                                      Street and reserving
                                      a right-of-way
Amity Street     Changing alignment,  Between Church Street 22-1976  5-27-1976
                 width and grades     and Sixth Street
Amity Street     Changing alignment,  Between Church Street 42-1976  11-17-1976
                 width and grades     and Sixth Street
Angelica Street  Opening and grading  From Lancaster Avenue 41-1929  7-17-1929
                                      to Summit Avenue
                 Changing curb        From Lancaster Avenue
Angelica Street  elevations and       to Gregg Avenue       46-1929  7-24-1929
                 grades
Angelica Street  Storm sewers         From Lancaster Avenue 35-1930  5-7-1930
                                      to Park Avenue
Angelica Street  Paving and curbing   From Lancaster Avenue 52-1930  7-30-1930
                                      to Summit Avenue
Angelica Street  Vacating             From Park Avenue to   56-1930  8-13-1930
                                      Summit Avenue
                                      The northeastern
                 Vacating and         sidewalk 12 feet wide
Angelica Street  removing             between Brookline     30-1984  3-21-1984
                                      Street and Gregg
                                      Avenue
                                      Of 0.4 miles of
                                      roadway beginning at
                                      a point approximately
Angora Road      Surfacing            750 feet north of the 62-1936  10-17-1936
                                      intersection with
                                      Mill Road, and
                                      extending northward
                                      to the City line
                                      Beginning
                                      approximately 750
                                      feet north of the
Angora Road      Surfacing            intersection of       62-1936  10-17-1936
                                      Angora Road and Hill
                                      Road and extending
                                      north to the City
                                      line
                                      Of 3,800 square feet
                                      of roadway beginning
Angora Road      Surfacing            at Hill Road and      66-1937  11-3-1937
                                      extending northward
                                      to present paved
                                      section
Arch Street      Vacating             From Front Street to  113-1927 9-14-1927
                                      Pear Street
Arch Street      Opening and grading  From Pear Street to   33-1928  4-18-1928
                                      Centre Avenue
Arch Street      Vacating             Between Forth Street  73-1929  11-6-1929
                                      and Fifth Street
Arch Street      Vacating             Between Center Avenue 22-1935  5-15-1935
                                      and Fourth Street
Argonne Road     Opening and grading  From Warren Street to 77-1924  9-3-1924
                                      northern City line
                                      From Warren Street to
Argonne Road     Opening              the northern City     11-1957  2-20-1957
                                      line
                                      Between a line north
Argonne Road     Vacating, abandoning of Mercer Street      66-1992  6-24-1992
                 and removing         projected and the
                                      Bern Township line
Arlington Street Opening and grading  From Upland Avenue to 107-1928 8-29-1928
                                      Belevedere Avenue
Arlington Street Opening and grading  From Lancaster Avenue 15-1929  4-17-1929
                                      to Park Avenue
Arlington Street Opening and grading  From Park Avenue to   41-1929  7-17-1929
                                      Summit Avenue
Arlington Street Opening and grading  From Belvedere Avenue 10-1930  3-12-1930
                                      to Summit Avenue
Arlington Street Paving and curbing   From Lancaster Avenue 52-1930  7-30-1930
                                      to Summit Avenue
                                      Between Wyomissing
Arlington Street Vacating             Boulevard and         21-1937  11-10-1937
                                      Pershing Boulevard
                 Revising curb        Between Brookline
Arlington Street elevations and       Street and Gregg      21-1937  11-10-1937
                 grades               Avenue
Arlington Street Opening              Between Orrton Avenue 37-1948  9-15-1948
                                      and Upland Avenue
Arlington Street Opening portion      From Lancaster Avenue 40-1957  12-31-1957
                                      to Gregg Avenue
                                      From Orrton Avenue to
                                      northern right-of-way
Arlington Street Opening              line of Reading Belt  23-1962  9-26-1962
                                      Branch of Reading
                                      Company
                                      Between Orrton Avenue
                 Placing on           to northern right-of-
Arlington Street topographical survey way line of Reading   23-1962  9-26-1962
                                      Belt Branch of
                                      Reading Company
Arlington Street Changing curb grades Between Gregg Avenue  12-1976  3-31-1976
                                      and Brookline Street
Ashton Street    Naming               Formerly known as     22-1942  7-8-1942
                                      Avenue "A"
Ashton Street    Opening              As located on Plan    11-1964  4-1-1964
                                      No. 6041
Ashton Street    Vacating             As located on Plan    11-1964  4-1-1964
                                      No. 6041
                                      Known as Ashton
Avenue "A"       Renaming             Street between River  22-1942  7-8-1942
                                      Road and East Road
Avenue "A"       Placing on           From Schuylkill       34-1942  9-30-1942
                 topographical survey Avenue to Avenue "D"
Avenue "A"       Opening              Between Schuylkill    1-1943   1-20-1943
                                      Avenue and Avenue "D"
Avenue "A"       Placing on           From Avenue "D" to    16-1961  8-2-1961
                 topographical survey Avenue "B"
Avenue "A"       Opening              From Avenue "D" to    16-1961  8-2-1961
                                      Avenue "B"
Avenue "B"       Placing on           From Schuylkill       34-1942  9-30-1942
                 topographical survey Avenue to Avenue "D"
Avenue "B"       Opening              Between Schuylkill    1-1943   1-20-1943
                                      Avenue and Avenue "D"
Avenue "B"       Opening              From Avenue "D" to    16-1961  8-2-1961
                                      Avenue "A"
Avenue "B"       Placing on           From Avenue "D" to    16-1961  8-2-1961
                 topographical survey Avenue "A"
Avenue "C"       Opening, grading and Between Berkley Road  23-1923  4-11-1923
                 improving            and High Street
                                      Known as Colston
Avenue "C"       Renaming             Street between River  22-1942  7-8-1942
                                      Road and High Street
Avenue "C"       Placing on           From Avenue "A" to    34-1942  9-30-1942
                 topographical survey Avenue "B"
Avenue "C"       Opening              Between Avenue "A"    1-1943   1-20-1943
                                      and Avenue "B"
Avenue "D"       Opening, grading and Between Berkley Road  23-1923  4-11-1923
                 improving            and Downing Street
                                      Known as Durham
Avenue "D"       Renaming             Street between        22-1942  7-8-1942
                                      Downing Street and
                                      East Road
                                      Known as Denton
Avenue "D"       Renaming             Street between River  22-1942  7-8-1942
                                      Road and Downing
                                      Street
Avenue "D"       Placing on           From Avenue "A" to    34-1942  9-30-1942
                 topographical survey Avenue "B"
Avenue "D"       Opening              Between Avenue "A"    1-1943   1-20-1943
                                      and Avenue "B"
                                      Known as Elkton
Avenue "E"       Renaming             Street between River  22-1942  7-8-1942
                                      Road and Berkley Road
 
Name Activity Location Ord. No. Date
Name       Activity      Location                                                                      Ord. Date
                                                                                                       No.
Baer       Opening and   From Columbia Road to Lehigh Street                                           77-  9-3-
Street     grading                                                                                     1924 1924
Baer       Relocating    Between Lehigh Street and Greenview Avenue                                    33-  8-2-
Street                                                                                                 1939 1939
Baer       Establishing  Between Lehigh Street and Greenview Avenue                                    33-  8-2-
Street     curb grades                                                                                 1939 1939
Baer       Removing from                                                                               33-  8-2-
Street     topographical Between Lehigh Street and Columbia Road                                       1939 1939
           survey
Baker                                                                                                  37-  4-
Street     Vacating      From Lacaster Avenue to Pershing Boulevard                                    1928 25-
                                                                                                            1928
Baker      Curbing and                                                                                 47-  7-
Street     grading       From Lancaster Avenue to 175 feet south                                       1930 23-
                                                                                                            1930
Baker                                                                                                  16-  6-
Street     Opening       Between Lancaster Avenue and the south City line                              1958 18-
                                                                                                            1958
Barberry   Opening and   From Old Wyomissing Road to the north City line                               53-  8-7-
Road       grading                                                                                     1929 1929
Bartlett   Opening and                                                                                 189- 12-
Street     grading       From Belvedere Avenue northward approximately 70 feet                         1927 28-
                                                                                                            1927
Bartlett   Opening and   From approximately 70 feet north of Belevedere Avenue to approximately 70     129- 11-
Street     grading       feet north of Prospect Avenue                                                 1928 7-
                                                                                                            1928
Bartlett   Opening and                                                                                 41-  7-
Street     grading       From Fern Avenue to Summit Avenue                                             1929 17-
                                                                                                            1929
Bartlett   Opening and                                                                                 24-  4-
Street     grading       From approximately 70 feet north of Prospect Avenue to Summit Avenue          1930 30-
                                                                                                            1930
Bartlett   Paving and                                                                                  52-  7-
Street     curbing       From Fern Avenue to Summit Avenue                                             1930 30-
                                                                                                            1930
Bartlett   Opening                                                                                     40-  12-
Street     portion       From Upland Avenue to Belvedere Avenue                                        1957 31-
                                                                                                            1957
Bayonne                  From the east building line of Lebanon Street to the east building line of    63-  12-
Street     Opening       Little Clinton Street                                                         1914 23-
                                                                                                            1914
Bayonne                                                                                                27-  5-
Street     Grading       From Little Clinton Street to Lebanon Street                                  1915 17-
                                                                                                            1915
Bayonne                  From the west building line of Little Clinton Street to the east building     27-  4-
Street     Vacating      line of Lebanon Street                                                        1916 19-
                                                                                                            1916
Bayonne                  From the west building line of Little Clinton Street to the east building     28-  4-
Street     Opening       line of Lebanon Street                                                        1916 19-
                                                                                                            1916
Bayonne    Placing on    From the west building line of Little Clinton Street to the east building     28-  4-
Street     topographical line of Lebanon Street                                                        1916 19-
           survey                                                                                           1916
Bayonne                                                                                                60-  12-
Street     Vacating      Between Lebanon Street and Little Clinton Street                              1939 27-
                                                                                                            1939
Bear       Vacating and  From the northwestern right-of-way line of the Warren Street Bypass to a      6-   4-
Street     removing      point 500 feet northeastward                                                  1959 30-
                                                                                                            1959
                         Beginning at a point 394.72 feet south of the southern building line of
           Vacating and  Fairview Street and 210 feet west of the western building line of Fourteenth
           removing from Street on the eastern building line of Beaver Street; thence extending
Beaver     the           southerly along the eastern topographical building line 505.24 feet to a      25-  3-
Street     topographical point; thence extending westerly 40 feet to the western topographical         2006 13-
           survey of the building line of Beaver Street; thence extending northerly along the western       2006
           City of       topographical building line of Beaver Street 505.24 feet to a point; thence
           reading       extending 40 feet easterly to the point of beginning. Containing in area 0.46
                         acres, more or less
Beech                                                                                                  18-  3-
Street     Sewers        From Pear Street to Second Street                                             1922 29-
                                                                                                            1922
Beech      Sewers        From Pear Street to Second Street                                             28-  5-3-
Street                                                                                                 1922 1922
Beech                    From a point 115 feet east of east building line of Second Street to Thorn    111- 1-
Street     Vacating      Street                                                                        1931 20-
                                                                                                            1932
Beech      Revising                                                                                    52-  10-
Street     grade         From east curbline of Second Street to 128 feet east therefrom                1940 30-
                                                                                                            1940
                         Beginning at a point on the western right-of-way line of North Second Street
                         a corner of lands of Reading- Berks Emergency Shelter; thence along lands of
                         Opportunity House (a.k.a. Reading-Berks Emergency Shelter) and the southern
                         right-of-way line of Beech Street South 87 degrees 08 minutes 15 second West
                         221.00 feet to a point on the eastern right-of-way line of Pear Street;            11-
Beech      Vacating      thence along the eastern right-of- way line of Pear Street North 02 degrees   68-  23-
Street                   51 minutes 45 second West 40.33 feet to a point on the northern side of Beech 2009 2009
                         Street, thence along the northern right-of-way of Beech Street North 87
                         degrees 22 minutes 57 second East 221.00 feet to a point on the western
                         right-of-way of North Second Street; thence along the western right-of- way
                         line of North Second Street South 02 degrees 51 minutes 59 second East 39.38
                         feet to a point the place of beginning
           Grading and                                                                                 28-  6-
Bell Alley paving        A 10-foot-wide alley, from Willow Street south to an unnamed alley            1972 14-
                                                                                                            1972
           Grading and   Located east of south Sixth and parallel between 600 block of Willow and an   37-  9-
Bell Alley paving        unnamed alley                                                                 1974 11-
                                                                                                            1974
Belmont    Placing on                                                                                  81-  2-2-
Avenue     topographical From Hiester's Lane to Delta Avenue                                           1915 1916
           survey
Belmont    Opening       From Hiester's Lane to Delta Avenue                                           82-  2-2-
Avenue                                                                                                 1915 1916
Belmont                                                                                                177- 12-
Avenue     Widening      From Hiesters Lane to Fifth Street                                            1927 31-
                                                                                                            1927
Belmont                                                                                                15-  3-
Avenue     Vacating      From Bruckman Avenue to Alton Avenue                                          1954 31-
                                                                                                            1954
Belmont    Vacating and                                                                                16-  5-
Avenue     removing      Between Crescent Avenue and Delta Avenue                                      1955 18-
                                                                                                            1955
Belmont    Changing                                                                                    15-  5-
Avenue     building line From 75 feet to 25 feet at northwest corner with Hiester's Lane               1958 14-
           radius                                                                                           1958
Belmont    Vacating and  From Bruckman Avenue to a 10-foot alley located 130 feet south of Crescent    18-  8-
Avenue     removing      Avenue                                                                        1961 16-
                                                                                                            1961
Belvedere  Opening and                                                                                 77-  6-
Avenue     grading       Between Hazel Street and Carroll Street                                       1927 15-
                                                                                                            1927
Belvedere  Paving and    From Hazel Street to Carroll Street                                           43-  5-9-
Avenue     curbing                                                                                     1928 1928
Belvedere  Opening and                                                                                 88-  12-
Avenue     grading       From Carroll Street to Summit Avenue                                          1929 4-
                                                                                                            1929
Belvedere  Paving and                                                                                  52-  7-
Avenue     curbing       From Carroll Street to Grace Street                                           1930 30-
                                                                                                            1930
Belvedere  Changing                                                                                    117- 9-
Street     elevation and From Crestmont Street to Carroll Street                                       1927 14-
           grade                                                                                            1927
Benner's   Revising curb North and south from Maple Street eastward 156.25 feet to a 10-foot- wide     3-   3-1-
Court      alignment     alley                                                                         1961 1961
Benner's   Vacating      Between Maple Street and an unnamed 10-foot-wide alley adjacent to Benner's   54-  8-9-
Court                    Court                                                                         2010 2010
Bennett                                                                                                24-  5-
Green      Vacating      On Berkshire Drive between Greenview Avenue and Warren street                 1934 23-
                                                                                                            1934
Bentley                                                                                                12-  7-
Court      Accepting     In the east bank area of the Schuylkill Urban Renewal Project                 2000 10-
                                                                                                            2000
Berkley    Opening and   From Avenue "C" to East Road                                                  6-   3-2-
Road       grading                                                                                     1932 1932
                         All that certain tract or piece of land to be used as a portion of West Green
Berkshire                Street, 60 feet wide, located on the north side of the existing West Green         10-
Bottling   Accepting     Street and the East side of Tulpehocken Street, as shown on the revision to   66-  23-
Drive                    the recorded plan of Riverfront Commerce Center, recorded in PBV 267, Page 9, 2006 2006
                         Berks County Records, situate in the City of Reading, County of Berks,
                         Commonwealth of Pennsylvania
Berkshire  Opening and   From Columbia Road to the northern City line                                  77-  9-3-
Drive      grading                                                                                     1924 1924
Berkshire                                                                                              53-  12-
Drive      Grading       From Greenview Avenue to the eastern terminus of Berkshire Drive              1955 21-
                                                                                                            1955
Berkshire                                                                                              11-  2-
Drive      Opening       From the north City line to the eastern terminus of Berkshire Drive           1957 20-
                                                                                                            1957
           Vacating                                                                                         3-
Berkshire  portion and   Between Lehigh Street and SR 784 and changing grade on remaining portion      7-   19-
Drive      changing                                                                                    1958 1958
           grade
Berks                                                                                                  60-  12-
Street     Vacating      Between Thirteenth Street and Fourteenth Street                               1915 1-
                                                                                                            1915
Berks                    From the eastern right-of- way line of the main line of the Philadelphia and  80-  2-2-
Street     Vacating      Reading Railway to the western right-of-way line of the East Penn Branch of   1915 1916
                         the Philadelphia and Reading Railway Company
Berks                    From the east building line of Kutztown Road to the east building line of     55-  8-
Street     Vacating      Mulberry Street                                                               1916 16-
                                                                                                            1916
Berks      Changing                                                                                    50-  10-
Street     elevation and From Alsace Road to Lorraine Road                                             1925 14-
           grade                                                                                            1925
Berks                                                                                                  45-  3-
Street     Vacating      Between Eleventh Street and Mulberry Street                                   1926 31-
                                                                                                            1926
Berks      Vacating      Between East McKnight Street and the western right-of-way line of the Belt    11-  2-9-
Street                   Line Railroad                                                                 1927 1927
Berks                    From East McKnight Street to approximately 100 feet west of the western       112- 9-
Street     Vacating      building line of Fourth Street                                                1927 14-
                                                                                                            1927
Berks      Opening and                                                                                 33-  4-
Street     grading       From Oriental Road to Fourth Street                                           1928 18-
                                                                                                            1928
Berks      Opening and   From approximately 103 feet west of Alsace Road to the east City line         8-   3-4-
Street     grading                                                                                     1931 1931
Berks      Changing curb                                                                               41-  6-
Street     elevations    From Fourteenth Street to Hampden Boulevard                                   1931 10-
           and grades                                                                                       1931
Berks      Revising                                                                                    74-  12-
Street     elevations    From Hampden Boulevard to Seventeenth Street                                  1934 5-
           and grades                                                                                       1934
Berks                                                                                                  75-  12-
Street     Opening       From Hampden Boulevard to Fernwood Street                                     1934 5-
                                                                                                            1934
Berks                                                                                                  76-  11-
Street     Storm sewers  —                                                                           1934 7-
                                                                                                            1934
Berks      Renaming      Known as Berton Street between River Road and East Road                       22-  7-8-
Street                                                                                                 1942 1942
Berks      Vacating      From Oriental Road to Fourth Street                                           55-  1949
Street                                                                                                 1949
Berks      Extending     —                                                                           55-  1949
Street                                                                                                 1949
Berks      Naming        Formerly known as Cathedral Street                                            55-  1949
Street                                                                                                 1949
Berks      Vacating and                                                                                37-  10-
Street     removing      From North Eleventh Street to North Thirteenth Street                         1957 30-
                                                                                                            1957
Berks                    From a point 150 feet east of Center Avenue to the east building line of      9-   4-
Street     Opening       Third Street                                                                  1958 23-
                                                                                                            1958
Berks      Revising                                                                                    14-  3-
Street     grade         From Rosemont Boulevard to Fifteenth Street                                   1960 23-
                                                                                                            1960
Berks      Vacating      As located on Plan No. 6041                                                   11-  4-1-
Street                                                                                                 1964 1964
Berks                    Between the east building line of North Fourth Street and the west building   19-  5-
Street     Vacating      line of Thorn Street                                                          1966 18-
                                                                                                            1966
Berks                                                                                                  48-  9-
Street     Opening       East of the east curbline of Hampden Boulevard                                1966 28-
                                                                                                            1966
Berks      Revising                                                                                    48-  9-
Street     location and  East of the east curbline of Hampden Boulevard                                1966 28-
           grade                                                                                            1966
Berks      Revising curb                                                                               44-  8-
Street     grades        Between Kutztown Road and Adams Street                                        1973 15-
                                                                                                            1973
Bern       Changing      Between Angelica Street and the right-of-way of the Reading Belt Line         53-  12-
Avenue     width         Railroad                                                                      1970 2-
                                                                                                            1970
Bern                                                                                                   60a- 3-
Street     Storm sewers  From Thorn Street to Centre Avenue                                            1913 18-
                                                                                                            1914
Bern                                                                                                   61-  9-
Street     Grading       Between Front Street and River Road                                           1916 11-
                                                                                                            1916
Bern                                                                                                   73-  12-
Street     Sewers        From the manhole at McKnight Street for a distance of 45 feet eastward        1916 11-
                                                                                                            1916
Bern       Opening,                                                                                    29-  5-
Street     grading and   Between Thirteenth Street and Pricetown Road                                  1917 23-
           paving                                                                                           1917
Bern       Changing      From East McKnight Street to a point about 80 feet west of West McKnight      64-  11-
Street     alignment     Street                                                                        1923 21-
                                                                                                            1923
Bern       Vacating      From East McKnight Street to a point about 80 feet west of West McKnight      32-  5-7-
Street                   Street                                                                        1924 1924
Bern                                                                                                   95-  11-
Street     Vacating      Between Oak Lane and the eastern City line                                    1924 12-
                                                                                                            1924
Bern       Opening,                                                                                    6-   1-
Street     grading and   Between Thirteenth Street and Hampden Boulevard                               1925 28-
           improving                                                                                        1925
Bern       Revising the                                                                                50-  3-
Street     alignment     From Palm Street to Hampden Boulevard                                         1926 31-
                                                                                                            1926
Bern       Opening and                                                                                 82-  7-
Street     grading       From Twelfth Street to Thirteenth Street                                      1927 13-
                                                                                                            1927
Bern       Revising                                                                                    179- 12-
Street     elevations    From Madison Avenue to Sixth Street                                           1927 31-
           and grades                                                                                       1927
Bern                                                                                                   184- 12-
Street     Storm sewers  From Twelfth Street to College Avenue                                         1927 7-
                                                                                                            1927
Bern                                                                                                   140- 12-
Street     Storm sewers  From Third Street to Fourth Street                                            1928 5-
                                                                                                            1928
Bern                                                                                                   77-  10-
Street     Storm sewers  From Fourth Street to Fifth Street                                            1930 8-
                                                                                                            1930
Bern       Changing curb                                                                               40-  6-
Street     elevations    From Sixteenth Street to Hampden Boulevard                                    1931 10-
           and grades                                                                                       1931
Bern                                                                                                   21-  4-
Street     Sewers        From Sixth Street to McKnight Street                                          1932 13-
                                                                                                            1932
Bern                                                                                                   21-  4-
Street     Sewers        From Thirteenth Street to 500 feet east of Thirteenth Street                  1932 13-
                                                                                                            1932
Bern                                                                                                   37-  6-
Street     Improving     From Center Avenue to Fifth Street                                            1934 13-
                                                                                                            1934
Bern       Establishing  On the northern side at Madison Avenue                                        4-   2-7-
Street     curb grade                                                                                  1945 1945
Bern       Closing to    From the western building line of North Thirteenth Street to the eastern      30-  8-3-
Street     public use    building line of Birch Street                                                 1949 1949
Bern       Vacating      From River Road to the east building line of West McKnight Street             22-  9-3-
Street     portion                                                                                     1958 1958
Bern                     Between the east curbline of North Eleventh Street and the west curbline of   11-  5-
Street     Opening       North Twelfth Street                                                          1967 31-
                                                                                                            1967
Berton     Naming        Formerly known as Berks Street                                                22-  7-8-
Street                                                                                                 1942 1942
Beverly    Opening and                                                                                 38-  4-
Place      grading       From Meade Street to Sheridan Street                                          1928 25-
                                                                                                            1928
Beverly    Opening                                                                                     40-  12-
Place      portion       From Meade Street to Sheridan Street                                          1957 31-
                                                                                                            1957
Bingaman                 Dedication from the redevelopment authority located in the model cities I — 39-  8-
Court      Accepting     urban renewal project and the riverfront urban renewal project                2002 12-
                                                                                                            2002
Bingaman   Paving and                                                                                  22-  5-
Street     improving     From Lancaster Bridge to Canal Street                                         1914 27-
                                                                                                            1914
Bingaman   Paving and                                                                                  22-  5-
Street     improving     From Sixth Street to Seventh Street                                           1914 27-
                                                                                                            1914
Bingaman   Paving and                                                                                  22-  5-
Street     improving     From Ninth Street to Chestnut Street                                          1914 27-
                                                                                                            1914
Bingaman   Paving and                                                                                  18-  4-
Street     improving     —                                                                           1915 14-
                                                                                                            1915
Bingaman                                                                                               30-  5-
Street     Repairing     As necessary                                                                  1917 23-
                                                                                                            1917
Bingaman   Widening      From Fourth Street to Water Street                                            11-  4-2-
Street                                                                                                 1919 1919
Bingaman                                                                                               22-  10-
Street     Improving     From Station 498+27 to Station 527+10, a distance of 2883 feet                1959 21-
                                                                                                            1959
Bingaman                 Between the eastern building line of South Fourth Street and the western      32-  9-
Street     Vacating      building line of Wood Street                                                  1976 15-
                                                                                                            1976
Bingaman   Establishing                                                                                5-   2-
Street     radius        At the northeast corner with Carpenter Street a 46-foot building line radius  1979 14-
                                                                                                            1979
Bingaman   Vacating and  North of Bingaman Street Bridge from South Fourth Street to a line near       18-  5-3-
Street     removing      Carpenter Street                                                              1979 1979
Bingaman   Vacating      A portion of Bingaman Street northwest of the Bingaman Street Bridge from a   32-  9-5-
Street                   line 104 feet southwest of the southwestern building line of Carpenter Street 1979 1979
Bingaman   Vacating,                                                                                   13-  2-
Street     abandoning    Portion of                                                                    1985 13-
           and removing                                                                                     1985
Bingaman   Vacating,     Between a line 82.96 feet southwest of the southwestern building line of      48-  7-
Street     abandoning    Carpenter Street extended and South Second Street                             1987 15-
           and removing                                                                                     1987
Birch                                                                                                  45-  8-
Street     Grading       Between Robeson Street and Marion Street                                      1915 18-
                                                                                                            1915
Birch                                                                                                  49-  7-
Street     Grading       Between Spring Street and Robeson Street                                      1916 12-
                                                                                                            1916
Birch      Vacating      Between Marion Street and Payor Street                                        8-   2-2-
Street                                                                                                 1921 1921
Birch                                                                                                  53-  10-
Street     Opening       Between Amity Street and Union Street                                         1922 4-
                                                                                                            1922
Birch                                                                                                  31-  5-
Street     Sewers        Between Union Street and Exeter Street                                        1923 29-
                                                                                                            1923
Birch      Opening,                                                                                    6-   1-
Street     grading and   Between Bern Street and Richmond Street                                       1925 28-
           improving                                                                                        1925
Birch      Vacating      Between northern building line of Union Street and the southern building line 23-  5-6-
Street                   of Exeter Street                                                              1925 1925
Birch      Opening and   From Bern Street to Richmond Street                                           7-   3-4-
Street     grading                                                                                     1931 1931
Birch                                                                                                  21-  4-
Street     Sewers        From Bern Street to Richmond Street                                           1932 13-
                                                                                                            1932
Birch      Curblines and Changing grade of eastern curbline from a point at the northern building line 14-  7-
Street     grades        of Walnut Street to a point 133 feet 3 inches northward                       1953 22-
                                                                                                            1953
Birch      Vacating and                                                                                37-  10-
Street     removing      From the City line to a point 360 feet south                                  1957 30-
                                                                                                            1957
Birch      Vacating and                                                                                35-  12-
Street     removing      From Richmond Street to a point 360 feet south of the northern City line      1962 12-
                                                                                                            1962
Birch                    From the south building line of Elm Street to the north building line of      5-   1-
Street     Vacating      Walnut Street                                                                 1974 23-
                                                                                                            1974
Blair      Stormwater                                                                                  45-  8-
Avenue     sewers        —                                                                           1925 12-
                                                                                                            1925
           Opening,
Blair      grading,      From Schuylkill Avenue to Butler Street                                       38-  6-1-
Avenue     paving and                                                                                  1932 1932
           improving
Bradford                                                                                               21-  11-
Street     Vacating      Between Arlington Street and Pennsylvania Avenue                              1937 10-
                                                                                                            1937
Brentwood                                                                                              13-  5-
Drive      Accepting     Dedication from Brentwood Industries, Inc., for a portion                     2003 12-
                                                                                                            2003
Bridge     Grading and                                                                                 28-  5-
Street     opening       Between Schuylkill Avenue and Eckert Avenue                                   1917 23-
                                                                                                            1917
Bridge                                                                                                 21-  4-
Street     Sewers        From Schuylkill Avenue to 100 feet east of Schuylkill Avenue                  1932 13-
                                                                                                            1932
Bright     Vacating,     From the western building line of North Eighth Street to the eastern building 57-  6-9-
Street     abandoning    line of Poplar Street                                                         1993 1993
           and removing
Brookline  Opening and                                                                                 38-  4-
Plaza      grading       From Lancaster Avenue to Pershing Boulevard                                   1928 25-
                                                                                                            1928
Brookline  Opening and                                                                                 9-   2-
Plaza      grading       From Lancaster Avenue to Clifton Avenue                                       1929 20-
                                                                                                            1929
Brookline  Opening       From Liggett Avenue to Pershing Boulevard                                     15-  4-3-
Plaza                                                                                                  1957 1957
Brookline  Opening                                                                                     40-  12-
Plaza      portion       From Clifton Avenue and from Newport Avenue to Liggett Avenue                 1957 31-
                                                                                                            1957
Brookline  Establishing                                                                                17-  4-
Plaza      a radius      On the curbline at the southeast corner of Brookline Plaza and Liggett Avenue 1973 11-
                                                                                                            1971
Brookline                                                                                              64-  5-
Street     Relocating    Between Wyomissing Boulevard and Pennsylvania Avenue                          1927 18-
                                                                                                            1927
Brookline                                                                                              65-  5-
Street     Widening      Between Grace Street and Wyomissing Boulevard                                 1927 18-
                                                                                                            1927
Brookline  Opening and                                                                                 166- 12-
Street     grading       From Grace Street to Pennsylvania Avenue                                      1927 14-
                                                                                                            1927
Brookline                                                                                              44-  7-
Street     Vacating      From Grace Street to Angelica Street                                          1929 24-
                                                                                                            1929
Brookline  Placing on                                                                                  45-  7-
Street     topographical From Grace Street to Angelica Street                                          1929 24-
           survey                                                                                           1929
Brookline  Changing curb                                                                               46-  7-
Street     elevations    From Grace Street to 160 feet east of Grace Street                            1929 24-
           and grades                                                                                       1929
Brookline  Stormwater    From Pennsylvania Avenue to Wyomissing Boulevard                              56-  8-7-
Street     sewers                                                                                      1929 1929
Brookline  Stormwater    From Grace Street to the eastern end of Belt Line R.R. culvert                56-  8-7-
Street     sewers                                                                                      1929 1929
Brookline                                                                                              67-  9-
Street     Vacating      From Grace Street to Noble Street                                             1930 24-
                                                                                                            1930
Brookline                                                                                              21-  11-
Street     Vacating      Between Wyomissing Boulevard and Pennsylvania Avenue                          1937 10-
                                                                                                            1937
Brookline  Opening       Between Noble Street and Angelica Street                                      18-  6-7-
Street                                                                                                 1950 1950
Bruckman   Placing on                                                                                  81-  2-2-
Avenue     topographical From Northmont Avenue to Kerper Estate                                        1915 1916
           survey
Bruckman   Opening       From Northmont Avenue to Kerper Estate                                        82-  2-2-
Avenue                                                                                                 1915 1916
Bruckman                                                                                               21-  4-
Avenue     Sewers        From Fairmont Avenue to Fremont Avenue                                        1932 13-
                                                                                                            1932
Bruckman                                                                                               10-  4-
Avenue     Vacating      From Belmont Avenue southwestward 125 feet                                    1935 17-
                                                                                                            1935
Bruckman                 Between the westerly building line of Fairmont Avenue and the westerly        4-   4-
Avenue     Vacating      building line of Belmont Avenue                                               1959 22-
                                                                                                            1959
Burnside   Opening and                                                                                 38-  4-
Avenue     grading       From Scott Street to Wyomissing Boulevard                                     1928 25-
                                                                                                            1928
Burnside   Opening       From Liggett Avenue to Pershing Boulevard                                     15-  4-3-
Avenue                                                                                                 1957 1957
Butler                                                                                                 85-  6-
Street     Vacating      From Mercer Street to the northern City line                                  1926 23-
                                                                                                            1926
           Opening,
Butler     grading,      From Blair Avenue to Lackawanna Street                                        38-  6-1-
Street     paving and                                                                                  1932 1932
           improving
Butler     Revising the                                                                                23-  8-6-
Street     topographical At the northwestern corner with Columbia Street                               1947 1947
           survey
Butler     Vacating and  From the southeastern building corner of Columbia Street to the southern      31-  11-
Street     opening       right-of-way line of the Reading Belt Railroad                                1947 5-
                                                                                                            1947
Butler                                                                                                 55-  12-
Street     Improving     —                                                                           1954 20-
                                                                                                            1954
Butler     Revising                                                                                    26-  8-
Street     grade         Between Lehigh Street and Lackawanna Street                                   1958 13-
                                                                                                            1958
Butler                   From the north building line of Lackawanna Street to the south building line  69-  12-
Street     Vacating      of Mercer Street                                                              1969 31-
                                                                                                            1969
Buttonwood Paving and                                                                                  22-  5-
Street     improving     From Fourth Street to Schuylkill Avenue                                       1914 27-
                                                                                                            1914
Buttonwood Paving and                                                                                  26-  5-
Street     improving     From Fourth Street to Fifth Street                                            1919 28-
                                                                                                            1919
Buttonwood                                                                                             140- 12-
Street     Storm sewers  From Eighth Street to Ninth Street                                            1928 5-
                                                                                                            1928
Buttonwood               From the east building line of Fourteenth Street eastward approximately 600   32-  7-
Street     Vacating      feet to the former eastern City boundary line                                 1935 31-
                                                                                                            1935
Buttonwood Curb lines                                                                                  33-  11-
Street     and grades    Southern side between Front Street and McKnight Street                        1953 25-
                                                                                                            1953
Buttonwood Revising                                                                                    11-  3-
Street     grade         Between Birch Street and Linden Street                                        1962 28-
                                                                                                            1962
Buttonwood                                                                                             44-  10-
Street     Relocating    Relocating its southern building line and southern curbline                   1977 19-
Bridge                                                                                                      1977
Buttonwood               The southernmost 28 feet between River Road and a line 257.42 feet eastward   47-  12-
Street     Vacating      along its southern building line                                              1977 21-
                                                                                                            1977
Buttonwood Vacating,
Street     abandoning    Between River Road and Buttonwood Street bridge intersection                  41-  8-5-
(south     and removing                                                                                1981 1981
ramp)
 
Name Activity Location Ord. No. Date
Name             Activity             Location              Ord. No. Date
                                      Between Greenway
Cameron Street   Opening              Terrace and Upland    47-1941  9-24-1941
                                      Avenue
                                      Between Chestnut
Canal Street     Improving            Street and Spruce     29-1941  7-2-1941
                                      Street
                                      From the western
                                      building line of
                 Vacating and         proposed Canal Street
Canal Street     removing             to the terminus of    43-1972  10-18-1972
                                      Chestnut Street at
                                      the eastern building
                                      line of Water Street
                                      A portion at the
                                      southwest corner of
Canal Street     Vacating             the intersection of   7-1977   3-2-1977
                                      Canal Street and
                                      South Second Street
                                      with Riverfront Drive
                 Changing alignment,  Between New Canal
Canal Street     width and grades     Street and South      44-1983  9-7-1983
                                      Street
Canal Street     Vacating, abandoning Portion of            13-1985  2-13-1985
                 and removing
                                      From Mercer Street to
Carbon Street    Vacating             the northern City     85-1926  6-23-1926
                                      line
Carbon Street    Changing elevations  From Lehigh Street to 117-1928 10-17-1928
                 and grades           Warren Street
                                      Between Columbia
Carbon Street    Opening              Street and Warren     23-1944  9-20-1944
                                      Street
                                      Between Blair Avenue
Carbon Street    Opening              to the Reading Belt   41-1949  8-10-1949
                                      Railroad
Carbon Street    Revising grade       Between Warren Street 26-1958  8-13-1958
                                      and Lackawanna Street
                                      From the north
                                      building line of
Carbon Street    Vacating             Lackawanna Street to  69-1969  12-31-1969
                                      the south building
                                      line of Mercer Street
                                      Between the south
                                      building line of
Carbon Street    Vacating             Columbia Street and   12-1975  4-9-1975
                                      the right-of-way line
                                      of the Reading
                                      Company
Carpenter Street Storm sewers         From Franklin Street  50-1921  9-21-1921
                                      to Cherry Street
Carpenter Street Storm sewers         From Bingaman Street  163-1926 9-22-1926
                                      northward 160 feet
                                      At the northeast
Carpenter Street Establishing radius  corner with Bingaman  5-1979   2-14-1979
                                      Street a 46-foot
                                      building line radius
                                      Between Riverfront
Carpenter Street Widening cartway     Drive and Bingaman    5-1979   2-14-1979
                                      Street from 17 feet
                                      to 22 feet
Carroll Avenue   Paving and curbing   From Belvedere Avenue 43-1928  5-9-1928
                                      to Summit Avenue
Carroll Street   Opening and grading  Between Summit Avenue 78-1927  6-15-1927
                                      and Belvedere Avenue
                                      From Lancaster Avenue
                                      to point approximatel
Carroll Street   Opening and grading  y 340 feet north of   79-1927  6-15-1927
                                      north building line
                                      of Gregg Avenue
Carroll Street   Changing elevation   From Belvedere Street 117-1927 9-14-1927
                 and grade            northward 260 feet
                                      From Lancaster Avenue
Carroll Street   Opening and grading  to Fern Avenue and    17-1929  4-24-1929
                                      from Park Avenue to
                                      Submit Avenue
Carroll Street   Opening and grading  From Fern Avenue to   18-1929  4-24-1929
                                      Park Avenue
                                      From Lancaster Avenue
Carroll Street   Paving and curbing   to Fern Avenue and    42-1929  7-17-1929
                                      from Park Avenue to
                                      Summit Avenue
                                      From the south
                                      building line of Fern
Carroll Street   Paving and curbing   Avenue in the north   43-1929  7-17-1929
                                      building line of Park
                                      Avenue
Carroll Street   Paving               From Lancaster Avenue 62-1934  10-10-1934
                                      to Gregg Avenue
                 Placing on           Between Meade Street
Carroll Street   topographical survey and Wyomissing        21-1937  11-10-1937
                                      Boulevard
                 Revising curb        Between Gregg Avenue
Carroll Street   elevations and       and Meade Street      21-1937  11-10-1937
                 grades
Carroll Street   Vacating             Between Meade Street  21-1937  11-10-1937
                                      and Grace Street
                                      Between Belvedere
Carroll Street   Opening              Avenue and Upland     14-1945  6-27-1945
                                      Avenue
Carroll Street   Opening portion      From Orrton Avenue to 40-1957  12-31-1957
                                      Upland Avenue
                                      From Front Street to
Cathedral Street Opening and grading  a point 150 feet east 33-1928  4-18-1928
                                      of Centre Avenue
Cathedral Street Renaming             Known as Berks Street 55-1949  1949
                                      east of Centre Avenue
                                      From Greenwich Street
                                      north 177 feet from
Cedar Street     Storm sewers         the north curbline of 33-1916  4-19-1916
                                      Greenwich Street to
                                      the present sewer
Cedar Street     Storm sewers         Amending Ord. No. 33- 44-1916  5-15-1916
                                      1916
Cedar Street     Sewers               From Walnut Street to 26-1921  4-13-1921
                                      Washington Street
Cedar Street     Sewers               At the 10-foot-wide   96-1924  11-5-1924
                                      alley south of Green
                                      Between a point
                                      178.70 feet north of
                                      the northern building
                                      line of Greenwich
                                      Street and the
                                      southern building
Cedar Street     Vacating and         line of Oley Street   38-1966  8-3-1966
                 removing             on the eastern side
                                      of Cedar Street, and
                                      a point 161.58 feet
                                      north of the northern
                                      building line of Oley
                                      Street on the western
                                      side of Cedar Street
Cedar Street     Revising alignment   —                   61-1966  11-30-1966
                                      As located in the
Cedar Street     Grading              City of Reading's     24-1967  7-19-1967
                                      Downtown East Project
                                      No. R184
                                      From Perry Street to
Center Avenue    Sewers               340 feet south of     21-1932  4-13-1932
                                      Marion Street
Center Avenue    Sewers               From Evans Avenue to  21-1932  4-13-1932
                                      the north City line
Center Avenue    Storm sewers         From Richmond Street  44-1933  10-25-1933
                                      to Oriental Road
                                      From the Lebanon
Centre Avenue    Paving and improving Valley Railroad to    22-1914  5-27-1914
                                      Charles Evans
                                      Cemetery
                                      Between Lebanon
                                      Valley Railroad
Centre Avenue    Curbing              Bridge and the        71-1914  9-16-1914
                                      entrance to Charles
                                      Evans Cemetery
                                      From Charles Evans
Centre Avenue    Grading              Cemetery entrance to  89-1914  12-16-1914
                                      Union Street
Centre Avenue    Storm sewers         From Exter Street to  26-1915  5-17-1915
                                      Evan's Avenue
Centre Avenue    Paving               From Woodward Street  17-1918  7-3-1918
                                      to L.V.R.R. bridge
                                      From Charles Evans
Centre Avenue    Paving               Cemetery to Bern      19-1921  3-30-1921
                                      Street
                                      Between Oley Street
Centre Avenue    Changing lines       and North Fourth      20-1922  3-29-1922
                                      Street
Centre Avenue    Widening             From Arch Street to   115-1927 9-14-1927
                                      the north City Line
                                      From Arch Street to
Centre Avenue    Opening and grading  the northern City     33-1928  4-18-1928
                                      line
Centre Avenue    Opening              From Robeson Street   65-1931  8-26-1931
                                      to Perry Street
Centre Avenue    Opening              From Evans Avenue to  65-1931  8-26-1931
                                      Arch Street
                 Revising             Eastern side between
Centre Avenue    topographical survey Perry Street and Pike 16-1948  6-30-1948
                                      Street
Centre Avenue    Establishing grade   —                   55-1949  1949
                                      Extending 14-foot
                 Revising             reserve building
Centre Avenue    topographical survey lines on the western  26-1950  8-9-1950
                                      side from Union
                                      Street to Bern Street
Centre Avenue    Changing width       From Bern Street to   26-1950  8-9-1950
                                      Arch Street
                                      From Station 82+14.50
Centre Avenue    Improving            to Station 94+83.40   14-1959  7-15-1959
                                      distance of 4,368.90
                                      feet
Centre Avenue    Changing grades      In accordance with    3-1972   1-26-1972
                                      Plan 5835
Centre Avenue    Changing alignment   Between Bern Street   30-1976  9-8-1976
                 and grades           and Richmond Street
                                      Western curbline
                                      between Pike Street
Centre Avenue    Relocating           and Amity Street 10   43-1978  11-15-1978
                                      feet westward for a
                                      distance of 84.64
                                      feet
Centre Avenue    Opening              Between Pike Street   43-1978  11-15-1978
                                      and Amity Street
                                      Between Pike Street
Centre Avenue    Widening portion     and Amity Street from 43-1978  11-15-1978
                                      60 feet wide to 65
                                      feet wide
                 Changing curbline    Of the medial strip
Centre Avenue    and grade            immediately north of  47-1982  10-27-1982
                                      Cathedral Street
                                      West of the medial
Centre Avenue    Vacating, abandoning strip between         50-1982  12-15-1982
                 and removing         Cathedral Street and
                                      the north City line
Charles Avenue   Opening and grading  From Warren Street to 77-1924  9-3-1924
                                      Columbia Road
Charles Avenue   Removing             From Warren Street to 53-1955  12-21-1955
                                      Columbia Road
                                      At 20 feet between
Charles Lane     Establishing width   Thorn Street and      6-1954   2-3-1954
                                      North Third Street
                 Vacating and         From North Third
Charles Lane     removing             Street to Thorn       12-1979  4-11-1979
                                      Street
Cherry Street    Storm sewers         From Carpenter Street 50-1921  9-21-1921
                                      to Fourth Street
Cherry Street    Stormwater sewers    From Tenth Street     46-1925  8-12-1925
                                      eastward 350 feet
Cherry Street    Storm sewers         Between Fifth Street  94-1934  1-2-1935
                                      and Sixth Street
Cherry Street    Storm sewers         Between Fifth Street  28-1936  6-3-1936
                                      and Sixth Street
Cherry Street    Storm sewers         Between Fifth Street  28-1936  6-3-1936
                                      and Sixth Street
                                      Between Lancaster
Cherry Street    Vacating             Avenue and Gregg      2-1950   1-18-1950
                                      Avenue
Cherry Street    Changing curb grade  Between Fifth Street  39-1954  10-6-1954
                                      and Wood Street
                                      From South Second
Cherry Street    Widening             Street to South       44-1954  12-1-1954
                                      Eleventh Street
                                      From Fourth Street to
Cherry Street    Improving            Sixth Street and from 4-1955   3-16-1955
                                      Plum Street to
                                      Seventh Street
                                      From South Second
Cherry Street    Curb grades          Street to South       26-1955  6-29-1955
                                      Eleventh Street
Cherry Street    Opening and widening From Sixth Street to  20-1957  5-29-1957
                                      Plum Street
Cherry Street    Opening and widening From Seventh Street   11-1961  5-24-1961
                                      to Eighth Street
Cherry Street    Revising alignment   —                   61-1966  11-30-1966
                                      As located in the
Cherry Street    Grading              City of Reading's     24-1967  7-19-1967
                                      Downtown East Project
                                      No. R184
Cherry Street    Revising curb        As located in Plan    24-1967  7-19-1967
                 alignment            1182-A
                 Revising             Between South Fourth
Cherry Street    topographical width  Street and Wood       32-1970  7-15-1970
                 and grade            Street
Cherry Street    Vacating             From Front Street to  46-1971  12-8-1971
                                      Second Street
Cherry Street    Curbline             Southern curbline of  37-2000  12-27-2000
                                      the 700 block
                                      From Mercer Street to
Chester Street   Vacating             the northern City     85-1926  6-23-1926
                                      line
Chester Street   Opening              Between Lehigh Street 29-1954  6-23-1954
                                      and Warren Street
                                      Between Columbia
                 Vacating and         Street and the right-
Chester Street   removing             of-way of the Reading 45-1955  10-5-1955
                                      Belt of the Reading
                                      Railroad Company
Chester Street   Opening portion      From Blair Avenue to  40-1957  12-31-1957
                                      Erie Street
Chester Street   Opening              From Columbia Street  19-1960  5-4-1960
                                      to Lehigh Street
                                      Between the southern
                                      building line of Erie
Chester Street   Opening              Street to the         17-1965  3-24-1965
                                      southern building
                                      line of Elk Street
                                      From the south
                                      building line of
                                      Lackawanna Street to
                                      a point 161.46 feet
Chester Street   Opening              south along the west  28-1966  6-1-1966
                                      building line and a
                                      point 155.75 feet
                                      south along the east
                                      building line Chester
                                      Street
                                      From the north
                 Vacating and         building line of
Chester Street   removing             Lackawanna Street to  36-1966  7-20-1966
                                      the south building
                                      line of Mercer Street
                                      From the north
                                      building line of
Chester Street   Opening              Warren Street to the  10-1967  5-3-1967
                                      south building line
                                      of Lackawanna Street
                                      Between the north
                                      building line of
Chester Street   Opening              Lackawanna Street and 23-1973  5-30-1973
                                      the south building
                                      line of Mercer Street
Chester Street   Revising curb grade  From Mercer Street    27-1974  7-10-1974
                                      southward 245 feet
                                      Between Lackawanna
Chester Street   Changing curb grades Street and Warren     18-1976  5-5-1976
                                      Street
                                      Between Mineral
Chestnut Avenue  Vacating             Springs Road and Hill 83-1924  9-24-1924
                                      Road
Chestnut Street  Paving and improving From Ninth Street to  22-1914  5-27-1914
                                      Tenth Street
Chestnut Street  Paving and improving Where necessary       38-1916  4-26-1916
Chestnut Street  Paving and improving From Canal Street to  30-1917  5-23-1917
                                      Second Street
Chestnut Street  Paving               From Fifth Street to  19-1921  3-30-1921
                                      Seventh Street
Chestnut Street  Paving and improving From Second Street to 30-1922  5-17-1922
                                      Canal Street
Chestnut Street  Paving and improving From Third Street to  30-1922  5-17-1922
                                      Fourth Street
Chestnut Street  Stormwater sewers    From Front Street to  50-1929  7-3-1929
                                      Second Street
                 Changing curb        From Perkiomen Avenue
Chestnut Street  elevation and grade  to South Thirteenth   6-1947   4-16-1947
                                      Street
                                      Of a portion of SR
                                      310 from Station
Chestnut Street  Improving            31+81 to Station      17-1957  4-17-1957
                                      42+76 a distance of
                                      1,095 feet
Chestnut Street  Improving            From Second Street to 24-1957  6-5-1957
                                      Fourth Street
Chestnut Street  Realigning the       From Second Street to 1-1971   1-13-1971
                 building line        Front Street
                                      Between the west
                 Vacating and         building line of
Chestnut Street  removing             South Second Street   27-1972  6-14-1972
                                      and the east building
                                      line of Canal Street
                                      From the western
                                      building line of
                 Vacating and         proposed Canal Street
Chestnut Street  removing             to the terminus of    43-1972  10-18-1972
                                      Chestnut Street at
                                      the eastern building
                                      line of Water Street
                                      On adjacent
                 Vacating and         properties at 1725
Church Street    removing             North Fifth Street    130-2022 12-12-2022
                                      and 1704 North Sixth
                                      Street
                                      From Berks Street to
Church Street    Vacating             the old northern City 80-1915  2-2-1916
                                      line
                                      From Walnut Street
Church Street    Sewers               southward about 290   28-1922  5-3-1922
                                      feet
                                      From Union Street to
Church Street    Vacating             unnamed street north  98-1929  1-15-1930
                                      of Union Street
Church Street    Vacating             From Amity Street to  50-1931  7-15-1931
                                      Union Street
Church Street    Sewers               From Robeson Street   21-1932  4-13-1932
                                      to Amity Street
                                      From Mercer Street to
Clarion Street   Vacating             the northern City     85-1926  6-23-1926
                                      line
Clarion Street   Opening              Between Lehigh Street 19-1949  6-1-1949
                                      and Warren Street
Clarion Street   Opening portion      From Lehigh Street to 40-1957  12-31-1957
                                      Columbia Street
Clarion Street   Opening              From Columbia Street  20-1961  8-23-1961
                                      to Potter Street
                                      Between the north
                                      building line of
Clarion Street   Opening              Blair Avenue and the  20-1965  3-24-1965
                                      south right-of-way of
                                      the Reading Company
                                      Belt Railroad
                                      From the south
                                      building line of
                                      Lackawanna Street to
                                      a point 132.44 feet
Clarion Street   Opening              south along the west  28-1966  6-1-1966
                                      building line and a
                                      point 126.73 feet
                                      south along the east
                                      building line of
                                      Clarion Street
                                      From the north
                 Vacating and         building line of
Clarion Street   removing             Lackawanna Street to  36-1966  7-20-1966
                                      the south building
                                      line of Mercer Street
                                      From the north
                                      building line of
                                      Warren Street and a
                                      point 403.27 feet
Clarion Street   Opening              north along the east  56-1966  11-2-1966
                                      building line and a
                                      point 397.56 feet
                                      north along the west
                                      building line of
                                      Clarion Street
                                      From the southern
                                      building line of
                 Vacating, abandoning Columbia Street
Clarion Street   and removing         extended to the       27-1995  3-1-1995
                                      northern building
                                      line of Potter Street
                                      extended
                                      From the northern
                 Vacating and         boundary of the
Clarion Street   removing             right-of- way of      4-1998   2-23-1998
                                      Warren Street to a
                                      point 420 feet north
Clifton Avenue   Opening and grading  From Gregg Avenue to  38-1928  4-25-1928
                                      Brookline Plaza
Clifton Avenue   Opening and grading  From Gregg Avenue to  9-1929   2-20-1929
                                      Brookline Drive
                                      From the north
                                      building line of
Clinton Street   Vacating             Lafayette Street to   66-1914  12-23-1914
                                      the Lebanon Valley
                                      Railroad
                                      From the northern
                                      line of the Lebanon
                                      Valley Railroad
Clinton Street   Vacating             right-of-way and the  81-1914  12-2-1914
                                      south line of 10-foot
                                      alley south of
                                      Greenwich Street
                                      Southward for a
                                      distance of 153 feet
Clinton Street   Vacating             from the southern     27-1916  4-19-1916
                                      building line of
                                      Bayonne Street
                                      Between Bayonne
Clinton Street   Vacating             Street and Buttonwood 43-1919  9-10-1919
                                      Street
                 Opening, grading and Between West Oley
Clinton Street   improving            Street and West       13-1921  4-6-1921
                                      Douglass Street
                                      From 100 feet south
Clinton Street   Opening and grading  of Oley Street to     51-1931  7-15-1931
                                      River Road
                 Revising curb        From West Oley Street
Clinton Street   elevations and       to West Douglass      67-1931  8-26-1931
                 grades               Street
Clinton Street   Sewers               From West Greenwich   21-1932  4-13-1932
                                      Street to River Road
                                      Between West
Clinton Street   Changing curb        Greenwich Street and  54-1969  10-1-1969
                                      River Road
                                      From Exeter Street to
Clover Street    Placing on           a point 226 feet      64-1931  8-26-1931
                 topographical survey north of the north
                                      building line
                                      From Exeter Street to
Clover Street    Opening and grading  226 feet north of     66-1931  8-26-1931
                                      north building line
                                      of Exeter Street
Clover Street    Sewers               From Exeter Street    21-1932  4-13-1932
                                      northward 230 feet
Clover Street    Opening              Between Oley Street   46-1942  11-18-1942
                                      and Windsor Street
Clover Street    Placing on           From Windsor Street   35-1943  12-22-1943
                 topographical survey to Spring Street
Clover Street    Opening              Between Spring Street 1-1944   1-12-1944
                                      and Windsor Street
Clover Street    Opening              Between Spring Street 22-1947  8-6-1947
                                      and Robeson Street
Clymer Street    Storm sewers         From Spring Road to   60a-1913 3-18-1914
                                      Good Street
                                      At the intersection
Clymer Street    Paving and improving of Clymer Street and  26-1919  5-28-1919
                                      Mineral Spring Road
                                      At the intersection
Clymer Street    Paving               of Clymer Street and  52-1921  10-3-1921
                                      Hill Road
                                      At intersection with
                                      Hill Road to the
Clymer Street    Improving            intersection of       8-1938   4-6-1938
                                      Twelfth Street and
                                      Walnut Street
                                      Establishing reserve
                 Revising             building lines on the
Clymer Street    topographical survey eastern side from     2-1949   3-9-1949
                                      Mineral Spring Road
                                      to Hill Road
                                      Between Thirteenth
College Avenue   Grading              Street and Palm       35-1917  7-3-1917
                                      Street
                                      Between Thirteenth
College Avenue   Opening and grading  Street and Palm       36-1917  7-3-1917
                                      Street
College Avenue   Opening, grading and Between Bern Street   6-1925   1-28-1925
                 improving            and Hampden Boulevard
                 Changing curb        From Fourteenth
College Avenue   elevations and       Street to Hampden     39-1931  6-10-1931
                 grades               Boulevard
                                      Formerly known as
College Avenue   Naming               Richmond Street from  78-1931  10-7-1931
                                      Sixteenth Street to
                                      Hampden Boulevard
                                      From Hampden
College Avenue   Sewers               Boulevard to Bern     21-1932  4-13-1932
                                      Street
Colston Street   Naming               Formerly known as     22-1942  7-8-1942
                                      Avenue "C"
Columbia Road    Opening and grading  From Baer Street to   77-1924  9-3-1924
                                      Berkshire Drive
Columbia Road    Removing from        Between Baer Street   33-1939  8-2-1939
                 topographical survey and Greenview Avenue
Columbia Road    Vacating and         In its entirety       6-1959   4-30-1959
                 removing
                                      Between Schuylkill
Columbia Street  Opening              Avenue and Clarion    15-1942  5-6-1942
                                      Street
                 Revising the         At the northwestern
Columbia Street  topographical survey corner with Butler    23-1947  8-6-1947
                                      Street
                                      From the western
                                      building line of
Columbia Street  Vacating and opening Butler Street to a    31-1947  11-5-1947
                                      point 25 feet west
                                      therefrom
Columbia Street  Opening portion      From Monroe Street to 40-1957  12-31-1957
                                      Clarion Street
                                      Between the east
                                      building line of
Columbia Street  Opening              Montgomery Street and 18-1965  3-24-1965
                                      the west building
                                      line of Monroe Street
Cotton Street    Renaming             Known as Woodvale     62-1914  9-2-1914
                                      Avenue
Cotton Street    Paving and improving From Ninth Street to  18-1915  4-14-1915
                                      Tenth Street
                                      From the west
                                      building line of
Cotton Street    Paving and improving Fourteenth Street to  38-1916  4-26-1916
                                      the east curbline of
                                      Nineteenth Street
                                      On the northern side
                 Changing curb        from South
Cotton Street    elevations and       Seventeenth Street to 26-1943  10-20-1943
                 grades               South Eighteenth
                                      Street
Court Street     Paving and improving From Front Street to  18-1915  4-14-1915
                                      Second Street
                                      From Seventh Street
Court Street     Stormwater sewers    eastward approximatel 50-1929  7-3-1929
                                      y 100 feet
Court Street     Widening             From Sixth Street to  61-1932  9-21-1932
                                      Reed Street
Court Street     Opening and widening From Third Street to  17-1963  6-19-1963
                                      Rose Street
Court Street     Revising alignment                        61-1966  11-30-1966
                                      As located in the
Court Street     Grading              City of Reading's     24-1967  7-19-1967
                                      Downtown East Project
                                      No. R184
Court Street     Revising curb        As located in Plan    24-1967  7-19-1967
                 alignment            1182-A
                                      Between North Second
Court Street     Widening and opening Street and Thorn      56-1968  11-27-1968
                                      Street
Court Street     Revising sidewalk    From Rose Street to   56-1969  10-8-1969
                 width and grades     Fourth Street
Court Street     Widening and opening From Rose Street to   11-1977  5-18-1977
                                      Fourth Street
                                      From the east
Court Street     Widening, revising   building line of      46-1977  12-21-1977
                 and opening          Thorn Street to Third
                                      Street
                                      Between North Second
Court Street     Opening              Street and Thorn      4-1978   1-25-1978
                                      Street
                                      Between North Front
Court Street     Vacating             Street and North      63-1978  1-4-1978
                                      Second Street
                 Changing alignment,  Between North Fourth
Court Street     width and grades     Street and Madison    5-1982   2-17-1982
                                      Avenue
                                      In the east bank area
Coventry Way     Accepting            of the Schuylkill     12-2000  7-10-2000
                                      Urban Renewal Project
Crescent Avenue  Placing on           From Hoffer Avenue to 81-1915  2-2-1916
                 topographical survey western City line
Crescent Avenue  Opening              From Hoffer Avenue to 82-1915  2-2-1916
                                      western City line
                                      From Fifth Street
Crescent Avenue  Storm sewers         eastward approximatel 96-1929  12-11-1929
                                      y 140 feet
Crescent Avenue  Storm sewers         From Fifth Street to  48-1931  6-3-1931
                                      Fremont Avenue
Crescent Avenue  Sewers               From Fifth Street to  21-1932  4-13-1932
                                      Hoffer Avenue
Crescent Avenue  Paving and curbing   From Fifth Street to  34-1934  7-11-1934
                                      Hoffer Avenue
Crestmont Street Opening and grading  From Belvedere Avenue 32-1928  4-18-1928
                                      to Prospect Avenue
Crestmont Street Opening and grading  From Fern Avenue to   15-1929  4-17-1929
                                      Park Avenue
Crestmont Street Opening and grading  From Lancaster Avenue 41-1929  7-17-1929
                                      to Fern Avenue
Crestmont Street Opening and grading  From Park Avenue to   41-1929  7-17-1929
                                      Summit Avenue
Crestmont Street Paving and curbing   From Lancaster Avenue 52-1930  7-30-1930
                                      to Belvedere Avenue
Crestmont Street Opening              Between Upland Avenue 53-1946  10-23-1946
                                      and Belvedere Avenue
Crestmont Street Opening              Between Orrton Avenue 38-1948  9-15-1948
                                      and Upland Avenue
                                      In the east bank area
Croyden Terrace  Accepting            of the Schuylkill     12-2000  7-10-2000
                                      Urban Renewal Project
 
Name Activity Location Ord. No. Date
Name             Activity             Location              Ord. No. Date
                                      Between Lancaster
Daniels Avenue   Opening              Avenue and south City 16-1958  6-18-1958
                                      line
                                      From Lackawanna
Darien Street    Opening and grading  Street to Mercer      77-1924  9-3-1924
                                      Street
Darien Street    Opening              Between Mercer Street 52-1941  10-1-1941
                                      and Lackawanna Street
                                      From manhole on Lemon
                                      Street westward
Deem Street      Sewers               approximatel y 193    72-1924  7-23-1924
                                      feet in House Sewer
                                      District No. 1
DeHarts Court    Changing elevations  From Windsor Street   162-1926 9-29-1926
                 and grades           southward 271 feet
                                      From the north
                                      building line of
DeHarts Court    Grading and paving   Robeson Street to the 38-1970  8-19-1970
                                      south building line
                                      of Marion Street
                                      Between Douglass
DeHarts Place    Opening              Street and Windsor    24-1945  9-26-1945
                                      Street
                 Placing on           From the eastern City
Delta Avenue     topographical survey line to Belmont       81-1915  2-2-1916
                                      Avenue
                                      From the eastern City
Delta Avenue     Opening              line to Belmont       82-1915  2-2-1916
                                      Avenue
Delta Avenue     Storm sewers         From Fremont Avenue   48-1931  6-3-1931
                                      to Raymond Avenue
Delta Avenue     Sewers               From Fremont Avenue   21-1932  4-13-1932
                                      to the east City line
Delta Avenue     Paving and curbing   From Raymond Avenue   34-1934  7-11-1934
                                      to the City line
Denton Street    Naming               Formerly known as     22-1942  7-8-1942
                                      Avenue "D"
Dickman Street   Vacating             From Alexander Street 37-1928  4-25-1928
                                      to Pershing Boulevard
                                      From the east
Dick Street      Paving and improving building line of      38-1916  4-26-1916
                                      Seventh Street to
                                      Poplar Street
                                      From the east
                                      building line of Reed
Dick Street      Opening              Street eastward to    42-1969  9-24-1969
                                      the west building
                                      line of North Seventh
                                      Street
                                      From Buttonwood
Division Street  Opening and grading  Street to Schuylkill  76-1930  10-29-1930
                                      Street
                                      Between Buttonwood
Division Street  Widening             Street and proposed   20-1978  5-31-1978
                                      Lafayette Street
                                      From Schuylkill
Douglass Street  Storm sewers         Avenue to Lincoln     60a-1913 3-18-1914
                                      Avenue
Douglass Street  Paving and improving From Third Street to  30-1922  5-17-1922
                                      Centre Avenue
Douglass Street  Paving and improving From Front Street to  62-1924  7-16-1924
                                      Second Street
Douglass Street  Paving               Between Front Street  63-1924  7-16-1924
                                      and Second Street
                                      Between the eastern
                                      building line of
Douglass Street  Vacating             Thirteenth Street and 23-1925  5-6-1925
                                      the eastern building
                                      line of Palm Street
                                      Between the western
                                      line of Clinton
                                      Street and a point 50
Douglass Street  Vacating             feet east of the      39-1925  12-9-1925
                                      eastern right-of-way
                                      of the Schuylkill and
                                      Lehigh Railroad
Douglass Street  Sewers               From Lincoln Street   21-1932  4-13-1932
(West)                                to Clinton Street
                 Relocation and       Between River Road
Douglass Street  opening              and the Schuylkill    39-1957  12-18-1957
                                      River
                                      Between River Road
Douglass Street  Vacating             and the Schuylkill    39-1957  12-18-1957
                                      River
                                      Between Hampden
Douglass Street  Revising grade       Boulevard and         11-1962  3-28-1962
                                      Thirteenth Street
Downing Street   Opening, grading and Between West Road and 23-1923  4-11-1923
                 improving            East Road
                                      Formerly known as
Durham Street    Naming               Avenue "D" *Updated   22-1942  7-8-1942
                                      by Ord. No. 27-2011
 
Name Activity Location Ord. No. Date
Name               Activity            Location             Ord. No. Date
East Laurel Street Vacating            Between Tenth Street 14-1919  4-2-1919
                                       and South Street
Eastman Street     Naming              Formerly known as    22-1942  7-8-1942
                                       East Road
Eastman Street     Opening             As located on Plan   11-1964  4-1-1964
                                       No. 6041
Eastman Street     Vacating            As located on Plan   11-1964  4-1-1964
                                       No. 6041
                   Vacating and        Between the start of
Eastman Street     removing from       York Street and the  27-2011  6-27-2011
                   topographical       end of York Street
                   survey
                                       From 343 feet north
East McKnight                          of the north
Street             Vacating            building line of     112-1927 9-14-1927
                                       Bern Street to the
                                       north City line
East Nineteenth    Renaming            Known as Woodvale    62-1914  9-2-1914
Street                                 Avenue
                                       Known as Eastman
East Road          Renaming            Street between       22-1942  7-8-1942
                                       Avenue "D" and
                                       Avenue "A"
                                       From the east
                                       building line of
                                       Carroll Street to a
                                       line at right angles
East Wyomissing                        to the point of
Boulevard          Vacating            curve of the         18-1971  5-5-1971
                                       property lines at
                                       the intersection of
                                       East Wyomissing
                                       Boulevard and Gregg
                                       Avenue
East Wyomissing                        Between Lancaster
Boulevard          Vacating/ altering  Avenue and Brookline 1-2008   1-14-2008
                                       Street
                                       800 block through
East Wyomissing    Changing median     900 block and 1000   29-2021  4-12-2021
Boulevard          width               block through the
                                       1300 blocks
                   Placing on          From Morgantown Road
Eberly Street      topographical       to Hazel Street      97-1927  8-3-1927
                   survey
Eberly Street      Vacating            From Morgantown Road 187-1927 12-28-1927
                                       to Hazel Street
                   Placing on          From Morgantown Road
Eberly Street      topographical       to Hazel Street      188-1927 12-28-1927
                   survey
Eberly Street      Opening and grading From Morgantown Road 189-1927 12-28-1927
                                       to Hazel Drive
                   Placing on          From Clymer Street
Eckert Avenue      topographical       eastwardly a         39-1917  7-11-1917
                   survey              distance of 1,100
                                       feet
                                       From Clymer Street
Eckert Avenue      Opening             eastwardly a         40-1917  7-11-1917
                                       distance of 1,100
                                       feet
                                       Between Hessian Road
Eckert Avenue      Opening, grading    and property of      20-1925  4-22-1925
                   and improving       George W. Green, et
                                       al
                                       From a point east of
                   Placing on          south Seventeenth
Eckert Avenue      topographical       Street northward     91-1926  7-27-1926
                   survey              from Mineral Spring
                                       Road
                                       Between a point east
                                       of the theoretical
                   Opening, grading    projection of south
Eckert Avenue      and improving       Seventeenth Street   147-1926 8-18-1926
                                       northward and a
                                       point approximately
                                       700 feet westward
                                       From south building
                                       line of Hessian Road
Eckert Avenue      Extending           to north building    103-1927 8-31-1927
                                       line of Mineral
                                       Spring Road
                                       A portion
                                       approximately 300
                                       feet in length
                   Placing on          located between the
Eckert Avenue      topographical       northward            104-1927 8-31-1927
                   survey              projections of South
                                       Sixteenth Street and
                                       South Seventeenth
                                       Street
                                       Approximately 300
                                       feet in length
                                       between the
Eckert Avenue      Grading and paving  northward            180-1927 12-31-1927
                                       projections of South
                                       Sixteenth Street and
                                       South Seventeenth
                                       Street
                                       Between West
Eckert Street      Grading             Douglass Street and  22-1918  8-14-1918
                                       West Windsor Street
                                       From West Douglass
Eckert Street      Opening and grading Street to West       66-1931  8-26-1931
                                       Windsor Street
                                       West curb from
                   Changing curb       northwest corner of
Eckert Street      elevation and grade West Douglass Street 7-1946   2-27-1946
                                       northward a distance
                                       of 283 feet
Eckert Street      Vacating            As located on Plan   11-1964  4-1-1964
                                       No. 6041
                   Changing curb       From Hampden
Eighteenth Street  elevations and      Boulevard to the     41-1931  6-10-1931
                   grades              north City line
                                       From 50 feet south
Eighteenth Street  Sewers              of Mineral Spring    92-1931  10-7-1931
                                       Road to Haak Street
                   Revising elevations From Hampden
Eighteenth Street  and grades          Boulevard to the     74-1934  12-5-1934
                                       north City line
Eighteenth Street  Revising grade      From Fairview Street 17-1961  7-26-1961
                                       southward 540 feet
Eighth Street      Storm sewers        From Franklin to     60a-1913 3-18-1914
                                       Chestnut
                   Paving and          From Buttonwood
Eighth Street      improving           Street to Oley       22-1914  5-27-1914
                                       Street
                                       From Spring Street
Eighth Street      Paving              to the present brick 51-1914  7-29-1914
                                       paving at junction
                                       with Ninth Street
Eighth Street      Paving and          From Douglass Street 18-1915  4-14-1915
                   improving           to Spring Street
Eighth Street      Paving and          —                  18-1915  4-14-1915
                   improving
                   Paving and          From Washington
Eighth Street      improving           Street to Walnut     44-1915  8-10-1915
                                       Street
Eighth Street      Paving and          Where necessary      38-1916  4-26-1916
                   improving
Eighth Street      Repairing           As necessary         30-1917  5-23-1917
                                       From Buttonwood
Eighth Street      Storm sewers        Street southward 350 140-1928 12-5-1928
                                       feet
                                       At Eighth Street and
Eighth Street      Streetlighting      Washington Street    22-1929  4-17-1929
                                       around the new City
                                       Hall
                                       From Oley Street
Eighth Street      Storm sewers        northward 145 feet   82-1931  9-9-1931
                                       thence eastward to
                                       Lance Place
Eighth Street      Improving           From Spring Street   27-1934  5-2-1934
                                       to Bingaman Street
Eighth Street      Storm sewers        From Penn Street to  33-1934  5-29-1934
                                       Court Street
Eighth Street      Storm sewers        Amended Ord. No. 33- 39-1934  6-20-1934
                                       1934
                                       From West Greenwich
Eisenbrown Street  Sewers              Street to West Oley  21-1932  4-13-1932
                                       Street
Elder Street       Vacating            Between Bern Street  26-1917  5-23-1917
                                       and Pricetown Road
Elder Street       Opening, grading    Between Bern Street  6-1925   1-28-1925
                   and improving       and Rockland Street
                                       From College Avenue
Elder Street       Opening and grading to 230 feet north of 8-1931   3-4-1931
                                       Rockland Street
                                       From a point 230
Elder Street       Changing width      feet north of        37-1931  6-10-1931
                                       Rockland Street to
                                       the north City line
                                       From Bern Street to
Elder Street       Changing width      a point 230 feet     38-1931  6-10-1931
                                       north of Rockland
                                       Street
                   Changing curb       From Bern Street to
Elder Street       elevations and      230 feet north of    40-1931  6-10-1931
                   grades              Rockland Street
                   Changing curb       From 230 feet north
Elder Street       elevations and      of Rockland Street   41-1931  6-10-1931
                   grades              to the north City
                                       line
                                       From Perry Street
Elder Street       Vacating            southward            14-1932  4-27-1932
                                       approximately 135
                                       feet
Elder Street       Sewers              From Bern Street to  21-1932  4-13-1932
                                       Rockland Street
                                       From a point 230
                                       feet north of the
                                       north building line
                                       of Rockland Street
                                       to the north City
                                       line and North
Elder Street       Vacating portion    Eighteenth Street    7-1962   2-14-1962
                                       from Hampden
                                       Boulevard to the
                                       north City line and
                                       Berks Street from
                                       North Fifteenth
                                       Street to Hampden
                                       Boulevard
                                       From the north
                                       building line of
Eleventh Street    Paving and          Washington Street to 38-1916  4-26-1916
                   improving           the south building
                                       line of Walnut
                                       Street
                   Paving and          Intersection of
Eleventh Street    improving           Eleventh Street and  26-1919  5-28-1919
                                       Greenwich Street
                                       From Walnut Street
Eleventh Street    Paving and          to the north         26-1919  5-28-1919
                   improving           building line of
                                       Buttonwood Street
                   Paving and          From Buttonwood
Eleventh Street    improving           Street to Douglass   30-1922  5-17-1922
                                       Street
Eleventh Street    Paving and          From Douglass Street 36-1922  7-19-1922
                   improving           to Windsor Street
Eleventh Street    Sewers              Between Union Street 31-1923  5-29-1923
                                       and Exeter Street
Eleventh Street    Storm sewers        Between Green Street 28-1934  5-2-1934
                                       and Amity Street
                                       At the northwest
Eleventh Street    Curblines and       corner of Eleventh   34-1974  8-15-1974
                   grades              Street and Perkiomen
                                       Avenue
Elkton Street      Naming              Formerly known as    22-1942  7-8-1942
                                       Avenue "E"
Ellery Street      Opening and grading From Park Avenue to  88-1929  12-4-1929
                                       Summit Avenue
Ellery Street      Vacating            From Fern Avenue to  89-1929  12-4-1929
                                       Park Avenue
Ellery Street      Widening            From Park Avenue to  48-1930  7-23-1930
                                       Summit Avenue
Ellery Street      Paving and curbing  From Park Avenue to  52-1930  7-30-1930
                                       Summit Avenue
                                       From Rose Street and
Elm Street         Storm sewers        Elm Street to West   21-1915  4-21-1915
                                       Elm Street and the
                                       Schuylkill Canal
Elm Street         Paving and          From Sixth Street to 44-1915  8-10-1915
                   improving           Reed Street
Elm Street         Paving and          From Fifth Street to 26-1919  5-28-1919
                   improving           Sixth Street
Elm Street         Paving              From Fourth Street   19-1921  3-30-1921
                                       to Fifth Street
Elm Street         Sewers              From Ninth Street to 28-1922  5-3-1922
                                       Tenth Street
Elm Street         Paving and          From Eighth Street   30-1922  5-17-1922
                   improving           to Tenth Street
Elm Street         Storm sewers        From Tenth Street to 177-1926 11-3-1926
                                       Eleventh Street
Elm Street         Paving              Between Tenth Street 53-1927  4-6-1927
                                       and Twelfth Street
                                       From Thirteenth
Elm Street         Opening and grading Street to Palm       61-1931  8-19-1931
                                       Street
Elm Street         Revising grade      Between Birch Street 11-1962  3-28-1962
                                       and Linden Street
                                       Between North Eighth
                   Vacating and        Street and a 15-
Elm Street         removing            foot-wide alley      28-1962  10-3-1962
                                       extending to Walnut
                                       Street
                                       Between Poplar
                                       Street and a 15-
Elm Street         Vacating            foot-wide alley      21-1966  5-25-1966
                                       between Poplar
                                       Street and Eighth
                                       Street
Erie Street        Opening portion     From Chester Street  40-1957  12-31-1957
                                       to Montgomery Street
                                       From the east side
Evans Avenue       Vacating            of Thorn Street to   6-1954   2-3-1954
                                       the south side of
                                       Exeter Street
                                       Between Centre
Evans Avenue       Revising grade      Avenue and Thorn     28-1958  8-13-1958
                                       Street
Evans Avenue       Changing grades     In accordance with   3-1972   1-26-1972
                                       Plan No. 5835
                                       From Old Wyomissing
Evergreen Road     Opening and grading Road to Parkside     53-1929  8-7-1929
                                       Drive south
Exeter Street      Grading and paving  Between Third Street 19-1917  4-25-1917
                                       and Fourth Street
Exeter Street      Opening, grading    Between Palm Street  29-1917  5-23-1917
                   and paving          and Pricetown Road
                                       Between Fourteenth
Exeter Street      Vacating            Street and Palm      37-1917  6-20-1917
                                       Street
Exeter Street      Vacating            Between Front Street 58-1917  11-21-1917
                                       and McKnight Street
Exeter Street      Paving              From Kutztown Road   19-1921  3-30-1921
                                       to Eleventh Street
                                       At the northwest
Exeter Street      Changing lines      corner of Exeter     46-1921  8-17-1921
                                       Street and Kutztown
                                       Road
                                       Between Eleventh
Exeter Street      Sewers              Street and           31-1923  5-29-1923
                                       Thirteenth Street
Exeter Street      Vacating            Between Palm Street  94-1924  11-12-1924
                                       and Fifteenth Street
                                       Between Oak Lane and
Exeter Street      Vacating            the eastern City     95-1924  11-12-1924
                                       line
Exeter Street      Vacating            From Fourth Street   175-1927 12-31-1927
                                       to Fifth Street
                   Placing on          From Fourth Street
Exeter Street      topographical       to Fifth Street      176-1927 12-31-1927
                   survey
Exeter Street      Revising elevations From Church Street   179-1927 12-31-1927
                   and grades          to Union Street
Exeter Street      Opening             From Kutztown Road   65-1931  8-26-1931
                                       to Tenth Street
Exeter Street      Sewers              From Third Street to 21-1932  4-13-1932
                                       Front Street
Exeter Street      Sewers              From Eleventh Street 21-1932  4-13-1932
                                       to Kutztown Road
                                       Between the east
                                       building line of
Exeter Street      Vacating            Fifth Street and the 21-1968  4-17-1968
                                       west building line
                                       of Sixth Street
Exeter Street      Changing grades     In accordance with   3-1972   1-26-1972
                                       Plan No. 5835
                   Vacating,           Between North Fourth
Exeter Street      abandoning and      Street and North     94-1986  12-3-1986
                   removing            Fifth Street
Exter Street       Storm sewers        From Third Street to 26-1915  5-17-1915
                                       Centre Avenue
 
Name Activity Location Ord. No. Date
Name                Activity            Location            Ord. No. Date
Fairmont Avenue     Changing elevations From Alton Avenue   96-1928  8-1-1928
                    and grades          to Bruckman Avenue
                                        From Delta Avenue
Fairmont Avenue     Opening and grading to the north City   51-1931  7-15-1931
                                        line
                                        From 14-foot alley
Fairmont Avenue     Sewers              south of Alton      21-1932  4-13-1932
                                        Avenue to the north
                                        City line
Fairmont Avenue     Paving              From Alton Avenue   9-1935   4-17-1935
                                        to Delta Avenue
                    Placing on          From Northmont
Fairmount Avenue    topographical       Avenue to the       81-1915  2-2-1916
                    survey              northern City line
                                        From Northmont
Fairmount Avenue    Opening             Avenue to the       82-1915  2-2-1916
                                        northern City line
                                        From Sixteenth and
Fairview Street     Grading             one- half Street to 64-1955  12-28-1955
                                        Seventeenth Street
                    Placing on          From Farr Road by
Farr Place          topographical       circular alignment  74-1929  11-13-1929
                    survey              to Farr Road
                                        From Farr Road by
Farr Place          Opening and grading circular alignment  95-1929  1-8-1930
                                        to Farr Road
                                        On the northerly
                    Curblines and       curbline between
Farr Place          grades              its two             48-1952  11-12-1952
                                        intersections with
                                        Farr Road
                    Placing on          From Wyomissing
Farr Road           topographical       Boulevard to the    74-1929  11-13-1929
                    survey              west City line
                                        From Wyomissing
Farr Road           Opening and grading Boulevard to the    95-1929  1-8-1930
                                        west City line
                                        Between Farr Place
Farr Road           Revising grade      and the             6-1960   2-10-1960
                                        southwestern City
                                        line
Fern Avenue         Opening and grading From Carroll Street 8-1929   2-20-1929
                                        to Noble Street
Fern Avenue         Opening and grading From Grace Street   15-1929  4-17-1929
                                        to Noble Street
                                        From Morgantown
Fern Avenue         Opening and grading Road to Carroll     41-1929  7-17-1929
                                        Street
Fern Avenue         Opening and grading From Noble Street   41-1929  7-17-1929
                                        to Angelica Street
                                        From Bartlett
Fern Avenue         Storm sewers        Street to Crestmont 35-1930  5-7-1930
                                        Street
                                        From Morgantown
Fern Avenue         Paving and curbing  Road to Angelica    52-1930  7-30-1930
                                        Street
                                        Between Jackson
Fern Avenue         Vacating            Street and Reading  3-1950   3-1-1950
                                        Belt Railroad
                                        From the western
                                        building line of
                                        Angelica Street to
Fern Avenue         Vacating            the eastern right-  24-1977  7-6-1977
                                        of-way line of the
                                        Reading Railroad
                                        Belt Line Division
                                        (now Conrail)
                                        Between Rockland
Fern Street         Vacating            Street and Hampden  7-1925   1-28-1925
                                        Boulevard
                                        From Rockland
Fern Street         Opening and grading Street to 230 feet  8-1931   3-4-1931
                                        north of Rockland
                                        Street
                                        Known as Fernwood
Fern Street         Renaming            Street from         36-1931  6-10-1931
                                        Rockland Street to
                                        the north City line
                                        Formerly Fern
Fernwood Street     Naming              Street from         36-1931  6-10-1931
                                        Rockland Street to
                                        the north City line
                                        From a point 230
Fernwood Street     Changing width      feet north of       37-1931  6-10-1931
                                        Rockland Street to
                                        the north City line
                                        From Rockland
Fernwood Street     Changing width      Street to a point   38-1931  6-10-1931
                                        230 feet north of
                                        Rockland Street
                    Changing curb       From Rockland
Fernwood Street     elevations and      Street northward    40-1931  6-10-1931
                    grades              230 feet
                    Changing curb       From 230 feet north
Fernwood Street     elevations and      of Rockland Street  41-1931  6-10-1931
                    grades              to the north City
                                        line
                                        From Rockland
Fernwood Street     Sewers              Street north 220    21-1932  4-13-1932
                                        feet
                    Revising elevations From Rockland
Fernwood Street     and grades          Street to the north 74-1934  12-5-1934
                                        City line
                                        North 230 feet of
Fernwood Street     Vacating and        the intersection    56-1956  12-19-1956
                    removing            with Rockland
                                        Street
                                        From a point 230
                                        feet north of the
                                        north building line
                                        of Rockland Street
                                        to the north City
                                        line and North
Fernwood Street     Vacating portion    Eighteenth Street   7-1962   2-14-1962
                                        from Hampden
                                        Boulevard to the
                                        north City line and
                                        Berks Street from
                                        North Fifteenth
                                        Street to Hampden
                                        Boulevard
                                        Between Amity
Fifteenth Street    Vacating            Street and          50a-1913 3-11-1914
                                        Pricetown Road
                    Opening, grading    Between Amity
Fifteenth Street    and paving          Street and Bern     29-1917  5-23-1917
                                        Street
                    Opening, grading    Between College
Fifteenth Street    and improving       Avenue and Rockland 6-1925   1-28-1925
                                        Street
Fifteenth Street    Opening, grading    Between Bern Street 6-1925   1-28-1925
                    and improving       and College Avenue
                    Opening, grading    Between Exeter
Fifteenth Street    and improving       Street and Bern     6-1925   1-28-1925
                                        Street
                                        From College Avenue
Fifteenth Street    Opening and grading to 230 feet north   8-1931   3-4-1931
                                        of Rockland Street
                    Changing curb       From College Avenue
Fifteenth Street    elevations and      to 230 feet north   40-1931  6-10-1931
                    grades              of Rockland Street
                    Changing curb       From 230 feet north
Fifteenth Street    elevations and      of Rockland Street  41-1931  6-10-1931
                    grades              to the north City
                                        line
                                        From Perry Street
                                        southward to a
Fifteenth Street    Vacating            point approximately 14-1932  4-27-1932
                                        375 feet south of
                                        Robeson Street
                                        From 110 feet south
Fifteenth Street    Sewers              of College Avenue   21-1932  4-13-1932
                                        to Rockland Street
                                        From Woodward
Fifth Street        Paving              Street to Lebanon   51-1914  7-29-1914
                                        Valley Railroad
Fifth Street        Paving and          —                 18-1915  4-14-1915
                    improving
                    Paving and          From S.S.L.V.R.R.
Fifth Street        improving           bridge to N.B.L. of 44-1915  8-10-1915
                                        Greenwich
Fifth Street        Repairing           As necessary        30-1917  5-23-1917
                                        From Buttonwood
Fifth Street        Paving              Street to Woodward  19-1921  3-30-1921
                                        Street
                                        From Richmond
                                        Street to the
Fifth Street        Opening             northern City line  172-1927 12-31-1927
                                        north of Berks
                                        Street
                                        From the
                                        southwestern City
Fifth Street        Opening             line of Northmont   172-1927 12-31-1927
                                        to the northern
                                        City line of
                                        Northmont
                                        From 260 feet south
Fifth Street        Vacating            of Amity to Bern    175-1927 12-31-1927
                                        Street
                    Placing on          From 260 feet south
Fifth Street        topographical       of Amity to Bern    176-1927 12-31-1927
                    survey              Street
Fifth Street        Revising elevations From Pike Street    179-1927 12-31-1927
                    and grades          northward 220 feet
Fifth Street        Revising elevations From Bern Street    179-1927 12-31-1927
                    and grades          northward 208 feet
                                        From Richmond
Fifth Street        Storm sewers        Street to Delta     96-1929  12-11-1929
                                        Avenue
                    Revising elevations From Pike Street to
Fifth Street        and grades          the northern City   45-1930  7-16-1930
                                        line
Fifth Street        Opening             From Pike Street to 46-1930  7-16-1930
                                        Richmond Street
                                        From Richmond
Fifth Street        Curbs, gutters and  Street to the       16-1931  3-4-1931
                    sidewalks           northern City line
                                        in Northmont
Fifth Street        Sewers              From Bern Street to 21-1932  4-13-1932
                                        Richmond Street
Fifth Street        Sewers              From Robeson Street 21-1932  4-13-1932
                                        to Amity Street
                                        On the west side
                                        from Spring Street
                                        northward
                                        approximately 115
                    Revising curb       feet, and on the
Fifth Street        elevations and      north side of       44-1938  11-2-1938
                    grades              Spring Street from
                                        Fifth Street
                                        westward
                                        approximately 107
                                        feet
                                        SR 157-18 from
                                        Station 26+94 to
Fifth Street        Improving           Station 60+12, a    2-1958   1-22-1958
                                        distance of 3,318
                                        feet
Fifth Street        Revising grade      Between Pike Street 10-1961  5-24-1961
                                        and Bern Street
                                        At the northeast
Fifth Street        Establishing        corner of Fifth     50-1974  11-6-1974
                    curblines           Street and
                                        Washington Street
                                        At the southwest
Fifth Street        Establishing        corner of Fifth     50-1974  11-6-1974
                    curblines           Street and Walnut
                                        Street
First Hockley Lane  Vacating            From Second Street  99-1931  12-9-1931
                                        to Third Street
Floyd Street        Opening and grading From Park Avenue to 88-1929  12-4-1929
                                        Summit Avenue
Floyd Street        Paving and curbing  From Park Avenue to 52-1930  7-30-1930
                                        Summit Avenue
Floyd Street        Vacating            Between Park Avenue 60-1930  9-3-1930
                                        and Summit Avenue
                                        A 30-foot street
Forest Street       Establishing        between Sixteenth   13-1923  3-23-1923
                                        Street and Hoskins
                                        Place
                    Opening, grading,   Between Sixteenth
Forest Street       and improving       Street and Hoskins  14-1923  3-23-1923
                                        Place
                    Grading, guttering  Between Hoskins
Forest Street       and paving          Place and Sixteenth 75-1924  8-6-1924
                                        Street
                                        Between South
Forest Street       Changing grades     Eighteenth Street   59-1973  11-28-1973
                                        and South
                                        Nineteenth Street
Fourteenth and one-                     Between Cotton
half Street         Grading             Street and Fairview 19-1914  5-27-1914
                                        Street
                                        Between Pricetown
Fourteenth Street   Opening             Road and Pike       20-1914  5-27-1914
                                        Street
                                        Between Rosemont
Fourteenth Street   Vacating            Boulevard and the   66-1915  12-1-1915
                                        northern City line
                    Opening, grading    Between Amity
Fourteenth Street   and paving          Street and Union    29-1917  5-23-1917
                                        Street
                                        From Union Street
                                        to the southern
Fourteenth Street   Vacating            side of a proposed  37-1917  6-20-1917
                                        new street named
                                        College Avenue
                    Opening, grading    Between College
Fourteenth Street   and improving       Avenue and Rockland 6-1925   1-28-1925
                                        Street
                                        Between the
                                        northern building
Fourteenth Street   Vacating            line of Oley Street 23-1925  5-6-1925
                                        and the southern
                                        building line of
                                        Windsor Street
                                        From College Avenue
Fourteenth Street   Opening and grading to 230 feet north   7-1931   3-4-1931
                                        of Rockland Street
                    Changing curb       From College Avenue
Fourteenth Street   elevations and      to 230 feet north   39-1931  6-10-1931
                    grades              of Rockland Street
                    Changing curb       From 230 feet north
Fourteenth Street   elevations and      of Rockland Street  41-1931  6-10-1931
                    grades              to the north City
                                        line
                    Changing curb       From College Avenue
Fourteenth Street   elevations and      to Rockland Street  88-1931  10-28-1931
                    grades
Fourteenth Street   Sewers              From College Avenue 21-1932  4-13-1932
                                        to Rockland Street
                                        From Hampden
Fourteenth Street   Vacating            Boulevard southward 14-1932  4-27-1932
                                        to Windsor Street
                                        Between the north
                                        building line of
Fourteenth Street   Vacating            Greenwich Street    50-1968  10-9-1968
                                        and the south
                                        building line of
                                        Oley Street
                    Changing alignment, Between Green
Fourteenth Street   width and grades    Street and          10-1980  2-20-1980
                                        Buttonwood Street
                                        From a point north
                                        of Elm Street to
Fourth Street       Water pipe          Walnut Street to a  17-1915  4-7-1915
                                        point between
                                        Fourth Street and
                                        Rose Street
Fourth Street       Paving and          From Pine Street to 44-1915  8-10-1915
                    improving           Bingaman Street
                                        Between Exeter
Fourth Street       Grading and paving  Street and Bern     19-1917  4-25-1917
                                        Street
Fourth Street       Repairing           As necessary        30-1917  5-23-1917
Fourth Street       Paving              From Walnut Street  19-1921  3-30-1921
                                        to Spring Street
                                        From Berks Street
Fourth Street       Opening and grading to a point 240 feet 33-1928  4-18-1928
                                        south of Berks
                                        Street
                    Establishing new    At the southwest
Fourth Street       building and        corner of Fourth    34-1974  8-15-1974
                    curblines and       Street and Laurel
                    grades              Street
                                        At the northwest
Fourth Street       Establishing        and southwest of    50-1974  11-6-1974
                    curblines           Fourth Street and
                                        Greenwich Street
                    Revising curb       At the intersection
Franklin Street     locations           of Franklin and     16-2023  2-27-2023
                                        South Front Street
                    Revising curb       At the intersection
Franklin Street     locations           of Franklin and     16-2023  2-27-2023
                                        South Second Street
Franklin Street     Storm sewers        From Peach Street   60a-1913 3-18-1914
                                        to Eighth Street
Franklin Street     Paving and          From Front Street   22-1914  5-27-1914
                    improving           to Second Street
Franklin Street     Paving and          From Third Street   22-1914  5-27-1914
                    improving           to Sixth Street
Franklin Street     Paving              From Second Street  51-1914  7-29-1914
                                        to Third Street
                    Revising            From South Front
Franklin Street     topographical       Street to Water     34-1955  8-24-1955
                    survey              Street
Franklin Street     Revising alignment  —                 61-1966  11-30-1966
                                        As located in the
Franklin Street     Grading             City of Reading's   24-1967  7-19-1967
                                        Downtown East
                                        Project No. R184
                    Opening,            From Second Street
Franklin Street     establishing        to the western      6-1974   1-30-1974
                    alignment and       building line of
                    grading             Front Street
Franklin Street     Curbline            Northern curbline   37-2000  12-27-2000
                                        of the 700 block
                    Placing on          From Alton Avenue
Freemont Avenue     topographical       to the northern     81-1915  2-2-1916
                    survey              City line
                                        From Alton Avenue
Freemont Avenue     Opening             to the northern     82-1915  2-2-1916
                                        City line
                                        From Crescent
Fremont Avenue      Storm sewers        Street to Delta     48-1931  6-3-1931
                                        Avenue
                                        From Bruckman
Fremont Avenue      Opening and grading Avenue to Alton     51-1931  7-15-1931
                                        Avenue
Fremont Avenue      Sewers              From Delta Avenue   21-1932  4-13-1932
                                        to Crescent Avenue
                                        From Bruckman
Fremont Avenue      Sewers              Avenue south to 14- 21-1932  4-13-1932
                                        foot alley
                                        From Buttonwood
                    Paving and          Street to the south
Front Street        improving           end of the southern 29-1915  5-17-1915
                                        approach of Front
                                        Street bridge
Front Street        Sewers              From Windsor Street 26-1921  4-13-1921
                                        to Spring Street
                    Paving and          From Douglass
Front Street        improving           Street to Spring    62-1924  7-16-1924
                                        Street
                                        Between Douglass
Front Street        Paving              Street and Spring   63-1924  7-16-1924
                                        Street
                                        From 100 feet north
                                        of the north
Front Street        Vacating            building line of    112-1927 9-14-1927
                                        Rockland Street to
                                        the north City line
                                        From Richmond
Front Street        Widening            Street to Sycamore  115-1927 9-14-1927
                                        Road
                                        From Richmond
Front Street        Opening and grading Street to northern  33-1928  4-18-1928
                                        City line
Front Street        Widening            From Penn Street to 14-1930  3-19-1930
                                        River Road
Front Street        Sewers              From Robeson Street 21-1932  4-13-1932
                                        to north City line
                    Establishing        From Schiller
Front Street        curbline            Street southward 88 66-1932  11-30-1932
                                        feet
                    Establishing a      Between Perry
Front Street        reserve line        Street and Union    6-1951   4-18-1951
                                        Street
                                        At the southwest
Front Street        Curblines and       corner of Front     6-1951   4-18-1951
                    grades              Street and Union
                                        Street
                                        At the northwest
Front Street        Curblines and       corner of Front     6-1951   4-18-1951
                    grades              Street and Perry
                                        Street
                                        Between Schiller
                                        Street and a 10-
Front Street        Widening            foot-wide alley 100 13-1979  4-11-1979
                                        feet south of
                                        Schiller Street
Fulton Street       Naming              Formerly known as   22-1942  7-8-1942
                                        West Road
                                        Between Lancaster
                                        Avenue and a point
Funston Avenue      Opening             160 feet north of   72-1941  12-10-1941
                                        the northern
                                        building line of
                                        Lancaster Avenue
                                        From the southern
                                        building line of
Funston Avenue      Opening             Liggett Avenue to   13-1947  5-7-1947
                                        the southern
                                        building line of
                                        Meade Street
                                        From a point 160
                                        feet north of the
                                        northern building
Funston Avenue      Opening             line of Lancaster   34-1954  7-14-1954
                                        Avenue to the
                                        southern building
                                        line of Meade
                                        Street
                                        From Liggett Avenue
Funston Avenue      Opening portion     northwestwardly to  40-1957  12-31-1957
                                        the City line
                    Revising curb       Between Gregg
Funston Avenue      grades              Avenue and          8-1967   3-29-1967
                                        Lancaster Avenue
                                        Between Logan
                    Revising curb       Street and Scott
Funston Avenue      grades              Street within the   61-1983  11-2-1983
                                        boundary of the
                                        City
                                        Between the eastern
                                        building line of
Furnace Street      Vacating            Seventh Street and  55-1919  12-10-1919
                                        the western
                                        building line of
                                        Ninth Street
 
Name Activity Location Ord. No. Date
Name              Activity             Location             Ord. No. Date
Garden Lane       Opening and grading  From Barberry Road   53-1929  8-7-1929
                                       to Evergreen Road
                  Placing on           From Barberry Road
Garden Lane       topographical survey to the western City  15-1950  6-21-1950
                                       line
                                       From Barberry Road
Garden Lane       Opening              west to the City     24-1950  6-28-1950
                                       line
                                       From Barberry Road
Garden Lane       Opening              westward to the      28-1951  10-10-1951
                                       City/ Borough of
                                       Wyomissing line
                  Opening, grading and From Lancaster
Gerry Street      improving            Avenue northward 112 70-1924  8-20-1924
                                       feet
                                       From Lancaster
Gerry Street      Storm sewers         Avenue northward 200 79-1924B 8-27-1924
                                       feet approximately
Gerry Street      Vacating             From Gregg Avenue to 37-1928  4-25-1928
                                       Pershing Boulevard
Gerry Street      Opening and grading  From Gregg Avenue to 38-1928  4-25-1928
                                       Liggett Avenue
Gerry Street      Opening and grading  From McCellan Street 9-1929   2-20-1929
                                       to Hancock Boulevard
                                       Between Lancaster
Gerry Street      Vacating             Avenue and Upland    3-1950   3-1-1950
                                       Avenue
                  Placing on           Between Lancaster
Gerry Street      topographical survey Avenue and Gregg     10-1952  4-2-1952
                                       Avenue
                  Reestablishing and   From Lancaster
Gerry Street      relocating           Avenue to Hancock    20-1954  4-7-1954
                                       Boulevard
                                       Between Lancaster
Gerry Street      Opening              Avenue and Gregg     44-1955  10-5-1955
                                       Street
                                       Between Gregg Avenue
Gerry Street      Opening              and Hancock          52-1955  12-21-1955
                                       Boulevard
                                       From the northern
                                       building line of
Gerry Street      Vacating             Lancaster Avenue to  17-1956  4-18-1956
                                       the southern
                                       building line of
                                       Gregg Avenue
                                       From the south
                                       building line of
Gerry Street      Vacating             Liggett Avenue to    24-1974  6-19-1974
                                       the west building
                                       line of Sheridan
                                       Street
                                       Replacing Sheridan
Gerry Street      Vacating             Street with McCellan 28-1974  7-31-1974
                                       Street
                                       Between Mineral
                                       Spring Road and the
Glen Road         Opening              City line to the     32-2024  5-13-2024
                                       north, where it
                                       adjoins Lower Alsace
                                       Township
                  Opening, grading and Between West Oley
Gordon Street     improving            Street and West      44-1923  7-3-1923
                                       Douglass Street
                                       Between West Oley
Gordon Street     Widening             Street and West      54-1923  9-19-1923
                                       Douglass Street
Gordon Street     Storm sewers         From Windsor Street  77-1930  10-8-1930
                                       to River Road
                                       From West Windsor
Gordon Street     Storm sewers         Street to West       55-1931  7-8-1931
                                       Douglass Street
Gordon Street     Sewers               From River Road to   21-1932  4-13-1932
                                       West Oley Street
                                       From the southern
                                       right-of- way line
Gordon Street     Vacating             of West Green Street 51-1977  11-30-1977
                                       to the northern
                                       right- of-way line
                                       of Conrail
                  Vacating, abandoning Between Buttonwood
Gordon Street     and removing         Street and West Elm  41-1981  8-5-1981
                                       Street
                  Opening, grading and From Lancaster
Grace Street      improving            Avenue northward 270 70-1924  8-20-1924
                                       feet
                                       From Lancaster
Grace Street      Storm sewers         Avenue northward 330 79-1924B 8-27-1924
                                       feet approximately
                                       From Lancaster
Grace Street      Opening and grading  Avenue to Summit     41-1929  7-17-1929
                                       Avenue
                  Changing curb        From Lancaster
Grace Street      elevations and       Avenue to Meade      46-1929  7-24-1929
                  grades               Street
                                       From Lancaster
Grace Street      Opening and grading  Avenue to Meade      47-1929  7-24-1929
                                       Street
Grace Street      Stormwater sewers    From Gregg Avenue to 56-1929  8-7-1929
                                       Brookline Street
                                       From Lancaster
Grace Street      Storm sewers         Avenue to Park       35-1930  5-7-1930
                                       Avenue
                                       From Lancaster
Grace Street      Paving and curbing   Avenue to Summit     52-1930  7-30-1930
                                       Avenue
                                       From Lancaster
Grace Street      Grading              Avenue to Gregg      32-1931  6-3-1931
                                       Avenue
                                       From Lancaster
Grace Street      Paving and curbing   Avenue to Gregg      89-1931  10-28-1931
                                       Avenue
                  Placing on           Between Meade Street
Grace Street      topographical survey and Wyomissing       21-1937  11-10-1937
                                       Boulevard
Grace Street      Vacating             Between Meade Street 21-1937  11-10-1937
                                       and Arlington Street
                                       Between Summit
Grace Street      Opening              Avenue and Upland    47-1949  10-11-1949
                                       Avenue
                                       Extending from the
                                       northerly building
Grace Street      Vacating portion     line of vacated      15-1962  7-18-1962
                                       Meade Street, a
                                       distance of 335.08
                                       feet
Grace Street      Curb grading         Between Gregg Avenue 17-1964  5-6-1964
                                       and Meade Street
                                       Between South
Grand View Avenue Opening, grading and Nineteenth Street    42-1922  8-28-1922
                  improving            and the east line of
                                       the City
                                       From Nineteenth
Grand View Street Vacating             Street east to the   11-1923  3-14-1923
                                       City line
Grape Street      Opening              From Front Street to 83-1927  7-13-1927
                                       Second Street
                                       From the western
                                       building line of
                  Vacating and         Canal Street to its
Grape Street      removing             western terminus at  43-1972  10-18-1972
                                       the east side of the
                                       former Schuylkill
                                       Canal
                  Opening,             From South Second
Grape Street      establishing         Street to Canal      6-1974   1-30-1974
                  alignment and        Street
                  grading
                                       Between the western
                                       topographical
                                       building line of
Grape Street      Vacating             south Second Street  35-1974  8-28-1974
                                       and the easterly
                                       topographical
                                       building line of
                                       South Front Street
                                       200 Block,
Grape Street      Widening             consistent with the  31-2008  4-28-2008
                                       final plan for
                                       Barley Square
Green Street      Vacating             Between Front Street 61a-1915 2-17-1915
                                       and Pear Street
Green Street      Storm sewers         From Tenth Street to 55-1931  7-8-1931
                                       Mulberry Street
Green Street      Revising grade       Between Birch Street 11-1962  3-28-1962
                                       and Linden Street
                                       From Columbia Road
Greenview Avenue  Opening and grading  to the northern City 77-1924  9-3-1924
                                       line
                                       Between Lehigh
Greenview Avenue  Opening              Street and the       24-1941  6-4-1941
                                       northern City line
                                       near Berkshire Drive
                                       From Lehigh Street
Greenview Avenue  Removing             to Reading Company   53-1955  12-21-1955
                                       Belt Line Railroad
Greenview Avenue  Grading              From Lehigh Street   32-1956  5-29-1956
                                       to Warren Street
                                       Between St.
Greenway Terrace  Opening              Bernardine Street    32-1948  7-21-1948
                                       and Jackson Street
                                       Between St.
Greenway Terrace  Opening              Bernardine Street    4-1950   1-25-1950
                                       and St. George
                                       Street
                                       From the east
                                       curbline of Eighth
Greenwich Street  Paving and improving Street to the west   38-1916  4-26-1916
                                       building line of
                                       Ninth Street
Greenwich Street  Paving and improving From Ninth Street to 26-1919  5-28-1919
                                       Tenth Street
Greenwich Street  Paving               From Second Street   19-1921  3-30-1921
                                       to Centre Avenue
Greenwich Street  Paving and improving From Centre Avenue   30-1922  5-17-1922
                                       to Fifth Street
Greenwich Street                       From Tulpehocken
(West)            Sewers               Street to Clinton    21-1932  4-13-1932
                                       Street
Greenwich Street  Revising grade       Between Birch Street 11-1962  3-28-1962
                                       and Linden Street
Gregg Avenue      Opening and grading  From Grace Street to 166-1927 12-14-1927
                                       Wyomissing Boulevard
                                       From Kenhorst
Gregg Avenue      Vacating             Boulevard to Gerry   37-1928  4-25-1928
                                       Street
                                       From Kenhorst
Gregg Avenue      Opening and grading  Boulevard to Gerry   38-1928  4-25-1928
                                       Street
Gregg Avenue      Opening and grading  From Brookline Plaza 9-1929   2-20-1929
                                       to Hancock Boulevard
                  Changing curb        From Angelica Street
Gregg Avenue      elevations and       to 160 feet east of  46-1929  7-24-1929
                  grades               Grace Street
                                       From Wyomissing
Gregg Avenue      Stormwater sewers    Boulevard to Grace   56-1929  8-7-1929
                                       Street
Gregg Avenue      Opening and grading  From Brookline Plaza 71-1929  10-16-1929
                                       to Newport Avenue
Gregg Avenue      Grading              From Grace Street to 33-1931  6-3-1931
                                       Noble Street
Gregg Avenue      Paving and curbing   From Grace Street to 89-1931  10-28-1931
                                       Noble Street
                  Revising curb        Between Arlington
Gregg Avenue      elevations and       Street and Carroll   21-1937  11-10-1937
                  grades               Street
                                       Between Kenhorst
Gregg Avenue      Opening              Boulevard and        20-1949  6-1-1949
                                       Newport Avenue
Gregg Avenue      Opening              Between Noble Street 17-1950  6-7-1950
                                       and Angelica Street
                                       From Hancock
Gregg Avenue      Opening              Boulevard to Gerry   17-1956  4-18-1956
                                       Street
                                       From the eastern
                                       building line of
Gregg Avenue      Vacating             Gerry Street to the  17-1956  4-18-1956
                                       Reading Belt
                                       Railroad
Gregg Avenue      Opening portion      From Grace Street to 40-1957  12-31-1957
                                       Noble Street
                                       Between the east
                                       building line of
Gregg Avenue      Opening              Funston Avenue and   33-1965  7-21-1965
                                       the west building
                                       line of McArthur
                                       Avenue
                                       From the northern
                                       building line of
Gregg Avenue      Changing curb grades Funston Avenue to    13-1969  3-26-1969
                                       Pershing Boulevard,
                                       Cumru Township
                                       Between the west
                                       building line of
Gregg Avenue      Opening              Funston Avenue and   25-1970  6-27-1970
                                       the City/Cumru
                                       Township line
                                       Between Carroll
Gregg Avenue      Changing curb grades Street and Arlington 4-1976   1-28-1976
                                       Street
                                       Between Brookline
Gregg Avenue      Vacating             Plaza and Hancock    43-1999  12-27-1999
                                       Boulevard
 
Name Activity Location Ord. No. Date
Name              Activity            Location             Ord. No.  Date
                                      In the east bank
Halifax Way       Accepting           area of the          12-2000   7-10-2000
                                      Schuylkill Urban
                                      Renewal Project
                                      Between Jefferson
Hamilton Street   Vacating            Street and           53-1977   12-7-1977
                                      Schuylkill Avenue
                                      Formerly Hampden
Hampden Boulevard Naming              Road and Pricetown   84-1924   10-1-1924
                                      Road
                  Revising            Between Thirteenth
Hampden Boulevard topographical       Street and Perry     154-1926  9-22-1926
                  survey              Street
                                      Between Thirteenth
Hampden Boulevard Opening             Street and Perry     155-1926  9-22-1926
                                      Street
                                      From Marion Street
Hampden Boulevard Storm sewers        northward            180A-1926 11-10-1926
                                      approximately 300
                                      feet
                  Changing curb       From Rockland Street
Hampden Boulevard elevations and      northward 255 feet   40-1931   6-10-1931
                  grades
                  Changing curb       From 230 feet north
Hampden Boulevard elevations and      of Rockland Street   41-1931   6-10-1931
                  grades              to the north City
                                      line
Hampden Boulevard Opening and grading From Windsor Street  63-1932   9-28-1932
                                      to Marion Street
                                      From Rockland Street
Hampden Boulevard Opening and grading to the north City    11-1934   3-7-1934
                                      line
                                      Between Windsor
Hampden Boulevard Improving           Street and Spring    44-1934   7-3-1934
                                      Street
                                      Between Rockland
                                      Street and the City
                                      line, approximately
Hampden Boulevard Sewers              325 feet north of    58-1934   9-26-1934
                                      Rockland Street, and
                                      extend therefrom
                                      north to the City
                                      line
                  Revising elevation  From City line
Hampden Boulevard and grades          southward 515.50     70-1934   11-21-1934
                                      feet
Hampden Boulevard Storm sewers        —                  76-1934   11-7-1934
                                      From Station
Hampden Boulevard Improving           26+36.27 to Station  30-1965   6-16-1965
                                      82+85.50, a distance
                                      of 5,649.23 feet
                                      From Douglass Street
Hampden Road      Renaming            to the City limits   84-1924   10-1-1924
                                      known as Hampden
                                      Boulevard
                                      From Lancaster
Hancock Boulevard Opening and grading Avenue to Wyomissing 38-1928   4-25-1928
                                      Boulevard
                                      From Lancaster
Hancock Boulevard Opening and grading Avenue to Gerry      9-1929    2-20-1929
                                      Street
Hancock Boulevard Opening             From Gerry Street to 24-1956   5-23-1956
                                      Liggett Avenue
Hancock Boulevard Changing median     100 block through    29-2021   4-12-2021
                  width               the 400 block
                                      From Lancaster
Hancock Street    Vacating            Avenue to Pershing   37-1928   4-25-1928
                                      Boulevard
                                      From Lancaster
Hancock Street    Opening             Avenue southward 175 23-1950   6-28-1950
                                      feet to the southern
                                      City line
Hanley Place      Opening and grading From Meade Street to 38-1928   4-25-1928
                                      McClellan Street
Hanley Place      Opening and grading From McCellan Street 9-1929    2-20-1929
                                      to Meade Street
                  Vacating,           Between Tulpehocken
Harold Street     abandoning and      Street and dead-end  41-1981   8-5-1981
                  removing            at Kissinger Court
                                      From Belevedere
Hawthorne Street  Vacating            Avenue to Grace      51-1923   9-19-1923
                                      Street
Hawthorne Street  Opening             Between Grace Street 46-1949   10-11-1949
                                      and Noble Street
Hay Street        Vacating            From Baker Street to 37-1928   4-25-1928
                                      Gerry Street
Hazel Street      Vacating            From Summit Avenue   98-1927   8-3-1927
                                      to Prospect Avenue
                  Placing on          From Summit Avenue
Hazel Street      topographical       to Prospect Avenue   99-1927   8-3-1927
                  survey
                                      From Park Avenue
Hazel Street      Vacating            northward            187-1927  12-28-1927
                                      approximately 233
                                      feet
Hazel Street      Opening and curbing From Upland Avenue   46-1928   5-16-1928
                                      to Belvedere Avenue
                                      From Belvedere
Hazel Street      Opening and grading Avenue to Eberly     88-1929   12-4-1929
                                      Street
                                      From Belvedere
Hazel Street      Storm sewers        Avenue to Eberly     35-1930   5-7-1930
                                      Street
                                      From Belevedere
Hazel Street      Paving and curbing  Avenue to Eberly     52-1930   7-30-1930
                                      Street
                                      Western sidewalk
Hazel Street      Widening            between Belvedere    14-1978   4-28-1978
                                      Avenue and Upland
                                      Avenue
Heine Street      Grading             At the building line 61-1914   9-2-1914
                                      of Cotton Street
                  Changing elevation  From Woodvale Avenue
Heine Street      and curb            southward to a 20-   59-1927   5-4-1927
                                      foot- wide alley
                  Vacating,           Between Liberty
Heller Street     abandoning and      Street and 10-foot-  41-1981   8-5-1981
                  removing            wide alley
                  Placing on          From Kenhorst
Hess Avenue       topographical       Boulevard to         55-1946   1-8-1947
                  survey              Margaret Street
                  Vacating and        From Kenhorst
Hess Avenue       removing            Boulevard to         14-1958   4-30-1958
                                      Margaret Street
                                      Between Mineral
                  Opening, grading    Spring Road and
Hessian Road      and improving       property of Charles  20-1925   4-22-1925
                                      W. and George W.
                                      Benz
                  Changing curblines  From Mineral Spring
Hessian Road      and elevations      Road to Eckert       41-1925   7-29-1925
                                      Avenue
                                      From a point
                                      approximately 150
                  Placing on          feet northeast of
Hessian Road      topographical       Holly Road           181-1927  12-31-1927
                  survey              northwestwardly
                                      approximately 350.88
                                      feet
Hessian Road      Changing elevation  From Holly Road to   24-1928   4-4-1928
                  and grades          Tropper Road
                                      From the point of
                                      tangent east of
Hessian Road      Opening and grading Holly Road to        26-1928   4-4-1928
                                      Hessian Camp
                                      Addition No. 2
Hiene Street      Opening and grading From Woodvale Avenue 116-1927  9-14-1927
                                      to Fairview Avenue
Hiene Street      Sewers              From Woodvale Avenue 92-1931   10-7-1931
                                      south 196 feet
Hiester's Lane    Paving and          From Sixth Street    22-1914   5-27-1914
                  improving           eastward 235 feet
Hiester's Lane    Widening            From Sixth Street to 178-1927  12-31-1927
                                      Moss Street
Hiester's Lane    Opening and grading From Sixth Street to 66-1931   8-26-1931
                                      Kutztown Road
Hiester's Lane    Sewers              From Sixth Street to 21-1932   4-13-1932
                                      Kutztown Road
                                      From 75 feet to 25
Hiester's Lane    Changing building   feet at northwest    15-1958   5-14-1958
                  line radius         corner with Belmont
                                      Avenue
                                      From unnamed street
                                      along the east side
Hiester's Lane    Revising curb       of the East Penn     22-1962   8-29-1962
                  grades              Branch of Reading
                                      Company to Kutztown
                                      Road
                                      Between South
Highland Avenue   Opening, grading    Nineteenth Street    41-1922   8-28-1922
                  and improving       and the east line of
                                      the City
                                      From Nineteenth
Highland Avenue   Vacating            Street east to the   11-1923   3-14-1923
                                      City line
High Street       Opening, grading    Between West Road    23-1923   4-11-1923
                  and improving       and East Road
                                      From Perkiomen
Hill Road         Storm sewers        Avenue to Clymer     60a-1913  3-18-1914
                                      Street
                                      From Clymer Street
Hill Road         Widening            for a distance of    24-1917   5-16-1917
                                      350 feet
                                      From the angle about
                                      800 feet east of
                                      Clymer Street to
Hill Road         Changing curb line  another angle, a     34-1917   6-20-1917
                                      distance of
                                      approximately 750
                                      feet
                                      From Clymer Street
                                      to about Lombard
Hill Road         Sewers              Street in House      57-1917   12-19-1917
                                      Sewer District No. 2
                                      1/2
                                      South of Victory
Hill Road         Changing grade      Place at             120-1928  10-24-1928
                                      intersection of
                                      proposed Haller Road
                  Placing on          From Angora Road
Hill Road         topographical       westward             96-1930   1-14-1931
                  survey              approximately 700
                                      feet
                                      From Angora Road
Hill Road         Opening and grading westward             22-1931   4-8-1931
                                      approximately 700
                                      feet
                                      At intersection with
                                      Clymer Street to the
Hill Road         Improving           intersection of      8-1938    4-6-1938
                                      Twelfth Street and
                                      Walnut Street
                                      On northern sidewalk
Hill Road         Establishing grade  from Clymer Street   50-1952   11-26-1952
                                      to Lombard Street
                                      From a point 320
                                      feet west of Victory
Hill Road         Opening             Place to a point 427 4-1960    1-27-1960
                                      feet west of Victory
                                      Place
                  Placing on          From Northmont
Hoffer Avenue     topographical       Avenue to the        81-1915   2-2-1916
                  survey              northern City line
                                      From Northmont
Hoffer Avenue     Opening             Avenue to the        82-1915   2-2-1916
                                      northern City line
Hoffer Avenue     Opening and grading From Raymond Avenue  51-1931   7-15-1931
                                      to Bruckman Avenue
                                      From Delta Avenue
Hoffer Avenue     Sewers              south to 14-foot     21-1932   4-13-1932
                                      alley
                                      From Crescent Avenue
Hoffer Avenue     Sewers              to 14-foot alley     21-1932   4-13-1932
                                      east of Raymond
                                      Avenue
Hoffer Avenue     Paving and curbing  From Crescent Avenue 34-1934   7-11-1934
                                      to Raymond Avenue
Hollenbach Street Sewers              From Lincoln Street  21-1932   4-13-1932
                                      to Schuylkill Avenue
                                      Between Hessian Road
Holly Road        Opening, grading    and property of      20-1925   4-22-1925
                  and improving       George W. Green, et
                                      al.
Hoskins Place     Catch basins        —                  64-1922   11-22-1922
                  Grading, guttering  Between Perkiomen
Hoskins Place     and paving          Avenue and Haak      74-1924   8-6-1924
                                      Street
Howard Place      Opening and grading From Lehigh Street   77-1924   9-3-1924
                                      to Warren Street
Howard Place      Extending and       To an intersection   33-1939   8-2-1939
                  widening portion    with Lehigh Street
                  Removing from       A portion between
Howard Place      topographical       Warren Street and    33-1939   8-2-1939
                  survey              Lehigh Street
Howard Place      Establishing curb   To an intersection   33-1939   8-2-1939
                  grades              with Lehigh Street
                                      Between Warren
Howard Place      Opening             Street and Lehigh    25-1941   6-4-1941
                                      Street
                                      Between Warren
Howard Place      Revising plans      Street and Lehigh    11-1955   4-20-1955
                                      Street
                  Vacating and        Between Warren
Howard Place      removing            Street and Lehigh    6-1959    4-30-1959
                                      Street
                                      Between Warren
Howard Place      Opening             Street and Lehigh    6-1959    4-30-1959
                                      Street
                                      From a point 105
                  Placing on          feet west of the
Hudson Street     topographical       building line of     26-1945   10-10-1945
                  survey              Second Street to
                                      Pear Street
                                      Southward for a
                                      distance of 153 feet
Huyett Street     Vacating            from the southern    27-1916   4-19-1916
                                      building line of
                                      Bayonne Street
                                      400 Block between
                                      West Buttonwood
Huyett Street     Vacating and        Street and its       3-2004    1-26-2004
                  removing            Northern Terminus,
                                      formerly Bayonne
                                      Street
 
Name Activity Location Ord. No. Date
Name             Activity             Location             Ord. No. Date
Inverness Street Opening and grading  From Baer Street to  77-1924  9-3-1924
                                      Greenview Avenue
Inverness Street Removing from        Between Baer Street  33-1939  8-2-1939
                 topographical survey and Greenview Avenue
Island Street    Vacating             From Water Street to 164-1927 12-21-1927
                                      the Schuylkill Canal
                                      Between Canal Street
Island Street    Vacating             and the Schuylkill   47-1952  10-29-1952
                                      Canal
                 Placing on           From Wyomissing
Ivy Road         topographical survey Boulevard to the     15-1950  6-21-1950
                                      western City line
                                      From Wyomissing
Ivy Road         Opening              Boulevard north to   24-1950  6-28-1950
                                      the City line
                                      From Wyomissing
Ivy Road         Opening              Boulevard northward  27-1951  10-10-1951
                                      to the City/Borough
                                      of Wyomissing line
 
Name Activity Location Ord. No. Date
Name             Activity             Location              Ord. No. Date
Jackson Street   Changing grades      Between Upland Avenue 150-1926 9-8-1926
                                      and Greenway Terrace
Jackson Street   Opening              Between Upland Avenue 42-1954  10-20-1954
                                      and Greenway Terrace
                                      From the northern
                                      building line of
Jackson Street   Vacating portion     Upland Avenue to the  22-1961  9-27-1961
                                      southeastern building
                                      line of New Holland
                                      Road
Jackson Street   Revising grade       Between Upland Avenue 22-1961  9-27-1961
                                      and Greenway Terrace
                                      As located in the
                                      Eighteenth Ward as
                 Revising             bounded by Jackson
Jackson Street   topographical survey Street, Upland        28-1968  6-26-1968
                                      Avenue, St.
                                      Bernardine Street and
                                      Greenway Terrace
                                      At the southwest
Jameson Place    Changing elevation   corner of Jameson     56-1914  8-12-1914
                                      Place and Ritter
                                      Street
                                      From Ritter Street to
                                      a point about 106
Jameson Place    Sewers               feet east of the      39-1919  8-29-1919
                                      building line of
                                      Ritter Street
                                      From the west side of
Jameson Street   Sewers               Ritter Street to      70-1914  9-23-1914
                                      Lincoln Street
Jefferson Street Vacating, abandoning Between Schuylkill    41-1981  8-5-1981
                 and removing         Avenue and River Road
                 Placing on           From Kenhorst
Joan Terrace     topographical survey Boulevard to Margaret 43-1941  9-3-1941
                                      Street
                                      Between Kenhorst
Joan Terrace     Opening              Boulevard and         58-1941  11-5-1941
                                      Margaret Street
Joan Terrace     Placing on           From Parkview Road to 9-1954   3-24-1954
                 topographical survey Parkside Drive South
Joan Terrace     Opening              From Parkview Road to 36-1954  9-29-1954
                                      Parkside Drive south
Joan Terrace     Revising grade       Between Parkview Road 15-1959  7-29-1959
                                      and Lilac Place
Joan Terrace     Revising grade       Between Parkview Road 13-1960  3-23-1960
                                      and Lilac Place
                 Placing on           Between West Green
Johnson Street   topographical survey Street and West       65-1916  10-4-1916
                                      Greenwich Street
                                      Between West Green
Johnson Street   Opening              Street and West       66-1916  10-11-1916
                                      Greenwich Street
                                      From the north
                                      building line of an
                                      alley along the
Johnson Street   Vacating             southern line of the  34-1918  11-13-1918
                                      Excesior Brass Works
                                      of the Lebanon Valley
                                      Railroad
Johnson Street                        Extending to the west
(Extension)      Opening              building line of      27-1979  8-22-1979
                                      Gordon Street
                                      From a point 239.97
                                      feet north of the
                                      north building line
Johnson Street   Vacating portion     of Speidel Street     27-1979  8-22-1979
                                      northward 118.26 feet
                                      to connect with
                                      Gordon Street
                 Vacating and         400 Block between
Johnson Street   removing             Speidel Street and    5-2004   1-26-2004
                                      Gordon Street
                 Vacating and         400 Block between
Johnson Street   removing             Speidel Street and    13-2004  3-28-2004
                                      Gordon Street
                 Vacating and         400 Block between
Johnson Street   removing             Speidel Street and    14-2004  3-28-2004
                                      Gordon Street
 
Name Activity Location Ord. No. Date
Name               Activity            Location             Ord. No. Date
Kathryn Street     Opening and grading From Snyder Street   77-1924  9-3-1924
                                       to Darien Street
                                       Between Snyder
Kathryn Street     Opening             Street and Darien    51-1941  10-1-1941
                                       Street
                   Changing the        Between Lancaster
Kenhorst Boulevard topographical       Avenue and the       22-1925  5-20-1925
                   survey              present southern
                                       City line
                   Placing on          Between Pershing
Kenhorst Boulevard topographical       Boulevard and Old    35-1929  6-5-1929
                   survey              Wyomissing Road
                                       From Lancaster
Kenhorst Boulevard Opening and grading Avenue to Old        66-1929  10-2-1929
                                       Wyomissing Road
                                       From north of
Kenhorst Boulevard Storm sewers        Lancaster Avenue to  82-1931  9-9-1931
                                       Pershing Boulevard
                                       From Pershing
Kenhorst Boulevard Storm sewers        Boulevard to Old     34-1932  4-27-1932
                                       Wyomissing Road
                                       From Lancaster
Kenhorst Boulevard Paving and curbing  Avenue northward to  64-1932  10-11-1932
                                       Old Wyomissing Road
                                       From the southern
                                       building line of
Kenhorst Boulevard Opening             Lancaster Avenue to  12-1941  4-9-1941
                                       the southern City
                                       line
                                       From Station 12+30
Kenhorst Boulevard Improving           to Station 14+64, a  13-1965  3-10-1965
                                       distance of 234 feet
                   Revising            Between Thirteenth
Kenney Street      topographical       Street and           28-1929  6-5-1929
                   survey              Fourteenth Street
                                       Between Seventeenth
Klein Avenue       Grading             Street and           12-1918  5-22-1918
                                       Eighteenth Street
                                       From Seventeenth
Klein Avenue       Sewers              Street to Eighteenth 92-1931  10-7-1931
                                       Street
Kutztown Road      Paving and          From Exeter Street   30-1922  5-17-1922
                   improving           to Hiester's Lane
                                       From Exeter Street
Kutztown Road      Opening             to the north City    65-1931  8-26-1931
                                       line
                                       From Exeter Street
Kutztown Road      Sewers              to the north City    21-1932  4-13-1932
                                       line
                                       At the northwest
Kutztown Road      Curblines and       corner of Kutztown   34-1974  8-15-1974
                   grades              Road and Exeter
                                       Street
                   Establishing new    At the southwest
Kutztown Road      building and        corner of Kutztown   34-1974  8-15-1974
                   curblines and       Road and Hiester's
                   grades              Lane
 
Name Activity Location Ord. No. Date
Name              Activity             Location             Ord. No. Date
                                       Between Kenhorst
Lacaster Avenue   Opening              Boulevard and the    68-1924  8-20-1924
                                       present western City
                                       boundary line
                                       From Schuylkill
Lackawanna Street Opening and grading  Avenue to Warren     77-1924  9-3-1924
                                       Street
                  Changing             From 115 feet east
Lackawanna Street topographical survey of Luzerne Street to 19-1929  4-24-1929
                                       Butler Street
Lackawanna Street Opening, grading,    From Butler Street   38-1932  6-1-1932
                  paving and improving to Luzerne Street
                                       Between Schuylkill
                                       Avenue and Warren
Lackawanna Street Revising curbline    Street to a position 28-1938  9-7-1938
                                       5/10 of a foot north
                                       of and parallel to
                                       its present location
                                       Between Schuylkill
Lackawanna Street Opening              Avenue and Darien    54-1941  10-1-1941
                                       Street
                                       Between Schuylkill
Lackawanna Street Opening              Avenue and Luzerne   22-1944  8-30-1944
                                       Street
                                       Between Luzerne
                                       Street and a point
Lackawanna Street Opening              122 feet 6 inches    43-1946  8-28-1946
                                       west of the western
                                       building line of
                                       Luzerne Street
Lackawanna Street Improving            —                  55-1954  12-20-1954
                                       Between Darien
Lackawanna Street Opening              Street and Warren    9-1956   2-29-1956
                                       Street
                                       Between Carbon
Lackawanna Street Revising grade       Street and           26-1958  8-13-1958
                                       Schuylkill Avenue
                                       Between the east
                                       building line of
Lackawanna Street Removing from        Montgomery Street    24-1966  6-1-1966
                  topographical survey and the west
                                       building line of
                                       Monroe Street
                                       Between the west
                                       building line of
Lackawanna Street Opening              Carbon Street and    26-1966  6-1-1966
                                       the west building
                                       line of Monroe
                                       Street
                                       From Tulpehocken
Lafayette Street  Grading              Street to Little     27-1915  5-17-1915
                                       Clinton Street
                                       At the south
                                       curbline of
Lafayette Street  Grading              Lafayette Street     18-1918  7-10-1918
                                       east of Little
                                       Clinton Street
                                       From the western
                                       building line of
                                       Tulpehocken Street
Lafayette Street  Vacating             westward to the      21-1923  4-11-1923
                                       western building
                                       line of Little
                                       Clinton Street
                                       Between Little
Lafayette Street  Vacating             Clinton Street and   60-1939  12-27-1939
                                       Tulpehocken Street
                                       Between Little
Lafayette Street  Opening              Clinton Street and   60-1939  12-27-1939
                                       Tulpehocken Street
                                       From the west
                                       building line of
Lafayette Street  Opening              Miltmore Street to   26-1970  7-15-1970
                                       the east building
                                       line of Gordon
                                       Street
                  Designating          From Division Street
Lafayette Street  alignment and        to Rosenthal Street  20-1978  5-31-1978
                  opening
                                       From the west
                                       building line of
Lafayette Street  Opening              Second Street to the 21-1978  5-31-1978
                                       east building line
                                       of Pear Street
                                       From the west
                                       building line of
Lafayette Street  Opening              Gordon Street to the 27-1979  8-22-1979
                                       east building line
                                       of Tulpehocken
                                       Street
                                       300 Block between
Lafayette Street  Vacating and         Tulpehocken Street   6-2004   1-26-2004
                  removing             and Little Clinton
                                       Street
                                       300 Block between
Lafayette Street  Vacating and         Tulpehocken Street   15-2004  3-22-2004
                  removing             and Little Clinton
                                       Street
                                       Between Morgantown
Lancaster Avenue  Turn-out             Road and Crestmont   31-1922  8-2-1922
                                       Street
                                       Between Morgantown
Lancaster Avenue  Opening              Road and Kenhorst    67-1924  8-20-1924
                                       Boulevard
                                       Between the western
                  Placing on           end of the present
Lancaster Avenue  topographical survey Bingaman Street      69-1924  8-20-1924
                                       bridge and
                                       Morgantown Road
Lancaster Avenue  Storm sewers         From Grace Street to 79-1924B 8-27-1924
                                       Angelica Street
                                       From 220 feet east
Lancaster Avenue  Storm sewers         of Gerry Street to   79-1924B 8-27-1924
                                       Funston Avenue
                                       From the west end of
Lancaster Avenue  Storm sewers         Bingaman Street      79-1924B 8-27-1924
                                       bridge to Carroll
                                       Street
                  Changing             The south building
Lancaster Avenue  topographical        line of Lancaster    93-1924  11-12-1924
                  intersection         Avenue
                                       From Morgantown Road
Lancaster Avenue  Grading              approximately 295    98-1924  12-24-1924
                                       feet westward
                                       Between Kenhorst
Lancaster Avenue  Opening              Boulevard and the    2-1925   2-11-1925
                                       present western City
                                       boundary line
                                       Between the western
                                       end of the present
Lancaster Avenue  Opening              Bingaman Street      3-1925   2-11-1925
                                       bridge and Kenhorst
                                       Boulevard
                                       From the western end
                                       of the Bingaman
Lancaster Avenue  Paving and improving Street Schuylkill    12-1925  2-11-1925
                                       River bridge to the
                                       present western City
                                       boundary line
Laurel Street     Paving               From Sixth Street to 19-1921  3-30-1921
                                       Seventh Street
                                       Portion of SR 06219-
Laurel Street     Improving            1 from Station 1+39  13-1958  4-30-1958
                                       to Station 6+92, a
                                       distance of 554 feet
                                       From Station 1+39 to
Laurel Street     Improving            Station 6+29, a      21-1958  7-16-1958
                                       distance of 553 feet
                                       From the south
                                       building line of
Lebanon Street    Placing on           Bayonne Street to    64-1914  12-23-1914
                  topographical survey the north building
                                       line of Bayonne
                                       Street
                                       From the south
                                       building line of
Lebanon Street    Vacating             Lafayette Street to  65-1914  12-23-1914
                                       the Lebanon Valley
                                       Railroad
                                       From the south
                                       building line of
Lebanon Street    Opening              Bayonne Street to    67-1914  12-23-1914
                                       the north building
                                       line of Bayonne
                                       Street
                                       For a distance of
                                       153 feet southward
Lebanon Street    Vacating             from the northern    27-1916  4-19-1916
                                       building line of
                                       Bayonne Street
Lehigh Street     Opening and grading  From Howard Place to 77-1924  9-3-1924
                                       Charles Avenue
                  Removing from        A portion between
Lehigh Street     topographical survey Howard Place and     33-1939  8-2-1939
                                       Baer Street
Lehigh Street     Opening              Between Howard Place 23-1941  6-4-1941
                                       and Greenview Avenue
                                       Between Schuylkill
Lehigh Street     Opening              Avenue and Clarion   21-1943  8-18-1943
                                       Street
Lehigh Street     Opening              From Clarion Street  29-1952  6-18-1952
                                       to Wayne Street
Lehigh Street     Improving            —                  55-1954  12-20-1954
                                       From Greenview
Lehigh Street     Removing             Avenue to Charles    53-1955  12-21-1955
                                       Avenue
                  Placing on           From Greenview
Lehigh Street     topographical survey Avenue to Berkshire  53-1955  12-21-1955
                                       Avenue
Lehigh Street     Grading              From Baer Street to  32-1956  5-29-1956
                                       Greenview Avenue
                                       From Greenview
Lehigh Street     Grading              Avenue to Warren     40-1956  7-11-1956
                                       Street
                                       From Greenview
Lehigh Street     Opening              Avenue to Berkshire  11-1957  2-20-1957
                                       Drive
Lehigh Street     Opening portion      From Wayne Street to 40-1957  12-31-1957
                                       Monroe Street
                                       Between Butler
Lehigh Street     Revising grade       Street and           26-1958  8-13-1958
                                       Schuylkill Avenue
                                       Known as Lowrie
Leland Street     Renaming             Street between West  22-1942  7-8-1942
                                       Road and Downing
                                       Street
Lemon Street      Sewers               From Bingaman Street 26-1921  4-13-1921
                                       northward
                  Vacating and         Between Franklin
Lemon Street      removing             Street and Cherry    32-1961  11-22-1961
                                       Street
                  Vacating and         Between Heller
Liberty Street    removing             Street and Gordon    8-1960   2-17-1960
                                       Street
                                       Between Tulpehocken
Liberty Street    Vacating, abandoning Street and the       41-1981  8-5-1981
                  and removing         intersection of
                                       Heller Street
                                       From Kenhorst
Liggett Avenue    Vacating             Boulevard to         37-1928  4-25-1928
                                       Wyomissing Street
                                       From Kenhorst
Ligget Avenue     Opening and grading  Boulevard to         38-1928  4-25-1928
                                       Pershing Boulevard
                                       From Kenhorst
Liggett Avenue    Opening              Boulevard to         5-1949   3-23-1949
                                       McArthur Street
                                       From Hancock
Liggett Avenue    Vacating and         Boulevard to a point 41-1957  12-31-1957
                  removing             1250 feet
                                       northeasterly
                                       Between McArthur
Liggett Avenue    Opening              Avenue and Funston   12-1963  3-26-1963
                                       Avenue
                                       At the intersection
Liggett Avenue    Revising alignment   of Liggett Avenue    29-1974  7-31-1974
                  and grades           and McCellan Street
                                       with Gerry Street
                                       The 900 block of
Liggett Avenue    Vacating and         Liggett near its     21-2021  4-12-2021
                  removing             intersection with
                                       Wyomissing Boulevard
                                       The 900 block of
Liggett Avenue    Realigning           Liggett Avenue and   25-2021  4-12-2021
                                       Wyomissing Boulevard
                                       intersection
Lilac Place       Placing on           From Old Wyomissing  9-1954   3-24-1954
                  topographical survey Road to Joan Terrace
                                       From the easterly
                                       property line of
                                       Butler Street
Limited access    Consenting to        intersecting with
highway           construction         Warren Street,       14-1954  3-17-1954
                                       thence northeasterly
                                       to the easterly City
                                       line with Muhlenberg
                                       Township
                  Reopening and
                  developing to
                  include construction
                  of the street,
                  curbs, islands,
Lincoln Street    sidewalks,           900 Block            56-2023  6-26-2023
                  stormwater
                  management controls,
                  retaining wall, and
                  other related
                  features
Lincoln Street    Sewers               From Jameson Place   70-1914  9-23-1914
                                       to Douglass Street
                                       Between River Road
                                       and the western
Lincoln Street    Vacating             right-of-way line of 11-1927  2-9-1927
                                       the Belt Line
                                       Railroad
                                       Between the southern
Lincoln Street    Opening and grading  building line of     23-1930  4-30-1930
                                       Spring Street and
                                       Robeson Street
Lincoln Street    Opening and grading  From Spring Street   51-1931  7-15-1931
                                       to Robeson Street
                                       From West Robeson
                  Revising curb        Street to 337.5 feet
Lincoln Street    elevations and       south of the south   67-1931  8-26-1931
                  grades               curbline of West
                                       Robeson Street
Lincoln Street    Sewers               From Robeson Street  21-1932  4-13-1932
                                       south 325 feet
                                       From West Windsor
Lincoln Street    Vacating             Street to West       49-1934  8-22-1934
                                       Spring Street
Lincoln Street    Vacating portion     From River Road to   22-1958  9-3-1958
                                       the Schuylkill River
                                       From West Greenwich
Lincoln Street    Opening              Street to West Oley  6-1962   2-14-1962
                                       Street
Lincoln Street    Vacating             As located on Plan   11-1964  4-1-1964
                                       No. 6041
                                       From the north
                                       building line of
Lincoln Street    Vacating             West Spring Street   53-1973  10-24-1973
                                       to the south
                                       building line of
                                       West Robeson Street
                                       From Buttonwood
Linden Street     Storm sewers         Street to 10-foot-   26-1915  5-17-1915
                                       wide alley south of
                                       Buttonwood Street
                                       Between Rosemont
Linden Street     Vacating             Boulevard and the    65-1915  12-1-1915
                                       northern City line
Linden Street     Widening             Between Pike Street  27-1919  6-4-1919
                                       and Union Street
                                       Between Greenwich
Linden Street     Opening              Street and Oley      33-1919  8-29-1919
                                       Street
                                       Between Robeson
Linden Street     Vacating             Street and Marion    50-1919  12-17-1919
                                       Street
Linden Street     Opening              Between Perry Street 53-1922  10-4-1922
                                       and Union Street
                  Opening, grading and Between College
Linden Street     improving            Avenue and Rockland  6-1925   1-28-1925
                                       Street
                                       Between the southern
                                       building line of
Linden Street     Vacating             Oley Street and the  23-1925  5-6-1925
                                       southern building
                                       line of Windsor
                                       Street
                                       From the north
                                       curbline of
Linden Street     Grading              Greenwich Street to  152-1926 9-15-1926
                                       the south curbline
                                       of Oley Street
                                       From College Avenue
Linden Street     Opening and grading  to 88 feet north of  7-1931   3-4-1931
                                       Richmond Street
Linden Street     Sewers               From College Avenue  21-1932  4-13-1932
                                       to Richmond Street
                                       From a point 87.67
                                       feet north of the
                                       north building line
Linden Street     Vacating             of Rockland Street   38-1969  8-6-1969
                                       to the south
                                       building line of
                                       Rosemont Boulevard
                                       Of 1.1 miles of
                                       roadway on Mt. Penn
                                       Reservation,
List Road         Surfacing            connecting Angora    63-1936  10-17-1936
                                       Road to Hill Road in
                                       Lower Alsace
                                       Township
                                       On Mt. Penn
                                       Reservation
List Road         Surfacing            connecting Angora    63-1936  10-17-1936
                                       Road to Hill Road in
                                       Lower Alsace
                                       Township
Little Clinton                         From Lafayette
Street            Grading              Street to Bayonne    27-1915  5-17-1915
                                       Street
                                       A portion from the
                                       southern building
Little Clinton    Vacating             line of Lafayette    21-1923  4-11-1923
Street                                 Street southward a
                                       distance of 12 feet
                                       6 inches
Little Clinton                         Between Bayonne
Street            Vacating             Street and Lafayette 60-1939  12-27-1939
                                       Street
Little Clinton                         Between Lafayette
Street            Opening              Street and           60-1939  12-27-1939
                                       Buttonwood Street
Little Clinton    Vacating and         400 Block between an
Street            removing             unnamed alley and    4-2004   1-26-2004
                                       Lafayette Street
Little Clinton    Vacating and         400 Block between an
Street            removing             unnamed alley and    12-2004  3-22-2004
                                       Lafayette Street
                                       Between Franklin
                                       Street and a point
Little Wunder     Opening              100 feet north of    47-1946  9-18-1946
Street                                 the northern
                                       building line of
                                       Franklin Street
Locust Street     Opening              Between Pike Street  53-1922  10-4-1922
                                       and Amity Street
Locust Street     Sewers               Between Union Street 31-1923  5-29-1923
                                       and Exeter Street
Locust Street     Opening              From Amity Street to 54-1925  10-28-1925
                                       Exeter Street
Locust Street     Vacating             From Pike Street to  150-1928 1-2-1929
                                       Amity Street
                                       Removing part of the
                  Revising             eastern sidewalk
Locust Street     topographical survey between Walnut       33-1956  6-13-1956
                                       Street and Elm
                                       Street
                  Vacating and         From the City line
Locust Street     removing             to a point 360 feet  37-1957  10-30-1957
                                       south
                  Vacating and         Between Exeter
Locust Street     removing             Street and Bern      18-1959  9-30-1959
                                       Street
                                       From Richmond Street
Locust Street     Vacating and         to a point 360 feet  35-1962  12-12-1962
                  removing             south of the
                                       northern City line
Locust Street     Vacating and         From Bern Street to  15-1963  5-15-1963
                  removing             Richmond Street
                                       Western building
                                       line from the
                                       northern building
                                       line of Walnut
                                       Street to a line
                  Revising building    168.45 feet
Locust Street     line, curbline and   northward along with 132-1992 11-25-1992
                  grade                revising the western
                                       curbline and grades
                                       from the northern
                                       building line of
                                       Walnut Street to a
                                       line 128.56 feet
                                       northward
                                       From Kenhorst
Logan Street      Vacating             Boulevard to Baker   37-1928  4-25-1928
                                       Street
                                       Between Kenhorst
Logan Street      Opening              Boulevard and        26-1946  4-17-1946
                                       McArthur Street
                                       From the south
                                       building line of
Logan Street      Opening              McArthur Avenue,     35-1967  11-29-1967
                                       southwest to Cumru
                                       Township/City Line
                                       at Funston Avenue
                                       Between the northern
                                       building line of
Lombard Street    Vacating, abandoning Hill Road and the    18-1983  4-20-1983
                  and removing         southern side of the
                                       first Duryea Drive
                                       crossing
Lorraine Road     Changing elevation   From Bern Street to  50-1925  10-14-1925
                  and grade            City line
Lorraine Road     Placing on           From Perry Street to 191-1927 12-28-1927
                  topographical survey Oak Lane
Lorraine Road     Opening and grading  From Berks Street to 8-1931   3-4-1931
                                       east City line
Lowrie Street     Naming               Formerly known as    22-1942  7-8-1942
                                       Leland Street
                                       From Hampden
Lunden Street     Vacating             Boulevard southward  14-1932  4-27-1932
                                       to Windsor Street
                                       From Mercer Street
Luzerne Street    Vacating             to the northern City 85-1926  6-23-1926
                                       line
Luzerne Street    Changing             From Warren Street   19-1929  4-24-1929
                  topographical survey to Merger Street
                  Opening, grading,    From Lackawanna
Luzerne Street    paving and improving Street to Mercer     38-1932  6-1-1932
                                       Street
                                       Between Columbia
Luzerne Street    Opening              Street and           57-1941  10-8-1941
                                       Lackawanna Street
                                       Between Blaie Avenue
Luzerne Street    Opening              and the Reading Belt 21-1945  8-1-1945
                                       Railroad
                                       Between the northern
                                       building line and a
Luzerne Street    Curblines and grades point 385 feet north 34-1952  7-9-1952
                                       of said building
                                       line
                                       Between Lehigh
Luzerne Street    Revising grade       Street and           26-1958  8-13-1958
                                       Lackawanna Street
                                       Between Columbia
                  Vacating, abandoning Street and the
Luzerne Street    and removing         Conrail right-of-    109-1992 10-14-1992
                                       way immediately to
                                       the south
 
Name Activity Location Ord. No. Date
Name              Activity            Location            Ord. No.  Date
                                      From Bern Street to
Madison Avenue    Sewers              210 feet south of   21-1932   4-13-1932
                                      Bern Street
                  Removing from       Between Bern Street
Madison Avenue    topographical       and Richmond Street 4-1945    2-7-1945
                  survey
                                      From Richmond
Madison Avenue    Opening             Street to Rockland  38-1957   12-11-1957
                                      Street
                                      From 20 feet to 25
Madison Avenue    Widening            feet between Court  90-1984   9-26-1984
                                      Street and
                                      Washington Street
                  Revising curb       Between Court
Madison Avenue    grades              Street and          90-1984   9-26-1984
                                      Washington Street
                  Vacating,           Between Bern Street
Madison Avenue    abandoning and      and Exeter Street   5-1986    1-15-1986
                  removing
                                      Between the
                                      southern boundary
                  Removing from       of lands owned by
Madison Avenue    topographical       Norfolk Southern    67-2007   8-27-2007
                  survey              Corporation and the
                                      north building line
                                      of Richmond Street
                                      From Muhlenberg
Maple Street      Sewers              Street to Culvert   18-1922   3-29-1922
                                      Street
                                      From Culvert Street
Maple Street      Sewers              to Muhlenberg       28-1922   5-3-1922
                                      Street
                                      Between Spruce
Maple Street      Vacating            Street and          54-2010   8-9-2010
                                      Muhlenberg Street
                  Placing on          From Old Wyomissing
Margaret Street   topographical       Road to Wyomissing  43-1941   9-3-1941
                  survey              Boulevard
                                      From East
                                      Wyomissing
                  Placing on          Boulevard southward
Margaret Street   topographical       approximately 470   9-1945    5-2-1945
                  survey              feet to the line of
                                      property of the
                                      Textile Machine
                                      Works
                                      Between Wyomissing
                                      Boulevard and the
Margaret Street   Opening             property line of    6-1946    2-27-1946
                                      the Textile Machine
                                      Works
                                      From its present
                                      southern terminus
Margaret Street   Extension           approximately 652   55-1946   1-8-1947
                                      feet southward to
                                      the center line of
                                      Pershing Boulevard
                                      Between Old
Margaret Street   Opening             Wyomissing Road and 31-1955   7-27-1955
                                      Wyomissing
                                      Boulevard
                                      From Pershing
                                      Boulevard to the
                                      northern property
Margaret Street   Vacating and        line of land owned  14-1958   4-30-1958
                  removing            by the United
                                      States of America a
                                      distance of 620.55
                                      feet
                                      Formerly known as
                                      Sheridan Street
Margaret Street   Naming              between Pershing    97-1994   8-31-1994
                                      Boulevard and Scott
                                      Street
                                      From Twelfth Street
Marion Street     Storm sewers        to Hampden          180A-1926 11-10-1926
                                      Boulevard
                                      Between Twelfth
Marion Street     Paving              Street and Hampden  53-1927   4-6-1927
                                      Boulevard
Marion Street     Storm sewers        From Tenth Street   140-1928  12-5-1928
                                      eastward 135 feet
Marion Street     Opening and grading From Front Street   51-1931   7-15-1931
                                      to Centre Avenue
                                      From Hampden
Marion Street     Vacating            Boulevard eastward  14-1932   4-27-1932
                                      to Sixteenth Street
Marion Street     Sewers              From Fifth Street   21-1932   4-13-1932
                                      to Sixth Street
Marion Street     Sewers              From Center Avenue  21-1932   4-13-1932
                                      to Front Street
                                      From McKnight
Marion Street     Vacating            Street to Weiser    39-1950   11-22-1950
                                      Street
                                      From the west
                                      building line of
Marion Street     Vacating            Centre Avenue to    19-1968   4-17-1968
                                      the east building
                                      line of Front
                                      Street
Master Street     Extending           From Eighth Street  14-1914   4-29-1914
                                      to Peach Street
                                      Between Lancaster
McAdoo Avenue     Opening             Avenue and the      18-1949   6-1-1949
                                      Southern City line
                                      Between Scott
McArthur Avenue   Opening             Street and Logan    38-1949   8-3-1949
                                      Street
                                      From the north
                                      building line of
McArthur Avenue   Opening             Meade Street to the 6-1970    1-27-1970
                                      north building line
                                      of Liggett Avenue
                                      From the south
                                      building line of
McArthur Avenue   Opening             Meade Street to the 9-1971    3-9-1971
                                      south building line
                                      of Gregg Avenue
                  Revising curb       Between Local
McArthur Avenue   grades              Street and Scott    23-1974   6-12-1974
                                      Street
                                      Between the south
                                      building line of
McArthur Street   Opening             Logan Street and    2-1976    1-21-1976
                                      the north building
                                      line of Liggett
                                      Avenue
                                      From Brookline
McCellan Street   Opening and grading Plaza to Wyomissing 38-1928   4-25-1928
                                      Boulevard
                                      From Brookline
McCellan Street   Opening and grading Plaza to Gerry      9-1929    2-20-1929
                                      Street
                                      From Wyomissing
                                      Boulevard southward
McClellan Street  Opening             to the property     36-1954   9-29-1954
                                      line of the Reading
                                      Housing Authority
                                      From Liggett Avenue
                                      northward to
McClellan Street  Opening             property line of    15-1957   4-3-1957
                                      the Reading Housing
                                      Authority
                  Placing on          From Neversink
McIllvain Street  topographical       Street to Neversink 97-1930   1-14-1931
                  survey              Alley
                                      From Neversink
McIllvain Street  Opening and grading Street to Neversink 21-1931   4-8-1931
                                      Alley
                                      Between Windsor
McKnight Street   Grading             Street and Spring   42-1914   9-2-1914
                                      Street
                                      Between Windsor
McKnight Street   Grading             Street and Spring   60-1914   9-2-1914
                                      Street
McKnight Street   Sewers              From Oley Street    26-1921   4-13-1921
                                      northward
                  Opening, grading    Between Perry
McKnight Street   and improving       Street and Pike     17-1924   3-5-1924
                                      Street
                                      From West Exeter
McKnight Street   Opening and grading Street to West Bern 66-1931   8-26-1931
                                      Street
                                      From West Perry
McKnight Street   Opening and grading Street to West Pike 66-1931   8-26-1931
                                      Street
                                      From West Union
McKnight Street   Revising curb       Street to 150 feet
(East)            elevations and      north of north      67-1931   8-26-1931
                  grades              curbline of West
                                      Union Street
                  Revising curb       From West Amity
McKnight Street   elevations and      Street to West      67-1931   8-26-1931
                  grades              Union Street
McKnight Street   Sewers              From Pike Street to 21-1932   4-13-1932
                                      Perry Street
McKnight Street   Sewers              From Bern Street    21-1932   4-13-1932
                                      south 100 feet
                                      From West Pike
McKnight Street   Relocating          Street to West      7-1948    4-28-1948
                                      Union Street
                                      From West Pike
McKnight Street   Vacating            Street to West      6-1951    4-18-1951
                                      Union Street
                                      At the northwest
McKnight Street   Curblines and       corner of McKnight  6-1951    4-18-1951
                  grades              Street and Pike
                                      Street
                                      At the southwest
McKnight Street   Curblines and       corner of McKnight  6-1951    4-18-1951
                  grades              Street and Perry
                                      Street
McKnight Street   Opening portion     From Spring Street  40-1957   12-31-1957
                                      to Robeson Street
                                      From West Perry
McKnight Street   Vacating            Street to West      28-1964   9-23-1964
                                      Robeson Street
                  Vacating,           From West Pike
McKnight Street   abandoning and      Street to West      38-1982   3-2-1983
                  removing            Perry Street
                  Placing on          From Grace Street
Meade Street      topographical       and Carroll Street  155-1927  12-14-1927
                  survey
Meade Street      Opening and paving  From Grace Street   156-1927  12-14-1927
                                      and Carroll Street
                                      From Kenhorst
Meade Street      Vacating            Boulevard to Gerry  37-1928   4-25-1928
                                      Street
                                      From Kenhorst
Meade Street      Opening and grading Boulevard to        38-1928   4-25-1928
                                      Hancock Boulevard
                                      From Brookline
Meade Street      Opening and grading Plaza to Hancock    9-1929    2-20-1929
                                      Boulevard
                                      From Brookline
Meade Street      Opening and grading Plaza to Newport    71-1929   10-16-1929
                                      Avenue
                                      Between Newport
Meade Street      Opening             Avenue and Kenhorst 59-1941   10-15-1941
                                      Boulevard
                                      From Funston Avenue
Meade Street      Opening             to the western City 13-1947   5-7-1947
                                      line
                                      Between Kenhorst
Meade Street      Opening             Boulevard and       33-1955   8-10-1955
                                      Funston Avenue
                                      Between McArthur
Meade Street      Grading             Avenue and Funston  43-1955   9-28-1955
                                      Avenue
                                      From the
                                      southwestern
                  Vacating and        building line of
Meade Street      removing            Carroll Street to   8-1961    5-17-1961
                                      the southwestern
                                      line of Grace
                                      Street
                                      Portion as more
Meade Street      Vacating            specifically        26-2003   8-11-2003
                                      detailed in the
                                      legal description
                                      Between Schuylkill
Mercer Street     Changing width      Avenue and          77-1924   9-3-1924
                                      Montgomery Street
                                      From Schuylkill
Mercer Street     Opening and grading Avenue to Argonne   77-1924   9-3-1924
                                      Road
Mercer Street     Revising grades and From Carbon Street  87-1926   6-23-1926
                  elevations          to Monroe Street
                  Opening, grading,   From Luzerne Street
Mercer Street     paving and          to Schuylkill       38-1932   6-1-1932
                  improving           Avenue
                                      From eastern
                  Revising curb       building line of
Mercer Street     elevations and      Schuylkill Avenue   31-1937   7-21-1937
                  grades              eastward
                                      approximately 75
                                      feet
                                      For approximately
Mercer Street     Grading             75 feet east of     42-1939   8-23-1939
                                      Schuylkill Avenue
                                      Between Schuylkill
Mercer Street     Opening             Avenue and Darien   18-1947   7-2-1947
                                      Street
                                      Between Luzerne
                                      Street and a point
Mercer Street     Opening             130 feet west of    7-1951    3-28-1951
                                      western building
                                      line of Luzerne
                                      Street
Mercer Street     Opening             From Darion Street  11-1957   2-20-1957
                                      to Argonne Road
                                      Between the west
                  Removing from       building line of
Mercer Street     topographical       Monroe Street and   25-1966   6-1-1966
                  survey              the west building
                                      line of Montgomery
                                      Street
                                      Between the west
                                      building line of
Mercer Street     Relocating portion  Wayne Street and    27-1966   6-1-1966
                                      the west building
                                      line of Monroe
                                      Street
                                      From a point 130
                                      feet west of west
                                      building line of
                                      Luzerne Street
Mercer Street     Opening             westerly 602.52     39-1967   12-27-1967
                                      feet to the center
                                      line of a 15-foot
                                      alley between
                                      Allegheny Avenue
                                      and Carbon Street
                  Revising curb       Between Butler
Mercer Street     grades              Street and          17-1974   5-2-1974
                                      Allegheny Avenue
                                      From Wayne Street
Mercer Street     Revising curb grade and Allegheny       27-1974   7-10-1974
                                      Avenue
                                      Between the south
                                      building line of
Mifflin Street    Vacating            Spruce Street and   4-1974    1-23-1974
                                      the north building
                                      line of Pine Street
                                      Between the
                                      southern building
                                      line of Chestnut
Mifflin Street    Vacating            Street and the      3-1977    1-19-1977
                                      northern building
                                      line of Spruce
                                      Street (previously
                                      vacated)
                                      Between the eastern
                                      building line of
Mill Street       Vacating            Seventh Street and  55-1919   12-10-1919
                                      the western
                                      building line of
                                      Ninth Street
Mill Street       Opening             From Robeson Street 62-1928   7-11-1928
                                      to Marion Street
Miltimore Street  Sewers              From River Road to  21-1932   4-13-1932
                                      Oley Street (West)
Mineral Spring                        From Perkiomen
Road              Paving              Avenue to Sixteenth 19-1921   3-30-1921
                                      Street
                                      From Sixteenth
Mineral Spring    Sewers              Street eastward for 26-1921   4-13-1921
Road                                  a distance of 378
                                      feet
Mineral Spring                        From Perkiomen
Road              Sewers              Avenue to Good      26-1921   4-13-1921
                                      Street
                                      From Good Street
Mineral Spring    Sewers              eastward for a      32-1921   5-11-1921
Road                                  distance of about
                                      300 feet
                                      From east of
                                      Eighteenth Street
                                      to Nineteenth
Mineral Spring                        Street and the road
Road              Vacating            connecting          80-1926   5-26-1926
                                      Nineteenth Street
                                      and Mineral Spring
                                      Road with Dengler
                                      Road
                                      From east
Mineral Spring    Plan approval       Eighteenth Street   81-1926   5-26-1926
Road                                  to east Nineteenth
                                      Street
                                      From east of
Mineral Spring    Opening             Eighteenth Street   183-1926  12-15-1926
Road                                  to the eastern City
                                      line
                                      From a point east
Mineral Spring                        of Eighteenth
Road              Constructing        Street eastward     16-1927   2-9-1927
                                      approximately 900
                                      feet
                                      From the eastern
Mineral Spring    Paving              end of viaduct to   132-1927  10-5-1927
Road                                  Mt. Penn Borough/
                                      City line
                                      From Sixteenth
Mineral Spring    Paving              Street to the       185-1927  12-7-1927
Road                                  western end of
                                      viaduct
                                      From Perkiomen
                                      Avenue to 75 feet
Mineral Spring    Improving           east of Sixteenth   60-1932   8-10-1932
Road                                  Street a placement
                                      of a 6-inch
                                      concrete base
Mineral Spring    Revising the        From Hill Road to
Road              topographical       Good Street         4-1947    4-2-1947
                  survey
                                      Establishing
                                      reserve building
                                      lines on the
Mineral Spring    Revising            northern side from
Road              topographical       Good Street to the  2-1949    3-9-1949
                  survey              angle between
                                      Sixteenth Street
                                      and Seventeenth
                                      Street
                                      Establishing
                                      reserve building
                                      lines on the
Mineral Spring    Revising            southern side from
Road              topographical       the angle between   2-1949    3-9-1949
                  survey              Sixteenth Street
                                      and Seventeenth
                                      Street to
                                      Eighteenth Street
                                      From Station 48+82
Mineral Spring    Improving           to Station 80+39, a 41-1966   8-10-1966
Road                                  distance of
                                      3,157.00 feet
Minor Street      Naming              Formerly known as   26-1951   11-7-1951
                                      Plum Street
                                      Between South
Minor Street      Changing grade      Street and New      44-1983   9-7-1983
                                      Canal Street
                                      From Mercer Street
Monroe Street     Vacating            to the northern     85-1926   6-23-1926
                                      City line
                                      Between Warren
Monroe Street     Opening             Street and          13-1955   5-4-1955
                                      Lackawana Street
                                      Between Warren
Monroe Street     Opening             Street and          35-1957   10-16-1957
                                      Montgomery Street
                                      From the north
                                      building line of
Monroe Street     Vacating            Columbia Street to  44-1970   10-7-1970
                                      the south building
                                      line of Lehigh
                                      Street
                                      Between Monroe
Montgomery Street Opening             Street and Blair    35-1957   10-16-1957
                                      Avenue
                                      Between the west
                                      building line of
Montgomery Street Opening             Monroe Street and   21-1965   4-7-1965
                                      the north building
                                      line of Lackawanna
                                      Street
                                      Between the north
                  Removing from       building line of
Montgomery Street topographical       Mercer Street and   23-1966   6-1-1966
                  survey              south building line
                                      of Lackawanna
                                      Street
                                      From Lancaster
                                      Avenue southward
                                      for a distance of
Morgantown Road   Opening             63 feet south of    33-1921   6-22-1921
                                      the southeastern
                                      corner of the
                                      abutment of the
                                      Pennsylvania Avenue
Morgantown Road   Changing alignment  East of Lancaster   30-1923   5-29-1923
                  and grade           Avenue
                                      From Lancaster
                                      Avenue to a point
Morgantown Road   Opening             about 250 feet      42-1923   8-1-1923
                                      southeast of
                                      Lancaster Avenue
                                      From Lancaster
Morgantown Road   Storm sewers        Avenue southward    79-1924B  8-27-1924
                                      approximately 224
                                      feet
                                      From Lancaster
Morgantown Road   Grading             Avenue              98-1924   12-24-1924
                                      approximately 230
                                      feet southward
                                      From Lancaster
                                      Avenue to a point
Morgantown Road   Grading             about 230 feet      11-1925   3-4-1925
                                      southeast of
                                      Lancaster Avenue
                                      From Lancaster
                  Paving and          Avenue to a point
Morgantown Road   improving           about 230 feet      12-1925   2-11-1925
                                      southeast of
                                      Lancaster Avenue
Morgantown Road   Vacating            From Fern Avenue to 95-1927   8-3-1927
                                      Prospect Avenue
                  Placing on          From Fern Avenue to
Morgantown Road   topographical       Prospect Avenue     96-1927   8-3-1927
                  survey
                                      From Prospect
Morgantown Road   Vacating            Avenue northward    187-1927  12-28-1927
                                      approximately 345
                                      feet
                  Placing on          From Prospect
Morgantown Road   topographical       Avenue northward    188-1927  12-28-1927
                  survey              approximately 345
                                      feet
                                      From Belvedere
Morgantown Road   Opening and grading Avenue to Fern      189-1927  12-28-1927
                                      Avenue
                                      From approximately
Morgantown Road   Grading and paving  230 feet southeast  118-1928  10-31-1928
                                      of Lancaster Avenue
                                      to Fern Avenue
Morgantown Road   Changing elevations At Morgantown Road  126-1928  10-31-1928
                  and grades          and Prospect Avenue
                                      From approximately
                                      200 feet south of
Morgantown Road   Stormwater sewers   Lancaster Avenue    70-1929   9-18-1929
                                      southward to Park
                                      Avenue
                                      From Eberly Street
Morgantown Road   Paving and curbing  to Belevedere       34-1930   6-4-1930
                                      Avenue
                                      From a point
                                      approximately 230
Morgantown Road   Paving and curbing  feet south of       34-1930   6-4-1930
                                      Lancaster Avenue to
                                      Summit Avenue
                                      From Belvedere
Morgantown Road   Opening             Avenue to south     43-1932   7-6-1932
                                      City line
                                      From Station 789+00
Morgantown Road   Improving           to Station 820+25,  8-1959    5-27-1959
                                      a distance of 3125
                                      feet
                                      From Station 789+00
Morgantown Road   Improving           to Station 820+00,  14-1959   7-15-1959
                                      a distance of
                                      4,368.90 feet
Morgantown Road   Easement and access Within Parcel ID    6-25-2012 69-2012
                  agreement           No. 530620916265
Morton Place      Vacating            From Hay Street to  37-1928   4-25-1928
                                      Pershing Boulevard
                                      From the north
                                      building line of
Moss Street       Vacating            Rockland Street     55-1916   8-16-1916
                                      north to the City
                                      line
                                      From Washington
Moss Street       Sewers              Street to Court     26-1921   4-13-1921
                                      Street
Moss Street       Catch basins        —                 18-1922   3-29-1922
Moss Street       Catch basins        —                 28-1922   5-3-1922
                                      From Union Street
Moss Street       Opening             to 230 feet north   65-1931   8-26-1931
                                      of Exeter Street
                                      From Union Street
Moss Street       Sewers              to 250 feet north   21-1932   4-13-1932
                                      of Exeter Street
                                      From the northern
                                      building line of
                                      Bern Street to the
Moss Street       Vacating            northern property   40-2013   8-26-2013
                                      line of lands of
                                      Reading Area Water
                                      Authority
                                      Between the eastern
                                      right-of-way line
                                      of Kutztown Road
Moss Street       Vacating            and the southern    26-2020   3-23-2020
                                      right-of-way line
                                      of Norfolk
                                      Southern/Conrail
                                      From the 10-foot
Muhenberg Street  Storm sewers        alley east of       41-1917   6-27-1917
                                      Sixteenth Street to
                                      Sixteenth Street
                                      From the north
                                      building line of
Mulberry Street   Vacating            Rockland Street     55-1916   8-16-1916
                                      north to the City
                                      line
                                      Between Exeter
Mulberry Street   Vacating            Street and Bern     15-1927B  5-18-1927
                                      Street
Mulberry Street   Sewers              From Union Street   21-1932   4-13-1932
                                      to Exeter Street
                                      Formerly known as
Museum Road       Naming              Westside Road, Old  62-1941   10-22-1941
                                      Wyomissing Road and
                                      Old Powder Road
 
Name Activity Location Ord. No. Date
Name                Activity            Location            Ord. No. Date
                    Changing            The west building
New Holland Avenue  topographical       line of New Holland 93-1924  11-12-1924
                    intersection        Avenue
                                        From Lancaster
New Holland Road    Opening             Avenue to present   59-1932  8-31-1932
                                        south City line
                                        Between Jackson
New Holland Road    Revising grade      Street and the west 22-1961  9-27-1961
                                        City line
                                        Between Jackson
                                        Street and the
                                        southeastern and
                                        southwestern City
New Holland Road    Vacating portion    lines and the       22-1961  9-27-1961
                                        proposed new
                                        southeastern
                                        building line of
                                        New Holland Road
                                        From Station 438+50
New Holland Road    Improving           to Station 445+23,  25-1967  8-9-1967
                                        a distance of 673
                                        feet
Newport Avenue      Opening and grading From Gregg Avenue   38-1928  4-25-1928
                                        to Brookline Plaza
                                        From Brookline
Newport Avenue      Opening and grading Plaza to Meade      71-1929  10-16-1929
                                        Street
                                        Between Gregg
Newport Avenue      Opening             Avenue and Meade    50-1946  10-2-1946
                                        Street
                                        From the south
                                        building line of
Nineteenth Street   Paving and          Perkiomen Avenue to 38-1916  4-26-1916
                    improving           the north building
                                        line of Cotton
                                        Street
                                        Nineteenth Street
Nineteenth Street   Connecting          and Mineral Spring  66-1923  11-21-1923
                                        Road with Dengler
                                        Street
                                        From Fairview
Nineteenth Street   Sewers              Street southward    92-1931  10-7-1931
                                        528 feet
                    Paving and          From Washington
Ninth Street        improving           Street to Marion    22-1914  5-27-1914
                                        Street
Ninth Street        Paving and          From Marion Street  22-1914  5-27-1914
                    improving           to Hiester's Lane
                    Paving and          From Washington
Ninth Street        improving           Street to Walnut    30-1917  5-23-1917
                                        Street
Ninth Street        Repairing           As necessary        30-1917  5-23-1917
Ninth Street        Paving and          From Penn Street to 26-1919  5-28-1919
                    improving           Chestnut Street
                                        At the southeast
Ninth Street        Changing lines      corner of Ninth     46-1921  8-17-1921
                                        Street and Exeter
                                        Street
Ninth Street        Opening             From Union Street   65-1931  8-26-1931
                                        to Exeter Street
Ninth Street        Sewers              From Amity Street   21-1932  4-13-1932
                                        to Exeter Street
                                        At the southeast
Ninth Street        Establishing        corner of Ninth     50-1974  11-6-1974
                    curblines           Street and
                                        Buttonwood Street
                                        At the southwest
Ninth Street        Establishing radius corner of Ninth     38-1975  8-27-1975
                                        Street and
                                        Washington Street
                                        Surrounding the
801 North Ninth     Revising curb       proposed Reading    6-2023   1-9-2023
Street              locations           School District
                                        "STEM Academy"
                                        From Lancaster
Noble Street        Opening and grading Avenue to Summit    41-1929  7-17-1929
                                        Avenue
                    Changing curb       From Lancaster
Noble Street        elevations and      Avenue to Gregg     46-1929  7-24-1929
                    grades              Avenue
                                        From Lancaster
Noble Street        Paving and curbing  Avenue to Summit    52-1930  7-30-1930
                                        Avenue
                                        From Lancaster
Noble Street        Opening and grading Avenue to Gregg     33-1931  6-3-1931
                                        Avenue
                                        From Brookline
Noble Street        Storm sewers        Street to Gregg     82-1931  9-9-1931
                                        Avenue
                                        From Lancaster
Noble Street        Paving and curbing  Avenue to Gregg     89-1931  10-28-1931
                                        Avenue
                                        Between Summit
Noble Street        Opening             Avenue and Upland   40-1941  8-20-1941
                                        Avenue
                                        From the south
                                        building line of
Noble Street        Vacating            Upland Avenue to    33-1969  7-16-1969
                                        the north building
                                        line of Orrton
                                        Avenue
                                        As located in the
North and South     Grading             City of Reading's   24-1967  7-19-1967
Eighth Street                           Downtown East
                                        Project No. R184
                                        As located in the
North and South     Grading             City of Reading's   24-1967  7-19-1967
Ninth Street                            Downtown East
                                        Project No. R184
                                        As located in the
North and South     Grading             City of Reading's   24-1967  7-19-1967
Seventh Street                          Downtown East
                                        Project No. R184
                                        As located in the
North and South     Grading             City of Reading's   24-1967  7-19-1967
Sixth Street                            Downtown East
                                        Project No. R184
North Eighth Street Revising alignment  —                 61-1966  11-30-1966
North Eleventh      Sewers              From Union Street   61-1921  12-14-1921
Street                                  to Exeter Street
North Eleventh      Changing curb       Between Bern Street 34-1947  12-24-1947
Street              elevation and grade and Rockland Street
North Eleventh      Changing alignment, Between Rockland
Street              width and grades    Street and north    53-1978  12-13-1978
                                        City line
                                        From a point 230
                                        feet north of the
North Fifteenth     Rerouting           northern building   7-1962   2-14-1962
Street                                  line of Rockland
                                        Street to the north
                                        City line
                                        Between Marion
North Fifth Street  Vacating            Street and Pike     25-1915  5-17-1915
                                        Street
                                        Between Richmond
                                        Street and the
North Fifth Street  Vacating            southern right-of-  179-1926 12-1-1926
                                        way of the Reading
                                        Company
                                        Between Richmond
                                        Street to the
                                        northern City line
                    Placing on          north of Berks
North Fifth Street  topographical       Street and thence   180-1926 12-1-1926
                    survey              from the
                                        southwestern City
                                        line of Northmont
                                        to the northern
                                        City line
North Fifth Street  Improving           From Spring Street  44-1930  6-18-1930
                                        to north City line
                                        Eastern curbline
North Fifth Street  Changing curb       between Elm Street  20-1945  7-25-1945
                    elevation and grade and Buttonwood
                                        Street
North Fourteenth    Grading and paving  Between Pike Street 21-1917  5-2-1917
Street                                  and Amity Street
                                        From the northern
                                        building line of
North Fourteenth    Grading             Green Street to the 10-1965  3-3-1965
Street                                  southern building
                                        line of Greenwich
                                        Street
North Fourth Street Changing lines      Between Oley Street 20-1922  3-29-1922
                                        and Centre Avenue
                                        Western side
North Fourth Street Grading             between Robeson     34-1956  6-13-1956
                                        Street and Spring
                                        Street
                                        From the south
                    Vacating and        building line of
North Fourth Street removing            Berks Street to the 5-1966   2-23-1966
                                        north building line
                                        of Rockland Street
                                        From the north
                                        building line of
North Fourth Street Vacating            Bern Street to the  34-1969  7-16-1969
                                        south building line
                                        of Rockland Street
North Thirteenth    Revising curb       At the Northeast    81-2024  12-9-2024
Street              alignment           Middle School
                                        From the 10-foot-
                    Removing from       wide alley north of
North Front Street  topographical       Buttonwood Street   22-1948  7-7-1948
                    survey              to the Lebanon
                                        Valley Railroad
North Front Street  Revising curb       At the Northwest    81-2024  12-9-2024
                    alignment           Middle School
                                        From Cathedral
North Front Street  Vacating            Street north to the 17-1968  4-3-1968
                                        boundary line of
                                        the City
                    Vacating and        Portion of the 100
North Grace Street  removing            block between Gregg 26-2003  8-11-2003
                                        Avenue
                    Placing on          From Marion Street
North Mill Street   topographical       to Perry Street     7-1949   5-4-1949
                    survey
                                        Between Marion
North Mill Street   Opening             Street and Perry    7-1949   5-4-1949
                                        Street
North Ninth Street  Revising alignment  —                 61-1966  11-30-1966
                    Changing building   Along eastern side
North Ninth Street  line, curbline and  between Douglass    41-1992  5-6-1992
                    grade               Street and Windsor
                                        Street
                                        Between Washington
North Second Street Abandoning          Street and Walnut   49-1957  12-18-1957
                                        Street
                                        Between Washington
                    Widening, revising  Street and the
North Second Street and opening         northern curbline   46-1977  12-21-1977
                                        of the Penn Street
                                        Bridge
                                        From a point 230
                                        feet north of the
                                        north building line
                                        of Rockland Street
                                        to the north City
                                        line and North
North Seventeenth   Vacating portion    Eighteenth Street   7-1962   2-14-1962
Street                                  from Hampden
                                        Boulevard to the
                                        north City line and
                                        Berks Street from
                                        North Fifteenth
                                        Street to Hampden
                                        Boulevard
                                        Between north
North Seventeenth                       building line of
Street              Vacating            Rockland Street and 32-1964  9-30-1964
                                        line 230 feet
                                        northward
                                        Public sidewalk on
North Seventh                           the west side
Street              Vacating            between Washington  31-1958  11-5-1958
                                        Street and Walnut
                                        Street
North Seventh       Revising alignment  —                 61-1966  11-30-1966
Street
                                        From a point 230
                                        feet north of the
                                        north building line
                                        of Rockland Street
                                        to the north City
                                        line and North
North Sixteenth     Vacating portion    Eighteenth Street   7-1962   2-14-1962
Street                                  from Hampden
                                        Boulevard to the
                                        north City line and
                                        Berks Street from
                                        North Fifteenth
                                        Street to Hampden
                                        Boulevard
                                        From the northern
                                        building line of
North Sixteenth                         Rockland Street to
Street              Vacating            its terminus from   68-2005  10-10-2005
                                        the topographical
                                        survey of the City
                                        of Reading
North Sixth Street  Streetlighting      Between Penn Street 1-1935   1-16-1935
                                        and Walnut Street
North Sixth Street  Revising alignment  —                 61-1966  11-30-1966
North Sixth Street  Changing curb       Between Pike Street 14-1969  3-26-1969
                    grades              and Richmond Street
                                        From the north
North Tenth Street  Vacating            building line of    55-1916  8-16-1916
                                        Rockland Street to
                                        the City line
North Third Street  Vacating            From Spring Street  12-1943  7-21-1943
                                        to Robeson Street
North Third Street  Extending           —                 55-1949  12-28-1949
                                        Between Bern Street
North Third Street  Vacating            and Richmond Street 57-1952  12-31-1952
                                        and retaining
                                        rights-of-way
                                        From the north side
North Third Street  Vacating            of Evans Avenue to  6-1954   2-3-1954
                                        the south side of
                                        Charles Lane
                                        From a point at the
                                        northern building
                                        line of Walnut
North Third Street  Grading             Street to a point   35-1955  9-14-1955
                                        at the southern
                                        building line at
                                        Buttonwood Street
                                        From the northerly
                                        property line of
North Third Street  Vacating            the Glidden Company 15-1956  3-7-1956
                                        to the northerly
                                        building line of
                                        Rockland Street
                                        Both sides from
North Third Street  Changing curb       Buttonwood Street   44-1956  8-15-1956
                    grades              to points 545 feet
                                        northward
North Third Street  Opening             From Spring Street  7-1965   2-3-1965
                                        to Robeson Street
                                        From the north
                                        building line of
North Third Street  Vacating            Richmond Street to  5-1970   1-27-1970
                                        the south building
                                        line of Rockland
                                        Street
                                        From Exeter Street
North Third Street  Vacating and        to its southern     12-1979  4-11-1979
                    removing            terminus at Charles
                                        Lane
North Thirteenth    Opening and grading From Spring Street  46-1934  8-15-1934
Street                                  to Robeson Street
North Thirteenth                        Between Spring
Street              Sewers              Street and Robeson  88-1934  1-30-1935
                                        Street
North Thirteenth                        Between Spring
Street              Paving and curbing  Street and Robeson  24-1935  6-19-1935
                                        Street
                                        From Spring Street
North Twelfth       Storm sewers        southward           177-1926 11-3-1926
Street                                  approximately 125
                                        feet
                                        From Douglass
North Twelfth       Storm sewers        Street northward    177-1926 11-3-1926
Street                                  approximately 125
                                        feet
                                        From Windsor Street
North Twelfth       Storm sewers        northward           177-1926 11-3-1926
Street                                  approximately 117
                                        feet
                                        From Oley Street
North Twelfth       Storm sewers        northward           177-1926 11-3-1926
Street                                  approximately 125
                                        feet
                                        From Oley Street
North Twelfth       Storm sewers        southward           177-1926 11-3-1926
Street                                  approximately 100
                                        feet
                                        From Green Street
North Twelfth       Storm sewers        northward           177-1926 11-3-1926
Street                                  approximately 125
                                        feet
North Twelfth       Vacating and        From the City line
Street              removing            to a point 360 feet 37-1957  10-30-1957
                                        south
                                        A portion of the
                                        eastern curbline
                                        between Walnut
North Twelfth       Changing curb       Street and Elm      27-1978  7-6-1978
Street              alignment           Street and
                                        modifying the
                                        sidewalk slope to
                                        the realigned curb
North Twelfth       Vacating,           Between Richmond
Street              abandoning and      Street and Rockland 14-1985  2-27-1985
                    removing            Street
                                        Between the north
North Twelfth       Vacating,           building line of
Street              abandoning and      Rockland Street and 74-1985  9-11-1985
                    removing            a line 330 feet
                                        northward
                    Placing on          From Hiester's Lane
Northmont Avenue    topographical       to City line        81-1915  2-2-1916
                    survey
Northmont Avenue    Opening             From Hiester's Lane 82-1915  2-2-1916
                                        to City line
Northmont Boulevard Vacating            From Hiesters Lane  173-1927 12-31-1927
                                        to Alton Avenue
                    Placing on          From Hiesters Lane
Northmont Boulevard topographical       to Alton Avenue     174-1927 12-31-1927
                    survey
                                        From 14-foot alley
Northmont Boulevard Sewers              south of Bruckman   21-1932  4-13-1932
                                        Avenue north 115
                                        feet
                                        From 14 foot alley
Northmont Boulevard Sewers              south of Alton      21-1932  4-13-1932
                                        Avenue north 130
                                        feet
                                        From Canal Street
                    Vacating and        and its termination
Norton Alley        removing            point approximately 35-1972  8-9-1972
                                        272 feet east of
                                        Canal Street
                                        In the east bank
Nottingham Court    Accepting           area of the         12-2000  7-10-2000
                                        Schuylkill Urban
                                        Renewal Project
 
Name Activity Location Ord. No. Date
Name                Activity            Location            Ord. No. Date
                                        Between Pine Street
                                        and 500 block of
O'Reilly Alley      Grading and paving  Strong Alley and    20-1974  5-22-1974
                                        500 block of Minor
                                        Street
                    Opening, grading    Between Perry
Oak Lane            and improving       Street and Union    42-1924  6-4-1924
                                        Street
                    Opening, grading    Between Union
Oak Lane            and improving       Street and Bern     6-1925   1-28-1925
                                        Street
Oak Lane            Changing elevations From Perry Street   187-1926 12-15-1926
                    and grades          to Pike Street
                    Placing on          From Alsace Road to
Oak Lane            topographical       Lorraine Road       191-1927 12-28-1927
                    survey
                    Placing on          From Lorraine Road
Oak Lane            topographical       to Perry Street     30-1929  6-5-1929
                    survey
Oak Lane            Opening and grading From Perry Street   36-1929  6-26-1929
                                        to Lorraine Road
Oak Lane            Vacating            From Perry Street   45-1932  7-13-1932
                                        to east City line
                    Placing on          From Perry Street
Oak Lane            topographical       to east City line   46-1932  7-13-1932
                    survey
                                        From the south
                                        building line of
Oak Street          Vacating            Cherry Street to    6-1971   2-17-1971
                                        the north building
                                        line of Grape
                                        Street
Old Powder House    Placing on          From Barberry Road
Road                topographical       to western City     137-1927 10-26-1927
                    survey              line
Old Powder House                        From Barberry Road
Road                Opening and grading to western City     143-1927 11-9-1927
                                        line
Old Powder House                        From Barberry Road
Road                Paving              to western City     153-1927 11-23-1927
                                        line
                                        Known as Museum
                                        Road between Old
Old Powder House    Renaming            Wyomissing Road and 62-1941  10-22-1941
Road                                    the Reading City/
                                        Wyomissing Borough
                                        line
Old Wyomissing Road Widening            From Westside Road  138-1927 10-26-1927
                                        to Barberry Road
                                        From Westside Road
                    Placing on          to a point
Old Wyomissing Road topographical       approximately 250   7-1932   3-9-1932
                    survey              feet east of Third
                                        Avenue
                                        From Westside Road
                                        to a point
Old Wyomissing Road Opening and grading approximately 250   8-1932   3-16-1932
                                        feet east of Third
                                        Avenue
                                        At intersection
                                        with presently
Old Wyomissing Road Storm sewers        unnamed street east 34-1932  4-27-1932
                                        of Parkside Drive
                                        south to Wyomissing
                                        Creek
                                        From Kenhorst
                                        Boulevard to
                                        Parkside Drive
Old Wyomissing Road Storm sewers        (South), thence     34-1932  4-27-1932
                                        through West
                                        Reading's
                                        playground to
                                        Wyomissing Creek
                                        From Kenhorst
Old Wyomissing Road Paving and curbing  Boulevard eastward  64-1932  10-11-1932
                                        to the projection
                                        of Third Avenue
                                        From its junction
                                        with West Side Road
Old Wyomissing Road Streetlighting      to a point          39-1933  9-20-1933
                                        approximately 236
                                        feet east of Third
                                        Avenue
                                        Known as Museum
                                        Road between
Old Wyomissing Road Renaming            Westside Road and   62-1941  10-22-1941
                                        Old Powder House
                                        Road
                                        From northeast
                    Vacating and        right-of- way of
Old Wyomissing Road removing            Hancock Boulevard   40-1999  12-13-1999
                                        to a point
                                        northeast
Oley Street         Paving              From Centre Avenue  52-1921  10-3-1921
                                        to Fourth Street
                                        Between Centre
Oley Street         Changing lines      Avenue and North    20-1922  3-29-1922
                                        Fourth Street
                                        From Tulpehocken
Oley Street (West)  Opening and grading Street to Clinton   66-1931  8-26-1931
                                        Street
Oley Street         Storm sewers        With Moss Street    82-1931  9-9-1931
Oley Street         Storm sewers        With Mulberry       82-1931  9-9-1931
                                        Street
                                        From Tulpehocken
Oley Street (West)  Sewers              Street to Clinton   21-1932  4-13-1932
                                        Street
                                        Between Eighth
Oley Street         Opening             Street and Ninth    10-1953  7-8-1953
                                        Street
                                        Between the
                                        southern building
Oley Street         Opening to public   line and the        22-1954  5-12-1954
                    use                 northerly curbline
                                        (Amending Ord. No.
                                        10-1953)
                                        Between Birch
Oley Street         Revising grade      Street and Linden   11-1962  3-28-1962
                                        Street
                                        Between the east
                                        building line of
Oley Street         Vacating            Linden Street and   51-1968  10-9-1968
                                        the east City of
                                        Reading boundary
                                        Between Sixth
Oley Street         Extending           Street and Seventh  10-1972  3-22-1972
                                        Street
                                        The unopened
                    Vacating,           portion from North
Oley Street         abandoning and      Sixth Street        14-1990  2-21-1990
                    removing            eastward to the
                                        opened portion of
                                        Oley Street
                                        Between Union
Olive Street        Vacating            Street and          26-1917  5-23-1917
                                        Pricetown Road
                                        Between Union
Olive Street        Widening            Street and Bern     27-1917  5-23-1917
                                        Street
                    Opening, grading    Between Union
Olive Street        and paving          Street and Bern     29-1917  5-23-1917
                                        Street
                    Opening, grading    Between College
Olive Street        and improving       Avenue and Rockland 6-1925   1-28-1925
                                        Street
                    Placing on          Between Bern Street
Olive Street        topographical       and College Avenue  8-1925   1-28-1925
                    survey
Olive Street        Opening, grading    Between Bern Street 9-1925   1-28-1925
                    and improving       and College Avenue
                                        From College Avenue
Olive Street        Opening and grading to 230 feet north   8-1931   3-4-1931
                                        of Rockland Street
                                        From a point 230
Olive Street        Changing width      feet north of       37-1931  6-10-1931
                                        Rockland Street to
                                        north City line
                                        From Bern Street to
Olive Street        Changing width      a point 230 feet    38-1931  6-10-1931
                                        north of Rockland
                                        Street
                    Changing curb       From College Avenue
Olive Street        elevations and      to 230 feet north   40-1931  6-10-1931
                    grades              of Rockland Street
                    Changing curb       From 230 feet north
Olive Street        elevations and      of Rockland Street  41-1931  6-10-1931
                    grades              to north City line
                                        From Perry Street
                                        southward to a
Olive Street        Vacating            point approximately 14-1932  4-27-1932
                                        420 feet south of
                                        Marion Street
Olive Street        Sewers              From College Avenue 21-1932  4-13-1932
                                        to Rockland Street
                                        From a point 230
                                        feet north of the
                                        north building line
                                        of Rockland Street
                                        to the north City
                                        line and North
Olive Street        Vacating portion    Eighteenth Street   7-1962   2-14-1962
                                        from Hampden
                                        Boulevard to the
                                        north City line and
                                        Berks Street from
                                        North Fifteenth
                                        Street to Hampden
                                        Boulevard
                    Paving and          From Chestnut
Orange Street       improving           Street to Franklin  44-1915  8-10-1915
                                        Street
                                        From Culvert Street
Orange Street       Sewers              to Muhlenberg       18-1922  3-29-1922
                                        Street
                                        From Culvert Street
Orange Street       Sewers              to Muhlenberg       28-1922  5-3-1922
                                        Street
                                        Between East Laurel
Orange Street       Vacating            Street and South    34-1943  12-22-1943
                                        Street
                    Vacating and        Between Cotton
Orange Street       removing            Street and East     13-1957  3-6-1957
                                        Laurel Street
Orchard Road        Opening and grading From Barberry Road  53-1929  8-7-1929
                                        to Westside Road
                    Removing from       Between Museum Road
Orchard Road        topographical       and Old Wyomissing  9-1945   5-2-1945
                    survey              Road
                                        From Richmond
Oriental Road       Opening and grading Street to northern  33-1928  4-18-1928
                                        City line
Oriental Road       Sewers              From Front Street   21-1932  4-13-1932
                                        to Center Avenue
                                        From Centre Avenue
Oriental Road       Vacating            to the northern     55-1949  12-28-1949
                                        City line
                    Placing on          From Northmont
Ormont Avenue       topographical       Avenue to Raymond   81-1915  2-2-1916
                    survey              Avenue
                                        From Northmont
Ormont Avenue       Opening             Avenue to Raymond   82-1915  2-2-1916
                                        Avenue
                                        Between Arlington
Orrton Avenue       Opening             Street and          4-1951   2-28-1951
                                        Crestmont Street
                                        From Morgantown
Orrton Avenue       Opening portion     Road to Arlington   40-1957  12-31-1957
                                        Street
                                        From Cresmont
Orrton Avenue       Opening portion     Street to Pansy     40-1957  12-31-1957
                                        Street
                    Vacating,           Between Pansy
Orrton Avenue       abandoning and      Street and Noble    129-1991 12-18-1991
                    removing            Street
 
Name Activity Location Ord. No. Date
Name                Activity            Location            Ord. No. Date
Palm Street         Vacating            Between Pike Street 51a-1913 3-11-1914
                                        and Pricetown Road
                                        Between Berks
Palm Street         Vacating            Street and the      59-1915  12-1-1915
                                        northern City line
Palm Street         Widening            Between Pike Street 27-1917  5-23-1917
                                        and Bern Street
Palm Street         Opening, grading    Between Pike Street 29-1917  5-23-1917
                    and paving          and Bern Street
                    Opening, grading    Between College
Palm Street         and improving       Avenue and Rockland 6-1925   1-28-1925
                                        Street
                                        Between northern
                                        building line of
Palm Street         Vacating            Oley Street and the 23-1925  5-6-1925
                                        southern building
                                        line of Windsor
                                        Street
                                        From College Avenue
Palm Street         Opening and grading to 230 feet north   8-1931   3-4-1931
                                        of Rockland Street
                                        From a point 230
Palm Street         Changing width      feet north of       37-1931  6-10-1931
                                        Rockland Street to
                                        Berks Street
                                        From College Avenue
Palm Street         Changing width      to a point 230 feet 38-1931  6-10-1931
                                        north of Rockland
                                        Street
                    Changing curb       From College Avenue
Palm Street         elevations and      to 230 feet north   40-1931  6-10-1931
                    grades              of Rockland Street
                    Changing curb       From 230 feet north
Palm Street         elevations and      of Rockland Street  41-1931  6-10-1931
                    grades              to Berks Street
                                        Between Buttonwood
Palm Street         Vacating            Street and Green    11-1932  4-6-1932
                                        Street
                                        From Hampden
Palm Street         Vacating            Boulevard to        14-1932  4-27-1932
                                        Windsor Street
Palm Street         Sewers              From College Avenue 21-1932  4-13-1932
                                        to Rockland Street
                                        From Rockland
Palm Street         Revising grade      Street to Berks     14-1960  3-23-1960
                                        Street
                                        Between the north
                                        building line of
Palm Street         Vacating            Greenwich Street    49-1968  10-2-1968
                                        and the south
                                        building line of
                                        Oley Street
                    Vacating,           Between Walnut
Palm Street         abandoning and      Street and Elm      46-1988  5-18-1988
                    removing            Street
                    Placing on          From Belevedere
Pansy Street        topographical       Avenue to Grace     52-1923  9-19-1923
                    survey              Street
                                        Between Upland
Pansy Street        Opening             Avenue and          32-1947  10-8-1947
                                        Belvedere Avenue
                                        Between Upland
Pansy Street        Opening             Avenue and Orrton   25-1951  8-22-1951
                                        Avenue
                                        From Morgantown
Park Avenue         Opening and grading Road to Angelica    41-1929  7-17-1929
                                        Street
                                        From Morgantown
Park Avenue         Paving and curbing  Road to Angelica    52-1930  7-30-1930
                                        Street
                                        Between Jackson
Park Avenue         Vacating            Street and Reading  3-1950   3-1-1950
                                        Belt Railroad
                                        From the western
                                        building line of
                                        Angelica Street to
Park Avenue         Vacating            the eastern right-  55-1968  11-27-1968
                                        of-way of the
                                        Reading Belt Line
                                        Railroad
                                        From Gerry Street
Parker Avenue       Vacating            to Pershing         37-1928  4-25-1928
                                        Boulevard
                                        From Hancock
Parker Avenue       Opening and grading Boulevard to        38-1928  4-25-1928
                                        Wyomissing
                                        Boulevard
                                        From Gerry Street
Parker Avenue       Vacating            to Wyomissing       3-1951   2-14-1951
                                        Boulevard
Parkside Drive      Opening, grading    From Westside Road  35-1927  3-2-1927
                    and improving       to Evergreen Road
Parkside Drive      Opening and grading From Evergreen Road 53-1929  8-7-1929
South                                   to west City line
                                        South between West
Parkside Drive      Streetlighting      Side Drive and Old  39-1933  9-20-1933
                                        Wyomissing Road
                                        On north side south
Parkside Drive      Changing curbline   from Westside Road  72-1934  11-7-1934
                                        to Evergreen Road
                                        South from
                                        Evergreen Road to
Parkside Drive      Changing width      the City/           33-1947  11-19-1947
                                        Wyomissing Borough
                                        line
                                        South from
Parkside Drive      Opening             Evergreen Road to   33-1947  11-19-1947
                                        the City/Borough of
                                        Wyomissing line
Parkside Drive      Placing on          From Old Wyomissing
South               topographical       Road to Wyomissing  9-1954   3-24-1954
                    survey              Boulevard
Parkside Drive                          From Old Wyomissing
South               Opening             Road to Wyomissing  36-1954  9-29-1954
                                        Boulevard
                                        Between Old
Parkside Drive      Opening             Wyomissing Road to  24-1958  8-13-1958
                                        Museum Road
                                        At the southwest
Parkside Drive      Establishing radius corner of Parkside  28-1975  7-2-1975
                                        Drive South and
                                        Museum Road
                    Placing on          From Old Wyomissing
Parkview Road       topographical       Road to Joan        9-1954   3-24-1954
                    survey              Terrace
                                        From Old Wyomissing
Parkview Road       Opening             Road to Joan        36-1954  9-29-1954
                                        Terrace
                                        Between Old
Parkview Road       Revising grade      Wyomissing Road and 15-1959  7-29-1959
                                        Joan Terrace
                                        Between Old
Parkview Road       Revising grade      Wyomissing Road to  13-1960  3-23-1960
                                        Joan Terrace
                    Placing on          From Old Wyomissing
Parkview Road       topographical       Road northward to   9-1962   3-31-1962
                    survey              the City line
                                        From Old Wyomissing
Parkview Road       Opening             Road northward to   9-1962   3-31-1962
                                        the City line
                                        From Brookline
Patton Avenue       Opening             Plaza to Wyomissing 15-1957  4-3-1957
                                        Boulevard
                                        From Greenway
Paul Street         Opening             Terrace southerly   17-1958  7-2-1958
                                        to the south City
                                        line
                    Placing on          From Greenway
Paul Street         topographical       Terrace southerly   17-1958  7-2-1958
                    survey              to the south City
                                        line
                                        Between Greenway
                                        Terrace and the
Paul Street         Vacating            boundary line of    24-2017  4-10-2017
                                        the City of Reading
                                        and Cumru Township
Peach Street        Storm sewers        From Cherry Street  60a-1913 3-18-1914
                                        to Franklin Street
Peach Street        Revising alignment  —                 61-1966  11-30-1966
                                        As located in the
Peach Street        Grading             City of Reading's   24-1967  7-19-1967
                                        Downtown East
                                        Project No. R184
                                        From the south
                                        building line of
Peach Street        Vacating            Cherry Street to    24-1968  5-15-1968
                                        the north building
                                        line of Franklin
                                        Street
                                        Between Bingaman
Pearl Street        Widening            Street and Willow   52-1922  11-8-1922
                                        Street
                                        From a point 150
                                        feet north of the
                                        north building line
Pearl Street        Vacating            of Franklin Street, 31-1971  10-13-1971
                                        62.35 feet to south
                                        building line of
                                        Cherry Street
                                        Between Washington
Pearl Street        Vacating            Street and Court    63-1977  1-4-1978
                                        Street
                                        Between Amity
Pear Street         Opening             Street and Union    56a-1913 3-11-1914
                                        Street
                    Placing on          Between Amity
Pear Street         topographical       Street and Union    56a-1913 3-11-1914
                    survey              Street
Pear Street         Opening and grading From Amity Street   51-1931  7-15-1931
                                        to Union Street
Pear Street         Opening             From Exeter Street  65-1931  8-26-1931
                                        to Bern Street
Pear Street         Opening and grading From Bern Street to 66-1931  8-26-1931
                                        Richmond Street
Pear Street         Sewers              From Amity Street   21-1932  4-13-1932
                                        to Union Street
Pear Street         Sewers              From Exeter Street  21-1932  4-13-1932
                                        to Richmond Street
Pear Street         Vacating            From Arch Street to 112-1927 9-14-1927
                                        north City line
                                        From Richmond
Pear Street         Opening and grading Street to Oriental  33-1928  4-18-1928
                                        Street
                    Curblines and       Between Hudson
Pear Street         grades              Street and Lebanon  10-1954  3-10-1954
                                        Valley Railroad
                                        Between the south
                                        building line of
                                        Exeter Street to a
                                        point 95.88 feet
                                        south on the west
Pear Street         Opening             building line, and  35-1965  8-4-1965
                                        76.88 feet south of
                                        the east building
                                        line being the
                                        south building line
                                        of a proposed 10-
                                        foot alley
                                        From the north
                                        building line of
                                        Union Street to a
                    Removing from       point 384.60 feet
Pear Street         topographical       north on the west   36-1965  8-4-1965
                    survey              building line and
                                        403.49 feet north
                                        on the south
                                        building line
                                        From the south
                                        building line of
                                        Exeter Street
                                        southward to its
                                        present terminus at
Pear Street         Vacating and        a line intersecting 19-1978  5-25-1978
                    removing            its western
                                        building line 95.78
                                        feet southward and
                                        its eastern
                                        building line 76.88
                                        feet southward
                                        From the southern
                                        side of a 5-foot-
                                        wide alley located
                                        69.2 feet south of
                                        the southern
                    Vacating,           building line
Pear Street         abandoning and      produced of Hudson  28-1981  8-19-1981
                    removing            Street southerly to
                                        the northern right-
                                        of-way line of the
                                        Lebanon Valley
                                        Branch of the
                                        Reading (now
                                        Conrail) Railroad
Penn Street         Sidewalks and curbs Entire length                7-28-1860
Penn Street         Paving and          Where necessary     38-1916  4-26-1916
                    improving
                                        From Tenth Street
Penn Street         Storm sewers        to Eleventh Street  56-1916  8-28-1916
                                        and Perkiomen
                                        Avenue
Penn Street         Repairing           As necessary        30-1917  5-23-1917
                                        From a point 60
                                        feet east of the
                                        east building line
                                        of Fifth Street
                                        westward, and by a
Penn Street         Revising curbline   circular curb to a  5-1938   4-6-1938
                                        projected south
                                        building line of
                                        Penn Street on the
                                        east curbline of
                                        Fifth Street
                                        From a point 60
                                        feet west of the
                                        west building line
                                        of Fifth Street
                                        eastward, and by a
Penn Street         Revising curbline   circular curb to a  6-1938   4-13-1938
                                        projected south
                                        building line of
                                        Penn Street on the
                                        west curbline of
                                        Fifth Street
                                        The southern
                                        curbline from a
                                        point 60 feet west
                    Revising            of the western
Penn Street         topographical       building line of    3-1942   2-4-1942
                    survey              Fifth Street
                                        eastward to the
                                        western curbline of
                                        Fifth Street
                                        From the
                                        intersection with
Penn Street         Improving           Second Street to    24-1954  5-5-1954
                                        the intersection
                                        with Eleventh
                                        Street
                                        From Station 963+54
                                        to Station
Penn Street         Improving           980+02.84 for a     25-1954  5-12-1954
                                        distance of
                                        4,899.54 feet
Penn Street         Revising alignment  —                 61-1966  11-30-1966
                                        As located in the
Penn Street         Grading             City of Reading's   24-1967  7-19-1967
                                        Downtown East
                                        Project No. R184
                                        From the north
                                        building line of
Penn Street         Vacating            Perkiomen Avenue to 50-1969  10-22-1969
                                        the west building
                                        line of Reservoir
                                        Road
                                        A 10-foot portion
                                        along from North
Penn Street         Vacating            Sixth Street to     41-1976  11-10-1976
                                        North Seventh
                                        Street
                    Revising alignment  Between Sixth
Penn Street         and grades          Street and Seventh  40-1977  9-21-1977
                                        Street
                                        The northernmost 60
Penn Street         Vacating            feet between North  47-1977  12-21-1977
                                        Front Street and
                                        North Second Street
                                        Along the northern
                    Revising curblines  and southern sides
Penn Street         and grades          between Fourth      44-1993  5-19-1993
                                        Street and Seventh
                                        Street
                                        From Lancaster
Pennsylvania Avenue Opening             Avenue to the creek 33-1921  6-22-1921
                                        at Brookline Street
                                        From Lancaster
Pennsylvania Avenue Opening             Avenue to Brookline 42-1923  8-1-1923
                                        Street
                                        From Lancaster
Pennsylvania Avenue Storm sewers        Avenue northward    79-1924B 8-27-1924
                                        286 feet
                                        approximately
Perkiomen Avenue    Paving and          From Nineteenth     22-1914  5-27-1914
                    improving           Street to City line
                    Paving and          From Mineral Spring
Perkiomen Avenue    improving           Road to Nineteenth  18-1915  4-14-1915
                                        Street
                    Paving and          From Eleventh
Perkiomen Avenue    improving           Street to Chestnut  26-1919  5-28-1919
                                        Street
Perkiomen Avenue    Catch basins        —                 64-1922  11-22-1922
                    Placing on          On the north side
Perkiomen Avenue    topographical       at Fourteenth       23-1924  4-16-1924
                    survey              Street
Perkiomen Avenue    Opening, grading    At Fourteenth       34-1925  7-1-1925
                    and improving       Street
                                        From Eighteenth
Perkiomen Avenue    Storm sewers        Street to           140-1928 12-5-1928
                                        Nineteenth Street
                    Revising the        From Hill Road to
Perkiomen Avenue    topographical       Good Street         4-1947   4-2-1947
                    survey
                                        Between South
Perkiomen Avenue    Changing alignment  Fourteenth Street   49-1973  9-12-1973
                                        and South Fifteenth
                                        Street
                    Placing on          From Oak Lane to
Perry Lane          topographical       the eastern City    185-1926 12-15-1926
                    survey              line
                    Opening, grading    From Oak Lane to
Perry Lane          and improving       the eastern City    186-1926 12-15-1926
                                        line
                                        From Thirteenth
Perry Street        Storm sewers        Street to Pricetown 60a-1913 3-18-1914
                                        Road
                                        Between Thirteenth
Perry Street        Grading             Street and          27-1914  6-6-1914
                                        Pricetown Road
Perry Street        Storm sewers        From Church Street  41-1917  6-27-1917
                                        to Sixth Street
                    Opening, grading    Between Pricetown
Perry Street        and improving       Road and the east   41-1923  7-3-1923
                                        City line
Perry Street        Vacating            Between River Road  110-1924 3-25-1925
                                        and Weiser Street
                    Changing elevation  From Hampden
Perry Street        and grade           Boulevard to Alsace 48-1925  9-9-1925
                                        Road
                                        From Oak Lane to
Perry Street        Vacating            the eastern City    184-1926 12-15-1926
                                        line
Perry Street        Changing elevations From Lorraine Road  187-1926 12-15-1926
                    and grades          to Oak Lane
Perry Street        Storm sewers        From Fifth Street   77-1930  10-8-1930
                                        to Church Street
Perry Street        Opening and grading From Weiser Street  51-1931  7-15-1931
                                        to Centre Avenue
Perry Street        Sewers              From Center Avenue  21-1932  4-13-1932
                                        to River Road
Perry Street        Sewers              From Fifth Street   21-1932  4-13-1932
                                        to Sixth Street
                    Revising curb       Between McArthur
Pershing Avenue     grades              Avenue and Funston  10-1964  3-11-1964
                                        Avenue
Pershing Boulevard  Vacating            From Sheridan Place 37-1928  4-25-1928
                                        to Parker Avenue
                                        From Sheridan
Pershing Boulevard  Opening and grading Street to Liggett   38-1928  4-25-1928
                                        Avenue
                                        Between Liggett
Pershing Boulevard  Vacating            Avenue and          21-1937  11-10-1937
                                        Arlington Street
                                        From Kenhorst
Pershing Boulevard  Opening and grading Boulevard to        16-1951  6-20-1951
                                        McArthur Avenue
                                        Between Liggett
Pershing Boulevard  Vacating            Avenue and          23-1956  4-18-1956
                                        Wyomissing
                                        Boulevard
                                        From the property
                                        line of Reading
Pershing Boulevard  Opening             Housing Authority   15-1957  4-3-1957
                                        eastward to
                                        McClellan Street
                                        From Kenhorst
                                        Boulevard to the
                                        property line of
Pershing Boulevard  Opening portion     the Reading Housing 40-1957  12-31-1957
                                        Authority,
                                        approximately 130
                                        feet east of
                                        Sheridan Street
                                        From McArthur
Pershing Boulevard  Opening             Avenue to the       17-1962  7-11-1962
                                        southwestern City
                                        line
                                        Between Pricetown
Pike Street         Opening             Road and Fourteenth 21-1914  5-27-1914
                                        Street
                    Opening, grading    Between Linden
Pike Street         and paving          Street and          29-1917  5-23-1917
                                        Fourteenth Street
Pike Street         Sewers              From Moss Street to 18-1922  3-29-1922
                                        Tenth Street
Pike Street         Sewers              From Moss Street to 28-1922  5-3-1922
                                        Tenth Street
                                        Between Oak Lane
Pike Street         Vacating            and eastern City    95-1924  11-12-1924
                                        line
                                        From Thirteenth
Pike Street         Storm sewers        Street to Linden    181-1926 11-10-1926
                                        Street
Pike Street         Sewers              From Fifth Street   21-1932  4-13-1932
                                        to Sixth Street
Pike Street         Sewers              From Center Avenue  21-1932  4-13-1932
                                        to River Road
                                        From the western
                                        building line of
Pike Street         Vacating            McKnight Street to  20-1944  9-13-1944
                                        the eastern
                                        building line of
                                        Weiser Street
                                        From the eastern
                                        building line of
Pike Street         Vacating            North Sixth Street  54-1954  12-15-1954
                                        to the western
                                        building line of
                                        North Ninth Street
                                        From 20 feet west
                                        of an 18-foot-wide
                    Vacating,           alley abutting the
Pike Street         abandoning and      rear of 1334        38-1982  3-2-1983
                    removing            through 1362 North
                                        Front Street to
                                        McKnight Street
Pine Street         Storm sewers        From Third Street   46-1925  8-12-1925
                                        to Fourth Street
                                        From the
                    Changing curb       southeastern curb
Pine Street         grades              corner of Second    1-1955   1-12-1955
                                        Street and Pine
                                        Street
                                        Between the west
                                        building line of
                                        South Third Street
Pine Street         Vacating            445.95 feet         4-1974   1-23-1974
                                        westerly to the
                                        east building line
                                        of proposed South
                                        Second Street
                                        Known as Minor
Plum Street         Renaming            Street between      26-1951  11-7-1951
                                        Spruce Street and
                                        Bingaman Street
Plum Street         Revising alignment  —                 61-1966  11-30-1966
                                        As located in the
Plum Street         Grading             City of Reading's   24-1967  7-19-1967
                                        Downtown East
                                        Project No. R184
                                        From the south
                                        building line of
Plum Street         Vacating            Cherry Street to    61-1970  12-30-1970
                                        the north building
                                        line of Franklin
                                        Street
Poplar Street       Storm sewers        From Walnut Street  140-1928 12-5-1928
                                        southward 220 feet
Poplar Street       Revising alignment  —                 61-1966  11-30-1966
                                        As located in the
Poplar Street       Grading             City of Reading's   24-1967  7-19-1967
                                        Downtown East
                                        Project No. R184
                                        Between Molino
Poplar Street       Change curb grade   Street and Bright   31-1967  10-18-1967
                                        Street
                                        Between a point
                                        183.17 feet north
                                        of the north
Poplar Street       Changing elevations building line of    53-1968  10-23-1968
                                        Walnut Street and
                                        the north building
                                        line of Bright
                                        Street
                                        From Court Street
Poplar Street       Vacating            to Washington       41-1971  11-10-1971
                                        Street
                                        From a line 183.61
                                        feet north of the
                                        northern building
                                        line of Walnut
                    Vacating,           Street to its
Poplar Street       abandoning and      termination;        57-1993  6-9-1993
                    removing            northwardly,
                                        between Bright
                                        Street and
                                        Buttonwood Street
                                        projected
                                        From Clarion Street
Potter Street       Opening             to a point 50 feet  20-1961  8-23-1961
                                        west
                                        Between Thirteenth
Pricetown Road      Widening            Street and Perry    51-1919  12-17-1919
                                        Street
                                        Between Thirteenth
Pricetown Road      Grading             Street and Perry    29-1921  4-27-1921
                                        Street
                                        From Douglass
Pricetown Road      Renaming            Street to the City  84-1924  10-1-1924
                                        limits known as
                                        Hampden Boulevard
Printz Street       Renaming            Formerly Rehr       43a-1913 2-18-1914
                                        Street
                                        From Morgantown
Prospect Avenue     Opening and grading Road to Bartlett    189-1927 12-28-1927
                                        Street
Prospect Avenue     Opening and grading From Hazel Street   134-1928 12-19-1928
                                        to Morgantown Road
                                        From Morgantown
Prospect Avenue     Opening and grading Road to Crestmont   135-1928 11-28-1928
                                        Street
 
Name Activity Location Ord. No. Date
Name               Activity            Location             Ord. No. Date
                                       Known as Cathedral
R-Phils Street     Renaming            Street from Front    21-1932  4-13-1932
                                       Street to Center     39-2024  6-24-2024
                                       Avenue
                   Placing on          From Hoffer Avenue
Raymond Avenue     topographical       to northern City     81-1915  2-2-1916
                   survey              line
                                       From Hoffer Avenue
Raymond Avenue     Opening             to northern City     82-1915  2-2-1916
                                       line
                                       From Delta Avenue to
                                       north City line
Raymond Avenue     Storm sewers        eastward             48-1931  6-3-1931
                                       approximately 80
                                       feet
Raymond Avenue     Sewers              From Hoffer Avenue   21-1932  4-13-1932
                                       north 150 feet
                   Relocating and      Between Delta Avenue
Raymond Avenue     realigning          and the north City   38-1935  9-25-1935
                                       line
                                       On the east side of
Raymond Avenue     Storm sewers        Raymond Avenue at    48-1936  10-3-1936
                                       the City line
Raymond Avenue     Storm sewers        At City line         48-1936  10-3-1936
                                       Between Delta Avenue
Raymond Avenue     Vacating            and the north City   19-1950  7-12-1950
                                       boundary line
Reed Street        Revising alignment  —                  61-1966  11-30-1966
Reed Street        Revising curb       As located in Plan   24-1967  7-19-1967
                   alignment           1182-A
                                       As located in the
Reed Street        Grading             City of Reading's    24-1967  7-19-1967
                                       Downtown East
                                       Project No. R184
                                       Between the northern
                                       building line of
Reed Street        Opening             Court Street and the 25-1978  7-6-1978
                                       southern building
                                       line of Washington
                                       Street
                                       Between the northern
                                       building line of
                                       Court Street and the
Reed Street        Widening            southern building    25-1978  7-6-1978
                                       line of Washington
                                       Street from 20 feet
                                       to 34 feet
Rehr Street        Renaming            Formerly Printz      43a-1913 2-18-1914
                                       Street
                                       Between Nicolls
                                       Street and the
Richards Street    Vacating            right-of-way of the  37-1922  7-26-1922
                                       Philadelphia and
                                       Reading Railway
                                       Known as Windsor
Richard Street     Renaming            Street between       2-1959   3-25-1959
                                       Nicolls Street and
                                       North Eighth Street
                   Opening, grading    Between Twelfth
Richmond Street    and improving       Street and           6-1925   1-28-1925
                                       Fourteenth Street
Richmond Street    Changing elevation  From Alsace Road to  50-1925  10-14-1925
                   and grade           Lorraine Road
Richmond Street    Vacating            Between Front Street 11-1927  2-9-1927
                                       and River Road
                   Placing on          Between Front Street
Richmond Street    topographical       and River Road       12-1927  2-9-1927
                   survey
Richmond Street    Opening and grading From Kutztown Road   81-1927  7-13-1927
                                       to Twelfth Street
Richmond Street    Widening            From Front Street to 115-1927 9-14-1927
                                       Pear Street
Richmond Street    Widening            From Pear Street to  178-1927 12-31-1927
                                       Sixth Street
Richmond Street    Storm sewers        From Kutztown Road   184-1927 12-7-1927
                                       to Twelfth Street
Richmond Street    Opening and grading From Front Street to 33-1928  4-18-1928
                                       Pear Street
Richmond Street    Opening and grading From Birch Street to 7-1931   3-4-1931
                                       Fourteenth Street
Richmond Street    Opening and grading From Twelfth Street  51-1931  7-15-1931
                                       to Thirteenth Street
Richmond Street    Opening             From Fifth Street to 65-1931  8-26-1931
                                       Sixth Street
Richmond Street    Opening and grading From Front Street to 66-1931  8-26-1931
                                       Fifth Street
                                       Known as College
Richmond Street    Renaming            Avenue from          78-1931  10-7-1931
                                       Sixteenth Street to
                                       Hampden Boulevard
                   Changing curb       From Linden Street
Richmond Street    elevations and      to Fourteenth Street 88-1931  10-28-1931
                   grade
Richmond Street    Sewers              From Sixth Street to 21-1932  4-13-1932
                                       Front Street
Richmond Street    Sewers              From Kutztown Road   21-1932  4-13-1932
                                       to Fourteenth Street
Richmond Street    Establishing curb   On the southern side 4-1945   2-7-1945
                   grade               at Madison Avenue
                                       Between Locust
Richmond Street    Changing curb       Street and a point   34-1947  12-24-1947
                   elevation and grade west of Eleventh
                                       Street
                   Changing curb       Between Fourth
Richmond Street    elevation and grade Street and Fifth     43-1949  10-17-1949
                                       Street
Richmond Street    Vacating portion    From River Road to   22-1958  9-3-1958
                                       Front Street
                                       From the west
                                       building line of
Richmond Street    Vacating            Madison Avenue to    13-1974  4-3-1974
                                       the west building
                                       line of North Fourth
                                       Street
Richmond Street    Vacating and        From Centre Avenue   16-1979  4-25-1979
                   removing            to Front Street
Ringler Alley      Vacating and        From Spruce Street   34-1972  8-9-1972
                   removing            to Norton Alley
                                       Between River Road
Ritter Street      Vacating            and western right-   11-1927  2-9-1927
                                       of-way line of the
                                       Belt Line Railroad
                                       From West Douglass
Ritter Street      Sewers              Street north 250     21-1932  4-13-1932
                                       feet
Ritter Street      Vacating            As located on Plan   11-1964  4-1-1964
                                       No. 6041
                                       From West Robeson
Ritter Street      Vacating            Street to West       28-1964  9-23-1964
                                       Spring Street
                                       From the western
Riverfront Drive   Opening,            building line of
(formerly Water    establishing        Front Street to the  6-1974   1-30-1974
Street)            alignment and       western building
                   grading             line of South Third
                                       Street
                                       Between the eastern
                                       building line of
Riverfront Drive   Opening             South Third Street   26-1978  7-6-1978
                                       and the western
                                       building line of
                                       South Fourth Street
River Road         Revising curb       1000 Block           56-2023  6-26-2023
                   alignment
River Road         Grading             From Bern Street to  61-1916  9-11-1916
                                       Rockland Street
River Road         Improving           As shown on the plan 8-1923   2-28-1923
                                       marked BR-14
River Road         Opening             From West Douglass   4-1929   2-20-1929
                                       Street to Bern Road
River Road         Opening             From Front Street to 4-1929   2-20-1929
                                       West Douglass Street
                                       From Gordon Street
River Road         Improving           to east of           62-1929  8-14-1929
                                       Schuylkill Avenue
                                       From Washington
River Road         Sidewalks           Street to Green      72-1929  10-16-1929
                                       Street
River Road         Sewers              Northwest of Bern    99-1929  12-18-1929
                                       Street
                                       From second angle
                                       east of Schuylkill
River Road         Opening and grading Avenue to Spring     66-1931  8-26-1931
                                       Street (West) at
                                       Eckert Street
                                       From West Union
                   Revising curb       Street to
River Road         elevations and      approximately 290    67-1931  8-26-1931
                   grades              feet south of south
                                       curbline of West
                                       Union Street
                                       From Gordon Street
River Road         Sewers              to Spring Street at  21-1932  4-13-1932
                                       Eckert Street
River Road         Storm sewers        South of Richmond    49-1936  10-7-1936
                                       Street
River Road         Storm sewers        South of Richmond    49-1936  10-7-1936
                                       Street
                                       From the end of the
                                       existing 30-inch
                                       sewer, approximately
River Road         Sewers              157 feet west of     38-1952  8-27-1952
                                       East McKnight Street
                                       to a point 299.48
                                       feet northwest of
                                       Richmond Street
                                       From the eastern
                                       right-of- way line
River Road         Vacating portion    of the Reading Belt  22-1958  9-3-1958
                                       Line Railroad to
                                       Bern Street
River Road         Opening             As located on Plan   11-1964  4-1-1964
                                       No. 6041
River Road         Vacating            As located on Plan   11-1964  4-1-1964
                                       No. 6041
                   Widening, revising  Between West Elm
River Road         and opening         Street and Penn      46-1977  12-21-1977
                                       Street
                   Vacating,           Between Jefferson
River Road         abandoning and      Street and           41-1981  8-5-1981
                   removing            Buttonwood Street
                                       (north ramp)
                                       Between Centre
Robeson Street     Grading             Avenue and Fourth    86-1914  12-16-1914
                                       Street
                                       Between Centre
Robeson Street     Opening             Avenue and Fourth    87-1914  1-20-1915
                                       Street
Robeson Street     Grading             From Centre Avenue   88-1914  1-20-1915
                                       to Fourth Street
Robeson Street     Catch basins        —                  18-1922  3-29-1922
Robeson Street     Catch basins        —                  28-1922  5-3-1922
Robeson Street     Opening and grading From River Road to   51-1931  7-15-1931
                                       Weiser Street
                   Revising curb       From River Road to
Robeson Street     elevations and      Weiser Street        67-1931  8-26-1931
                   grades
                                       From Hampden
                                       Boulevard eastward
Robeson Street     Vacating            to a point           14-1932  4-27-1932
                                       approximately 235
                                       feet east of
                                       Fifteenth Street
Robeson Street     Sewers              From Weiser Street   21-1932  4-13-1932
                                       to River Road
                                       Between Fourth
Robeson Street     Sewers              Street and Rose      10-1940  2-28-1940
                                       Street
                                       From eastern right-
                                       of-way line of the
                                       main line of the
                                       Philadelphia and
                                       Reading Railway
Rockland Street    Vacating            Company to the       80-1915  2-2-1916
                                       western right-of-way
                                       line of the East
                                       Penn Branch of the
                                       Philadelphia and
                                       Reading Railway
                                       Company
                   Opening, grading    Between Fourteenth
Rockland Street    and improving       Street and Hampden   6-1925   1-28-1925
                                       Boulevard
Rockland Street    Changing elevation  From Alsace Road to  50-1925  10-14-1925
                   and grade           Lorraine Road
                                       Between East
                                       McKnight Street and
Rockland Street    Vacating            the western right-   11-1927  2-9-1927
                                       of-way line of the
                                       Belt Line Railroad
                                       From East McKnight
Rockland Street    Vacating            Street to Third      112-1927 9-14-1927
                                       Street
Rockland Street    Widening            From Moss Street to  178-1927 12-31-1927
                                       Hampden Boulevard
Rockland Street    Opening and grading From Third Street to 33-1928  4-18-1928
                                       Rose Street
                                       From Fourteenth
Rockland Street    Opening and grading Street to Hampden    8-1931   3-4-1931
                                       Boulevard
                   Changing curb       From Fourteenth
Rockland Street    elevations and      Street to Hampden    40-1931  6-10-1931
                   grades              Boulevard
                                       From Fourteenth
Rockland Street    Sewers              Street to Hampden    21-1932  4-13-1932
                                       Boulevard
Rockland Street    Extending           —                  55-1949  12-28-1949
                                       From the center line
                                       of Rose Street to
Rockland Street    Vacating            the eastern building 15-1956  3-7-1956
                                       line of Centre
                                       Avenue
                                       60 feet wide from
                                       the center line of
                                       Rose Street
Rockland Street    Rerouting           southwestwardly to   15-1956  3-7-1956
                                       the eastern building
                                       line of Centre
                                       Avenue
                                       Between North Fifth
                                       Street and the
Rockland Street    Vacating and        eastern right-of-    16-1957  4-10-1957
                   removing            way line of the Main
                                       Line of the Reading
                                       Company Railroad
                                       At the northwest
Rockland Street    Revising curbline   corner with          7-1963   2-6-1963
                                       Thirteenth Street
Rockland Street    Opening             From Eleventh Street 9-1963   3-20-1963
                                       to Thirteenth Street
Rockland Street    Vacating            As located on Plan   11-1964  4-1-1964
                                       No. 6041
                                       Between east
                                       curbline of Kutztown
Rockland Street    Opening             Road and west        27-1967  9-6-1967
                                       curbline of North
                                       Eleventh Street
                   Vacating,           Between North
Rockland Street    abandoning and      Thirteenth Street    52-1981  11-18-1981
                   removing            and North Fourteenth
                                       Street
                                       Beginning at Rose
                                       Street and Elm
Rose Street        Water pipe          Street, on Rose      51-1915  9-15-1915
                                       Street to Walnut
                                       Street thence to
                                       building
                                       Between Spring
Rose Street        Opening and grading Street and Robeson   32-1919  8-6-1919
                                       Street
                                       From 288 feet north
                                       of north building
Rose Street        Vacating            line of Rockland     112-1927 9-14-1927
                                       Street to north City
                                       line
Rose Street        Opening and grading From Rockland Street 33-1928  4-18-1928
                                       to Oriental Road
                                       From Walnut Street
Rose Street        Storm sewers        southward            140-1928 12-5-1928
                                       approximately 80
                                       feet
Rose Street        Sewers              From Exeter Street   21-1932  4-13-1932
                                       to Bern Street
                                       Between Richmond
Rose Street        Vacating            Street and Rockland  29-1935  7-3-1935
                                       Street
Rose Street        Extending           —                  55-1949  12-28-1949
                                       From the north side
Rose Street        Vacating            of Evans Avenue to   6-1954   2-3-1954
                                       the south side of
                                       Exeter Street
                                       From the northern
                                       building line of
Rose Street        Vacating            Exeter Street to a   28-1954  6-23-1954
                                       point between Exeter
                                       Street and Bern
                                       Street
                                       Between Rockland
Rose Street        Vacating            Street and Berks     6-1955   2-9-1955
                                       Street
                                       From Thirteenth
Rosemont Boulevard Placing on map      Street to the        64-1915  12-1-1915
                                       northern City line
                                       From Thirteenth
Rosemont Boulevard Opening             Street to the        67-1915  12-1-1915
                                       northern City line
                                       From Thirteenth
Rosemont Boulevard Revising grade      Street to the north  14-1960  3-23-1960
                                       City line
                                       To 38-foot-wide
                                       right-of- way from
Rosemont Avenue    Reducing width      North Thirteenth     102-1990 8-8-1990
                                       Street eastward to
                                       the sidewalk area
                   Placing on          From Wyomissing
Rose Virginia Road topographical       Boulevard to west    74-1929  11-13-1929
                   survey              City line
                                       From Wyomissing
Rose Virginia Road Opening and grading Boulevard to west    95-1929  1-8-1930
                                       City line
Route 506          Changing grade      —                  101-1927 8-3-1927
 
Name Activity Location Ord. No. Date
Name        Activity                                                                   Location                                          Ord. Date
                                                                                                                                         No.
St.                                                                                                                                      6-   1-
Bernadine   Dedicating                                                                 Through Angelica Park to Route 10                 2008 28-
Street                                                                                                                                        2008
St.                                                                                                                                      40-  10-
Bernardine  Placing on topographical survey                                            From Greenway Terrace to the southern City line   1948 20-
Street                                                                                                                                        1948
St.                                                                                    Known as St. Bernardine Street between Upland     40-  10-
Bernardine  Renaming                                                                   Avenue and Greenway Terrace                       1948 20-
Street                                                                                                                                        1948
St.                                                                                                                                      98-  10-
Bernardine  Revising curb alignment                                                    Intersection with Morgantown Road                 2023 23-
Street                                                                                                                                        23
St.                                                                                                                                      40-  10-
Bernardine  Naming                                                                     Formerly known as St. Bernadine Street            1948 20-
Street                                                                                                                                        1948
St.                                                                                                                                      40-  12-
Bernardine  Opening portion                                                            From Upland Avenue to south City line             1957 31-
Street                                                                                                                                        1957
St. Francis                                                                                                                              11-  4-
Street      Opening                                                                    Between Greenway Terrace and Upland Avenue        1958 30-
                                                                                                                                              1958
St. Francis                                                                            From the south building line of Upland Street to  13-  5-
Street      Vacating and removing                                                      the north building line of Greenway Terrace       1967 10-
                                                                                                                                              1967
St. George                                                                             From the northern building line of Upland Avenue  22-  9-
Street      Vacating portion                                                           to the southeastern building line of Summit       1961 27-
                                                                                       Avenue                                                 1961
St. George                                                                                                                               56-  11-
Street      Vacating portion                                                           Unopened 300 Block                                2015 9-
                                                                                                                                              2015
St.                                                                                                                                      21-  8-1-
Nicholas    Opening                                                                    Between Upland Avenue and Greenway Terrace        1962 1962
Street
Schuylkill  Eliminating two-way traffic and establishing one-way traffic south bound,  900 Block, southwest side of bridge (known as     56-  6-
Avenue      and providing a “no left turn” at the intersection with Windsor Street “Eberhart Street”)                            2023 26-
                                                                                                                                              2023
Schuylkill  Revising curb locations and alignments, and installing sidewalk between    900 Block, the side street on the southeast side  56-  6-
Avenue      the southeast side bridge abutment and the Northwest Branch Library        of the bridge (labeled “Unknown City Street”) 2023 26-
                                                                                                                                              2023
Schuylkill                                                                                                                               22-  5-
Avenue      Paving and improving                                                       From Front Street to Douglass Street              1914 27-
                                                                                                                                              1914
Schuylkill                                                                             From the north building line of Oley Street to    26-  5-
Avenue      Paving and improving                                                       the Schuylkill Avenue bridge                      1919 28-
                                                                                                                                              1919
Schuylkill                                                                                                                               8-   2-
Avenue      Improving                                                                  As shown on the plan marked BR-14                 1923 28-
                                                                                                                                              1923
Schuylkill                                                                                                                               45-  8-
Avenue      Stormwater sewers                                                          —                                               1925 12-
                                                                                                                                              1925
Schuylkill  Opening                                                                    From the south building line of Blair Avenue to   75-  7-6-
Avenue                                                                                 the present northern City line                    1927 1927
Schuylkill  Paving and improving                                                       From the south building line of Blair Avenue to   76-  7-6-
Avenue                                                                                 the present northern City line                    1927 1927
Schuylkill                                                                                                                               65-  8-
Avenue      Opening                                                                    From Oley Street to River Road                    1931 26-
                                                                                                                                              1931
Schuylkill                                                                                                                               21-  4-
Avenue      Sewers                                                                     From Oley Street (West) to Windsor Street (West)  1932 13-
                                                                                                                                              1932
Schuylkill                                                                             From a point south of Mercer Street northward to  31-  7-
Avenue      Revising curb elevations and grades                                        the northern City line                            1937 21-
                                                                                                                                              1937
Schuylkill                                                                                                                               42-  8-
Avenue      Improving                                                                  At Mercer Street                                  1939 23-
                                                                                                                                              1939
Schuylkill                                                                             From northern building line of Mercer Street to   45-  10-
Avenue      Vacating                                                                   northern City line                                1939 4-
                                                                                                                                              1939
Schuylkill                                                                             From the northern building line of Mercer Street  45-  10-
Avenue      Opening                                                                    to the northern City line                         1939 4-
                                                                                                                                              1939
Schuylkill                                                                             SR 310-15 from Station 114+59 to Station 157+29   3-   1-
Avenue      Improvement s                                                              distance of 4,270 feet                            1958 29-
                                                                                                                                              1958
Schuylkill                                                                                                                               6-   4-
Avenue      Revising grade                                                             Between Avenue "A" and Lackawanna Street          1959 30-
                                                                                                                                              1959
Schuylkill                                                                             Between Walnut Street and North Second Street and 47-  12-
Avenue      Vacating                                                                   North Front Street                                1977 21-
                                                                                                                                              1977
Scott                                                                                                                                    37-  4-
Street      Vacating                                                                   From Sheridan Street to Hancock Street            1928 25-
                                                                                                                                              1928
Scott                                                                                                                                    38-  4-
Street      Opening and grading                                                        From Sheridan Street to Pershing Boulevard        1928 25-
                                                                                                                                              1928
Scott                                                                                                                                    36-  9-
Street      Opening                                                                    From Kenhorst Boulevard to McArthur Avenue        1955 21-
                                                                                                                                              1955
Scott       Opening                                                                    From property line of Reading Housing Authority   15-  4-3-
Street                                                                                 eastward to Wyomissing Boulevard                  1957 1957
Scott       Opening                                                                    From McArthur Avenue to Putman Place              11-  3-9-
Street                                                                                                                                   1960 1960
Scott                                                                                  Between the east building line of Kenhorst        35-  8-
Street      Opening                                                                    Boulevard and the east building line of Sheridan  1966 10-
                                                                                       Street                                                 1966
Scott                                                                                  Between Putnam Place and Funston Avenue within    61-  11-
Street      Revising curb grades                                                       the boundary of the City                          1983 2-
                                                                                                                                              1983
Second                                                                                                                                   22-  5-
Street      Paving and improving                                                       From Court Street to Washington Street            1914 27-
                                                                                                                                              1914
Second                                                                                                                                   51-  7-
Street      Paving                                                                     From Franklin Street to Chestnut Street           1914 29-
                                                                                                                                              1914
Second                                                                                                                                   26-  4-
Street      Sewers                                                                     From Greenwich Street to Elm Street               1921 13-
                                                                                                                                              1921
Second                                                                                                                                   36-  6-
Street      Paving and improving                                                       From Oley Street to Douglass Street               1923 20-
                                                                                                                                              1923
Second                                                                                 From Station 42+74 to Station 53+79, a distance   14-  3-
Street      Improving                                                                  of 1,105 feet                                     1965 10-
                                                                                                                                              1965
Sedgwick                                                                                                                                 38-  4-
Street      Opening and grading                                                        From Kenhorst Boulevard to Liggett Avenue         1928 25-
                                                                                                                                              1928
Sedgwick                                                                               From the east building line of Kenhorst Boulevard 49-  9-
Street      Vacating                                                                   to the west building line of Sheridan Street      1969 24-
                                                                                                                                              1969
Seventeenth                                                                                                                              51-  9-
and One-    Vacating                                                                   Between Haak Street and Klein Avenue              1917 26-
Half street                                                                                                                                   1917
Seventeenth                                                                                                                              39-  8-2-
and One-    Vacating                                                                   Between Klein Avenue and Mineral Spring Road      1922 1922
half Street
Seventeenth                                                                            From the south curbline of Fairview Street to 120 152- 9-
and One-    Grading                                                                    feet south of Fairview Street                     1926 15-
half Street                                                                                                                                   1926
Seventeenth                                                                                                                              18-  3-
Street      Sewers                                                                     North of Perkiomen Avenue                         1922 29-
                                                                                                                                              1922
Seventeenth Sewers                                                                     North on Perkiomen Avenue                         28-  5-3-
Street                                                                                                                                   1922 1922
Seventeenth                                                                                                                              6-   1-
Street      Opening, grading and improving                                             Between College Avenue and Rockland Street        1925 28-
                                                                                                                                              1925
Seventeenth                                                                                                                              140- 12-
Street      Storm sewers                                                               From Haak Street southward 410 feet               1928 5-
                                                                                                                                              1928
Seventeenth Opening and grading                                                        From College Avenue to 230 feet north of Rockland 8-   3-4-
Street                                                                                 Street                                            1931 1931
Seventeenth                                                                            From College Avenue to 230 feet north of Rockland 40-  6-
Street      Changing curb elevations and grades                                        Street                                            1931 10-
                                                                                                                                              1931
Seventeenth                                                                            From 230 feet north of Rockland Street to the     41-  6-
Street      Changing curb elevations and grades                                        north City line                                   1931 10-
                                                                                                                                              1931
Seventeenth                                                                                                                              21-  4-
Street      Sewers                                                                     From Richmond Street to Rockland Street           1932 13-
                                                                                                                                              1932
Seventeenth                                                                                                                              64-  12-
Street      Curbing                                                                    From Fairview Street 125 feet northward           1955 28-
                                                                                                                                              1955
Seventh     Vacating                                                                   From Rockland Street to the old northern City     80-  2-2-
Street                                                                                 line                                              1915 1916
Seventh     Stormwater sewers                                                          From Penn Street to Court Street                  50-  7-3-
Street                                                                                                                                   1929 1929
Seventh                                                                                On east side from Court Street northward to       27-  5-
Street      Improving                                                                  Washington Street, thence eastward on Washington  1935 29-
                                                                                       Street along the bridge approach                       1935
Seventh                                                                                                                                  34-  9-
Street      Opening                                                                    Between Penn Street and Cherry Street             1979 26-
                                                                                                                                              1979
Sheffield                                                                              In the east bank area of the Schuylkill Urban     12-  7-
Court       Accepting                                                                  Renewal Project                                   2000 10-
                                                                                                                                              2000
Sheridan                                                                                                                                 37-  4-
Street      Vacating                                                                   From Gregg Avenue to Scott Place                  1928 25-
                                                                                                                                              1928
Sheridan                                                                                                                                 38-  4-
Street      Opening and grading                                                        From Scott Street to Brookline Plaza              1928 25-
                                                                                                                                              1928
Sheridan                                                                                                                                 71-  10-
Street      Opening and grading                                                        From Brookline Plaza to Newport Avenue            1929 16-
                                                                                                                                              1929
Sheridan                                                                                                                                 16-  6-
Street      Opening                                                                    From Pershing Boulevard to Scott Street           1963 19-
                                                                                                                                              1963
Sheridan                                                                               Known as Margaret Street between Pershing         97-  8-
Street      Renaming                                                                   Boulevard and Scott Street                        1994 31-
                                                                                                                                              1994
Sheridan                                                                                                                                 9-   2-
Street      Vacating                                                                   Located in the 18th Ward                          2011 14-
                                                                                                                                              2011
Sixteenth                                                                                                                                26-  5-
Street      Vacating                                                                   Between Exeter Street and Pricetown Road          1917 23-
                                                                                                                                              1917
Sixteenth                                                                                                                                29-  5-
Street      Opening, grading and paving                                                Between Exeter Street and Bern Street             1917 23-
                                                                                                                                              1917
Sixteenth                                                                                                                                6-   1-
Street      Opening, grading and improving                                             Between Bern Street and Richmond Street           1925 28-
                                                                                                                                              1925
Sixteenth   Opening and grading                                                        From College Avenue to 230 feet north of Rockland 8-   3-4-
Street                                                                                 Street                                            1931 1931
Sixteenth                                                                              From College Avenue to 230 feet north of Rockland 40-  6-
Street      Changing curb elevations and grades                                        Street                                            1931 10-
                                                                                                                                              1931
Sixteenth                                                                              From 230 feet north of Rockland Street to the     41-  6-
Street      Changing curb elevations and grades                                        north City line                                   1931 10-
                                                                                                                                              1931
Sixteenth                                                                                                                                14-  4-
Street      Vacating                                                                   From Perry Street southward to Marion Street      1932 27-
                                                                                                                                              1932
Sixteenth                                                                                                                                21-  4-
Street      Sewers                                                                     From Bern Street to Rockland Street               1932 13-
                                                                                                                                              1932
Sixth                                                                                                                                    22-  5-
Street      Paving and improving                                                       From Walnut Street to Buttonwood Street           1914 27-
                                                                                                                                              1914
Sixth                                                                                                                                    38-  6-
Street      Storm sewers                                                               From Penn Street to Washington Street             1915 30-
                                                                                                                                              1915
Sixth                                                                                  From the northern property line of the American   80-  2-2-
Street      Vacating                                                                   Skale Manufacturin g Company to the old northern  1915 1916
                                                                                       City line
Sixth                                                                                  From the north building line of Chestnut Street   38-  4-
Street      Paving and improving                                                       to the north building line of Bingaman Street     1916 26-
                                                                                                                                              1916
Sixth                                                                                  From the north building line of Oley Street to    38-  4-
Street      Paving and improving                                                       the north building line of Windsor Street         1916 26-
                                                                                                                                              1916
Sixth                                                                                                                                    26-  5-
Street      Paving and improving                                                       From Windsor Street to Spring Street              1919 28-
                                                                                                                                              1919
Sixth                                                                                                                                    65-  8-
Street      Opening                                                                    From Robeson Street to Amity Street               1931 26-
                                                                                                                                              1931
Sixth                                                                                                                                    66-  8-
Street      Opening and grading                                                        From Amity Street to Richmond Street              1931 26-
                                                                                                                                              1931
Sixth                                                                                                                                    21-  4-
Street      Sewers                                                                     From Robeson Street to Richmond Street            1932 13-
                                                                                                                                              1932
Skyline                                                                                                                                  67-  6-
Drive       Easement                                                                   Within Parcel ID No. 5317-02-76-2 194             2012 25-
                                                                                                                                              2012
Snyder      Opening and grading                                                        From Lackawanna Street to the northern City line  77-  9-3-
Street                                                                                                                                   1924 1924
Snyder                                                                                                                                   53-  10-
Street      Opening                                                                    Between Mercer Street and Lackawanna Street       1941 1-
                                                                                                                                              1941
South                                                                                                                                    53-  7-
Eighth      Water                                                                      Between Chestnut Street and Bingaman Street       1916 26-
Street                                                                                                                                        1916
South                                                                                                                                    61-  11-
Eighth      Revising alignment                                                         —                                               1966 30-
Street                                                                                                                                        1966
South                                                                                  Eastern curbline for a distance of 45 feet        35-  6-
Fifteenth   Changing curb grades                                                       northward from the northern building line of      1956 13-
Street                                                                                 Cotton Street                                          1956
                                                                                       Between the west curbline on the south building
South Fifth Revising curb elevations and grades                                        line of Penn Street and a point on the south      30-  9-7-
Street                                                                                 curbline of Penn Street approximatel y 100 feet   1938 1938
                                                                                       west thereof
                                                                                       Beginning at a point 299.82 feet south of the
                                                                                       southern building line of Fairview Street and on
                                                                                       the eastern building line of South Fourteenth and
                                                                                       One- Half Street; thence extending southerly
                                                                                       along the eastern topographical building line
                                                                                       50.08 feet to a point being the southern most
South                                                                                  part of South Fourteenth and One-Half Street on        3-
Fourteenth  Vacating and removing from the topographical survey of the City of Reading the topographical map; thence extending westerly  24-  13-
and One-                                                                               60 feet to the western topographical building     2006 2006
Half Street                                                                            line of South Fourteenth and One-Half Street;
                                                                                       thence extending northerly along the western
                                                                                       topographical building line of South Fourteenth
                                                                                       and One-Half Street 50.08 feet to a point; thence
                                                                                       extending 60 feet easterly to the point of
                                                                                       beginning. Containing in area, 0.068 acres, more
                                                                                       or less
                                                                                       From a point 355.25 feet south of the southern
                                                                                       building line of Fairview Street and on the
                                                                                       eastern building line of South Fourteenth Street;
                                                                                       thence extending southerly along the eastern
                                                                                       topographical building line 173.58 feet to a
                                                                                       point being the southern most part of South
South                                                                                  Fourteenth Street on the topographical map;       23-  3-
Fourteenth  Vacating and removing from the topographical survey of the City of Reading thence extending westerly 60 feet to the western  2006 13-
Street                                                                                 topographical building line of South Fourteenth        2006
                                                                                       Street; thence extending northerly along the
                                                                                       western topographical building line of South
                                                                                       Fourteenth Street 173.58 feet to a point; thence
                                                                                       extending 60 feet easterly to the point of
                                                                                       beginning. Containing in area, 0.23 acres, more
                                                                                       or less
South                                                                                  From the southern building line extended of       42-  10-
Fourth      Vacating                                                                   Laurel Street to the northern building line of    1977 5-
Street                                                                                 Canal Street                                           1977
South Front                                                                                                                              6-   1-
Street      Opening, establishing alignment and grading                                From Penn Street to Franklin Street               1974 30-
                                                                                                                                              1974
South Front                                                                            Between Penn Street and Franklin Street;          50-  12-
Street      Changing alignment, width and grades                                       Riverfront Drive                                  1996 23-
                                                                                                                                              1996
South                                                                                                                                    46-  8-
Nineteenth  Stormwater sewers                                                          From Perkiomen Avenue to Cotton Street            1925 12-
Street                                                                                                                                        1925
South Ninth                                                                            State Highway Route No. 147-10, from Station      43-  8-
Street      Improving                                                                  59+67 to Station 96+25, a distance of 3,658 feet  1956 15-
                                                                                                                                              1956
South Ninth                                                                                                                              61-  11-
Street      Revising alignment                                                         —                                               1966 30-
                                                                                                                                              1966
South Ninth                                                                            Between the south building line of Penn Street    45-  10-
Street      Changing alignment                                                         and the north building line of Cherry Street      1970 7-
                                                                                                                                              1970
South                                                                                                                                    6-   1-
Second      Opening, establishing alignment and grading                                From Penn Street to Riverfront Drive              1974 30-
Street                                                                                                                                        1974
South                                                                                  On eastern side in front of property numbers 39,  23-  5-7-
Seventh     Curblines and grades                                                       41 and 43                                         1952 1952
Street
South                                                                                                                                    61-  11-
Seventh     Revising alignment                                                         —                                               1966 30-
Street                                                                                                                                        1966
South Sixth                                                                                                                              61-  11-
Street      Revising alignment                                                         —                                               1966 30-
                                                                                                                                              1966
South Sixth                                                                                                                              101- 9-
Street      Changing alignment, width and grades                                       Between Penn Street and Cherry Street             1995 20-
                                                                                                                                              1995
South                                                                                  Between the eastern building line of Seventh      55-  12-
Street      Vacating                                                                   Street and the western building line of Ninth     1919 10-
                                                                                       Street                                                 1919
South       Changing alignment, width and grades                                       Between Canal Street and South Seventh Street          
Street
                                                                                       Between proposed Pine Street (also proposed
South Third                                                                            Riverfront Drive) and proposed South Second       4-   1-
Street      Vacating                                                                   Street (Bingaman Street) beginning 530.38 feet    1974 23-
                                                                                       south of the south building line of existing Pine      1974
                                                                                       Street
South Third                                                                            From Spruce Street to a point 530.68 south of the 6-   1-
Street      Opening, establishing alignment and grading                                south building line of Pine Street                1974 30-
                                                                                                                                              1974
                                                                                       From its southern terminus northward to the
South Third                                                                            southern building line of Riverfront Drive from   40-  9-
Street      Reducing width                                                             60 feet to 47 feet by vacating the 13-foot-wide   1978 20-
                                                                                       sidewalk on and along the western side of this         1978
                                                                                       portion
South Third                                                                            The topographical survey located south of         19-  5-
Street      Vacating and removing                                                      Riverfront Drive                                  2003 27-
                                                                                                                                              2003
                                                                                       South of Riverfront Drive 60 feet wide as shown
South Third                                                                            on the partial vacation of South Third Street     34-  4-
Street      Vacating and removing from the topographical survey of the City of reading Plan, prepared by Stackhouse Bensinger, Inc.,     2006 24-
                                                                                       Plan No. 1125-005-A1 .1, dated September 2, 2005.      2006
                                                                                       Containing in area 13,711 square feet
South                                                                                  From Chestnut Street to a point 64 1/2 feet south 6-   4-
Thirteenth  Changing curb elevation and grade                                          of the southern building line of Chestnut Street  1947 16-
Street                                                                                                                                        1947
Speidel                                                                                                                                  78-  11-
Street      Opening and grading                                                        From Tulpehocken Street                           1930 5-
                                                                                                                                              1930
Spring                                                                                                                                   81-  11-
Garden      Placing on topographical survey                                            From Culvert Street to Laurel Street              1929 13-
Street                                                                                                                                        1929
Spring                                                                                                                                   100- 1-
Garden      Opening and grading                                                        From Culvert Street to Laurel Street              1929 15-
Street                                                                                                                                        1930
Spring                                                                                                                                   18-  4-
Street      Paving and improving                                                       From Ninth Street to Tenth Street                 1915 14-
                                                                                                                                              1915
Spring                                                                                                                                   44-  8-
Street      Paving and improving                                                       From Eleventh Street to Pricetown Road            1915 10-
                                                                                                                                              1915
Spring                                                                                 From the west building line of Centre Avenue to   38-  4-
Street      Paving and improving                                                       50 feet west of the west building line of Front   1916 26-
                                                                                       Street                                                 1916
Spring                                                                                 From the west building line of Sixth Street to    38-  4-
Street      Paving and improving                                                       the east building line of Rose Street             1916 26-
                                                                                                                                              1916
Spring                                                                                                                                   19-  3-
Street      Paving                                                                     From Rose Street to Centre Avenue                 1921 30-
                                                                                                                                              1921
Spring                                                                                                                                   23-  4-
Street      Opening and grading                                                        Between River Road and Lincoln Street             1930 30-
                                                                                                                                              1930
Spring                                                                                                                                   51-  7-
Street      Opening and grading                                                        From River Road to McKnight Street                1931 15-
                                                                                                                                              1931
Spring                                                                                 From Hampden Boulevard eastward to Fifteenth      14-  4-
Street      Vacating                                                                   Street                                            1932 27-
                                                                                                                                              1932
Spring                                                                                                                                   21-  4-
Street      Sewers                                                                     From McKnight Street to River Road                1932 13-
                                                                                                                                              1932
Spring      Improving                                                                  From Eighth Street to Ninth Street                27-  5-2-
Street                                                                                                                                   1934 1934
Spring                                                                                                                                   12-  4-
Street      Revising curb grade                                                        Between Centre Avenue and Eighth Street           1962 25-
                                                                                                                                              1962
Spring                                                                                 From Station 0+00 to Station 23+78, distance of   14-  4-
Street      Improving                                                                  2,378 feet                                        1963 17-
                                                                                                                                              1963
Spring                                                                                 From the intersection with Centre Avenue at       29-  6-
Street      Improving                                                                  Station 0+26 to the intersection with Eighth      1965 16-
                                                                                       Street at Station 35+20                                1965
Spruce                                                                                                                                   22-  5-
Street      Paving and improving                                                       From Front Street to Second Street                1914 27-
                                                                                                                                              1914
Spruce                                                                                                                                   18-  4-
Street      Paving and improving                                                       From Second Street to Third Street                1915 14-
                                                                                                                                              1915
Spruce                                                                                                                                   19-  3-
Street      Paving                                                                     From Third Street to Fifth Street                 1921 30-
                                                                                                                                              1921
Spruce                                                                                                                                   46-  8-
Street      Stormwater sewers                                                          From Third Street to Fourth Street                1925 12-
                                                                                                                                              1925
Spruce                                                                                                                                   140- 12-
Street      Storm sewers                                                               From Tenth Street westward approximately 120 feet 1928 5-
                                                                                                                                              1928
Spruce                                                                                                                                   140- 12-
Street      Storm sewers                                                               From Tenth Street eastward approximately 360 feet 1928 5-
                                                                                                                                              1928
Spruce                                                                                                                                   140- 12-
Street      Storm sewers                                                               From Ninth Street to Orange Street                1928 5-
                                                                                                                                              1928
Spruce                                                                                 From the western building line of Canal Street to 43-  10-
Street      Vacating and removing                                                      its terminus at the east bank of the Schuylkill   1972 18-
                                                                                       River                                                  1972
Spruce                                                                                                                                   6-   1-
Street      Opening, establishing alignment and grading                                From South Third Street to Canal Street           1974 30-
                                                                                                                                              1974
Spruce                                                                                 Between the eastern building line of South Second 56-  12-
Street      Vacating                                                                   Street and a line 8 feet west of the western side 1977 21-
                                                                                       of Biddle Alley extended                               1977
                                                                                       From approximately 305 feet south of the
                                                                                       intersection with Lincoln Street at Station       14-  3-
SR 160      Improving                                                                  140+00 to approximately 150 north of the          1957 20-
                                                                                       intersection with Cleveland Avenue at Station          1957
                                                                                       167+16.07
State                                                                                  From Station 60+12 to Station 117+15, Station
Highway     Improving                                                                  118+75 to Station 123+36.50, a distance of        8-   2-3-
Route No.                                                                              6,164.50 feet                                     1965 1965
157
Stephen's                                                                              A 10-foot-wide alley, from Minor Street east to   28-  6-
Court       Grading and paving                                                         an unnamed alley                                  1972 14-
                                                                                                                                              1972
Stephen's                                                                              A 10-foot-wide alley, from Bell Alley to Minor    28-  6-
Court       Grading and paving                                                         Street                                            1972 14-
                                                                                                                                              1972
Steuben                                                                                Between Hill Road and property of Charles W. and  20-  4-
Road        Opening, grading and improving                                             George W. Benz                                    1925 22-
                                                                                                                                              1925
Steuben                                                                                From a point approximately 620 feet east of Hill  181- 12-
Road        Placing on topographical survey                                            Road eastward approximately 320.22 feet           1927 31-
                                                                                                                                              1927
Steuben                                                                                From a point of curvature approximately 390 feet  23-  4-4-
Road        Vacating                                                                   west of the stone at the southeast corner of Hill 1928 1928
                                                                                       Road and Steuben Road to Trooper Road
Steuben                                                                                                                                  40-  12-
Road        Opening portion                                                            East of Hill Road to east of Trooper Road         1957 31-
                                                                                                                                              1957
Stiegel     Vacating                                                                   From the southwestern property line of Hessian    23-  4-4-
Road                                                                                   Camp Addition No. 2 to Trooper Road               1928 1928
Stiegel     Vacating                                                                   Between Hill Road and Trooper Road                31-  7-3-
Road                                                                                                                                     1973 1973
Summit                                                                                                                                   41-  7-
Avenue      Opening and grading                                                        From Morgantown Road to Angelica Street           1929 17-
                                                                                                                                              1929
Summit                                                                                                                                   52-  7-
Avenue      Paving and curbing                                                         From Morgantown Road to Angelica Street           1930 30-
                                                                                                                                              1930
Summit                                                                                 From the southwestern right-of-way line of the    22-  9-
Avenue      Vacating portion                                                           Belt Line Branch of the Reading Company to the    1961 27-
                                                                                       northern building line of Upland Avenue                1961
                                                                                       From a line 360 feet west of the westerly
Summit      Vacating                                                                   building line of Noble Street westward to its     27-  8-3-
Avenue                                                                                 terminus at the eastern right-of-way line of the  1977 1977
                                                                                       Reading Railroad Belt Line Railroad (now Conrail)
Summit                                                                                 A cul-de-sac street, between its eastern terminus 31-  7-
Chase Drive Opening                                                                    and the southern building line of Joan Terrace    1978 26-
                                                                                                                                              1978
Sycamore                                                                                                                                 33-  4-
Road        Opening and grading                                                        From Front Street to Oriental Road                1928 18-
                                                                                                                                              1928
Sycamore                                                                                                                                 21-  4-
Road        Sewers                                                                     From Front Street to Oriental Road                1932 13-
                                                                                                                                              1932
                                                                                       From the east building line of Front Street to         2-
Sycamore    Vacating                                                                   the north building line of South Oriental line of 10-  28-
Road                                                                                   Richmond Street to the west building line of      1968 1967
                                                                                       Centre Avenue
 
Name Activity Location Ord. No. Date
Name               Activity            Location             Ord. No. Date
Tenth Street       Paving and          —                  18-1915  4-14-1915
                   improving
                                       From the north
                   Paving and          building line of
Tenth Street       improving           Walnut Street to the 38-1916  4-26-1916
                                       north building line
                                       of Spring Street
                                       From Spring Street
Tenth Street       Paving and          to the north         26-1919  5-28-1919
                   improving           building line of
                                       Robeson Street
Tenth Street       Paving              From Robeson Street  19-1921  3-30-1921
                                       to Pike Street
Tenth Street       Opening             Between Amity Street 53-1922  10-4-1922
                                       and Pike Street
Tenth Street       Paving and          From Pike Street to  36-1923  6-20-1923
                   improving           Amity Street
Tenth Street       Opening             From Exeter Street   6-1924   2-27-1924
                                       to Bern Street
Tenth Street       Opening and grading From Exeter Street   51-1931  7-15-1931
                                       to Richmond Street
Tenth Street       Opening             From Union Street to 65-1931  8-26-1931
                                       Exeter Street
Tenth Street       Sewers              From Union Street to 21-1932  4-13-1932
                                       Richmond Street
                                       East side between
Tenth Street       Changing curbline   Spruce Street and    107-2010 12-27-2010
                                       Muhlenberg Street
                                       At the northwest
Third Street       Changing elevation  corner of Third      53-1914  8-5-1914
                                       Street and Bern
                                       Street
                                       Between Douglass
Third Street       Sidewalks           Street and Centre    80-1914  11-18-1914
                                       Avenue
                                       From the south
Third Street       Paving and          building line of     38-1916  4-26-1916
                   improving           Spruce Street to
                                       Canal Street
                                       From the north
                                       building line of
Third Street       Paving and          Washington Street to 38-1916  4-26-1916
                   improving           the south building
                                       line of Buttonwood
                                       Street
Third Street       Repairing           As necessary         30-1917  5-23-1917
                                       From Buttonwood
Third Street       Paving and          Street to the siding 26-1919  5-28-1919
                   improving           of West Reading
                                       Railroad
Third Street       Paving and          From Court Street to 26-1919  5-28-1919
                   improving           Walnut Street
                   Grading, opening    Between Spring
Third Street       and improving       Street and Robeson   27-1921  4-20-1921
                                       Street
Third Street       Paving and          From Douglass Street 30-1922  5-17-1922
                   improving           to Windsor Street
Third Street       Vacating            From Rockland Street 112-1927 9-14-1927
                                       to north City line
                                       From Oriental Road
Third Street       Opening and grading to a point 195 feet  33-1928  4-18-1928
                                       south of Oriental
                                       Road
Third Street       Opening and grading From Bern Street to  66-1931  8-26-1931
                                       Richmond Street
Third Street       Sewers              From Exeter Street   21-1932  4-13-1932
                                       to Richmond Street
Third Street       Vacating            From Oriental Road   55-1949  12-28-1949
                                       to Rockland Street
                                       Between Rockland
Third Street       Vacating            Street and Berks     6-1955   2-9-1955
                                       Street
Third Street       Opening             From Berks Street to 9-1958   4-23-1958
                                       north City Line
Third Street       Grading             Between Berks Street 9-1958   4-23-1958
                                       and north City line
Third Street       Changing grades     In accordance with   3-1972   1-26-1972
                                       Plan 5835
Thirteenth Street  Opening             From Richmond Street 49-1914  9-2-1914
                                       to City line
                                       Between the western
                                       building line of
                                       Thirteenth Street,
                                       the northern City
Thirteenth Street  Changing lines and  line, the western    62-1915  12-1-1915
                   grades              building line of
                                       Palm Street and the
                                       northern building
                                       line of Rockland
                                       Street
                                       Between Douglass
Thirteenth Street  Opening             Street and Hampden   34-1919  8-29-1919
                                       Street
Thirteenth Street  Sewers              Between Union Street 31-1923  5-29-1923
                                       and Exeter Street
                                       In the vicinity of
Thirteenth Street  Changing elevations Thirteenth Street    33-1924  4-23-1924
                                       and Bern Street
Thirteenth Street  Opening, grading    Between Bern Street  6-1925   1-28-1925
                   and improving       and Richmond Street
Thirteenth Street  Paving              From Union Street    178-1926 11-3-1926
                                       and Bern Street
Thirteenth Street  Grading and paving  From Pike Street to  68-1927  5-18-1927
                                       Union Street
Thirteenth Street  Grading             From Douglass Street 102-1927 8-10-1927
                                       to Hampden Boulevard
Thirteenth Street  Grading and paving  Amending Ord. No.    125-1927 9-28-1927
                                       68-1927
                                       From Windsor Street
Thirteenth Street  Stormwater sewers   northward            50-1929  7-3-1929
                                       approximately 200
                                       feet
                                       From the north
                                       building line of
Thirteenth Street  Paving and curbing  Douglass Street to   80-1929  11-13-1929
                                       the north building
                                       line of Windsor
                                       Street
                                       From north building
                                       line of Douglass
Thirteenth Street  Paving and curbing  Street to north      101-1929 5-14-1930
                                       building line of
                                       Windsor Street
                                       Between Robeson
Thirteenth Street  Grading and paving  Street and Marion    39-1930  6-18-1930
                                       Street
Thirteenth Street  Storm sewers        From Spruce Street   77-1930  10-8-1930
                                       to Muhlenburg Street
Thirteenth Street  Opening and grading From Bern Street to  8-1931   3-4-1931
                                       Richmond Street
Thirteenth Street  Sewers              From Bern Street to  21-1932  4-13-1932
                                       Richmond Street
Thirteenth Street  Opening and grading From Windsor Street  62-1932  9-28-1932
                                       to Robeson Street
                                       From Rockland Street
Thirteenth Street  Revising grade      to the north City    14-1960  3-23-1960
                                       line
                                       Between Walnut
Thirteenth Street  Revising grade      Street and Windsor   11-1962  3-28-1962
                                       Street
                                       At the northwest
Thirteenth Street  Revising curbline   corner with Rockland 7-1963   2-6-1963
                                       Street
                                       From 50 feet south
                                       of south building
Thorn Street       Vacating            line of Rockland     112-1927 9-14-1927
                                       Street to north City
                                       line
                                       From Oriental Road
Thorn Street       Opening and grading to a point 175 feet  33-1928  4-18-1928
                                       south of Oriental
                                       Road
Thorn Street       Opening             From Exeter Street   65-1931  8-26-1931
                                       to Bern Street
Thorn Street       Opening and grading From Bern Street to  66-1931  8-26-1931
                                       Richmond Street
Thorn Street       Opening and grading From Evans Avenue to 66-1931  8-26-1931
                                       Exeter Street
                                       From the north
                                       building line of
                                       Buttonwood Street to
Thorn Street       Vacating            the north right-of-  94-1931  11-18-1931
                                       way line of the
                                       Lebanon Valley
                                       Branch of Reading
                                       Company
Thorn Street       Sewers              From Evans Avenue to 21-1932  4-13-1932
                                       Richmond Street
Thorn Street       Extending           —                  55-1949  12-28-1949
                                       Eastern and western
                                       curblines between
Thorn Street       Changing curb       the south curbline   61-1956  12-26-1956
                   grades              of Exeter Street to
                                       points 375 feet
                                       southward
                                       From a point 406.25
                                       feet south of the
                                       southern building
Thorn Street       Vacating and        line of Buttonwood   10-1958  4-23-1958
                   removing            Street to the
                                       northern property
                                       line of the Reading
                                       School District
                                       Between Evans Avenue
Thorn Street       Revising grade      and a point 115 feet 28-1958  8-13-1958
                                       northward
                                       Between the south
                                       building line of
Thorn Street       Vacating            Berks Street and the 20-1966  5-18-1966
                                       north building line
                                       of Rockland Street
                   Vacating,           Between Bern Street
Thorn Street       abandoning and      and Richmond Street  4-1986   1-15-1986
                   removing
                   Vacating and        Between Washington
Thorn Street       removing            Street and Walnut    42-2023  5-8-2023
                                       Street
                                       From a point 304.54
                                       feet south of the
                   Vacating and        southern building
Thorn Street       removing            line of Buttonwood   28-2002  6-24-2002
                                       Street along the
                                       western property
                                       line of Thorn Street
Trooper Road       Opening portion     From Hessian Road to 40-1957  12-31-1957
                                       Victory Place
                                       Between West Oley
Tulpehocken Street Opening             Street and West      43-1923  7-3-1923
                                       Douglass Street
                                       From Douglass Street
Tulpehocken Street Sewers              (West) to Oley       21-1932  4-13-1932
                                       Street (West)
                                       Between the south
                                       building line of
Tulpehocken Street Vacating            Harold Street to the 29-1975  7-2-1975
                                       north building line
                                       of West Elm Street
                   Vacating,           Between River Road
Tulpehocken Street abandoning and      and West Elm Street  41-1981  8-5-1981
                   removing
                   Vacating,           Between Buttonwood
Tulpehocken Street abandoning and      Street and Harold    41-1981  8-5-1981
                   removing            Street
                                       From Marion Street
Twelfth Street     Storm sewers        to 10-foot-wide      26-1915  5-17-1915
                                       alley south of
                                       Marion Street
Twelfth Street     Sewers              Between Union Street 31-1923  5-29-1923
                                       and Exeter Street
                                       Between Marion
Twelfth Street     Grading and paving  Street and Pike      51-1925  10-1-1925
                                       Street
Twelfth Street     Paving              Between Elm Street   53-1927  4-6-1927
                                       and Marion Street
Twelfth Street     Storm sewers        From Richmond Street 184-1927 12-7-1927
                                       to Bern Street
Twelfth Street     Opening and grading From Bern Street to  51-1931  7-15-1931
                                       Richmond Street
Twelfth Street     Sewers              From Exeter Street   21-1932  4-13-1932
                                       to Richmond Street
                                       From Muhlenberg
                                       Street to a point
                                       176 feet 3 inches
Twelfth Street     Vacating            north of the         59-1946  2-5-1947
                                       northern building
                                       line of Muhlenberg
                                       Street
                                       At the northwest
Twelfth Street     Establishing a      corner of Twelfth    56-1974  12-4-1974
                   curbline radius     Street and Elm
                                       Street
                   Placing on          From Nineteenth
Twentieth Street   topographical       Street east to City  11-1923  3-14-1923
                   survey              line
 
Name Activity Location Ord. No. Date
Name             Activity             Location              Ord. No. Date
                                      Between Eleventh
Union Street     Sewers               Street and Thirteenth 31-1923  5-29-1923
                                      Street
Union Street     Vacating             Between Oak Lane and  95-1924  11-12-1924
                                      the eastern City line
Union Street     Vacating             From Fifth Street to  175-1927 12-31-1927
                                      Church Street
Union Street     Vacating             From Church Street to 50-1931  7-15-1931
                                      Sixth Street
Union Street     Opening and grading  From River Road to    51-1931  7-15-1931
                                      Pear Street
                 Revising curb        From Front Street to
Union Street     elevations and       River Road            68-1931  8-26-1931
                 grades
Union Street     Sewers               From Pear Street to   21-1932  4-13-1932
                                      River Road
Union Street     Sewers               From Ninth Street to  21-1932  4-13-1932
                                      Moss Street
                                      Extending 15-foot
                                      reserve building
Union Street     Revising             lines on each side    26-1950  8-9-1950
                 topographical survey from North Front
                                      Street to Centre
                                      Avenue
                                      Removing 15-foot
                                      reserve building line
                                      on north side of
                                      Union Street from
                                      River Road to Centre
                                      Avenue and
                                      eliminating 100-foot-
                                      radius from the
Union Street     Revising plan        northwest corner of   24-1965  4-14-1965
                                      Union Street and
                                      Centre Avenue and
                                      extending a 14-foot
                                      reserve line on
                                      Centre Avenue to
                                      intersect with north
                                      building line of
                                      Union Street
                                      Between the west
                                      building line of
Union Street     Opening              Centre Avenue and     34-1965  8-4-1965
                                      west building line
                                      Pear Street
                 Removing 15-foot     From River Road to
Union Street     reserve building     Front Street          14-1971  3-24-1971
                 line
                 Vacating, abandoning From Front Street
Union Street     and removing         west to the property  2-1991   1-16-1991
                                      of Conrail
Unnamed Alley    Grading and paving   —                   85-1929  11-20-1929
Unnamed Alley    Grading and paving   —                   56-1931  8-5-1931
Unnamed Alley    Grading and paving   —                   62-1931  8-19-1931
Unnamed Alley    Grading and paving   —                   68-1934  11-7-1934
Unnamed Alley    Grading and paving   —                   57-1935  12-31-1935
Unnamed Alley    Grading and paving   —                   9-1938   5-11-1938
Unnamed Alley    Grading and paving   —                   24-1938  8-10-1938
                                      Between Birch Street
                                      and North Thirteenth
Unnamed Alley    Grading and paving   Street and between    37-1954  9-29-1954
                                      Oley Street and
                                      Douglas Street
                                      Between Locust Street
Unnamed Alley    Grading and paving   and North Twelfth     37-1954  9-29-1954
                                      Street
                                      Between Miltmore
                                      Street and Gordon
Unnamed Alley    Grading and paving   Street and to the     37-1954  9-29-1954
                                      rear of properties on
                                      the north side of
                                      West Green Street
                                      Between Birch Street
                                      and a 10-foot alley
Unnamed Alley    Grading and paving   running north and     37-1954  9-29-1954
                                      south from Oley
                                      Street to Douglas
                                      Street
                                      Gutter running north
                                      and south from Spring
Unnamed Alley    Grading and paving   Street to Robeson     48-1956  10-3-1956
                                      Street and between
                                      North Eleventh Street
                                      to Locust Street
                                      Extending from Pike
Unnamed Alley    Grading and paving   Street to Amity       31-1957  8-7-1957
                                      Street
                                      A 15-foot-wide alley
                                      running from the
                                      westerly side of
                 Acceptance for       Meade Street to the
Unnamed Alley    public use           southerly side of     42-1957  12-4-1957
                                      Carroll Street
                                      between Carroll
                                      Street and Grace
                                      Street
Unnamed Alley    Grading and paving   —                   11-1959  6-17-1959
Unnamed Alley    Grading and paving   —                   7-1960   2-10-1960
Unnamed Alley    Grading and paving   —                   27-1962  9-19-1962
Unnamed Alley    Grading and paving   —                   23-1963  9-4-1963
Unnamed Alley    Grading and paving   —                   24-1963  8-14-1963
                                      From McClellan Street
Unnamed Alley    Paving               between Haley Place   36-1964  11-10-1964
                                      and Clifton Avenue
                                      As located running
Unnamed Alley    Grading and paving   parallel to Chapel    48-1968  9-11-1968
                                      Terrace and South
                                      Thirteenth Street
                                      From the west
                                      building line of
                                      Mulberry Street
Unnamed Alley    Grading and paving   westwardly 100 feet   46-1970  10-21-1970
                                      to the east building
                                      line of a 13-foot
                                      alley
                                      A 10-foot-wide alley,
Unnamed Alley    Grading and paving   from Minor Street     28-1972  6-14-1972
                                      west to Bell Alley
                                      Between Linden Street
                                      and Fourteenth Street
                                      and extending from
                                      the north building
Unnamed Alley    Grading and paving   line of Elm Street    52-1973  10-10-1973
                                      northwardly 412 feet
                                      and 1 1/4 inch to the
                                      south building line
                                      of a 10-foot alley
                                      From Pine Street to
Unnamed Alley    Grading and paving   the 500 block of Bell 20-1974  5-22-1974
                                      Alley and 500 block
                                      of Minor Street
                                      Located 100 feet
                                      north of Willow
                                      Street and parallel
Unnamed Alley    Grading and paving   between the 500 block 20-1974  5-22-1974
                                      of Strong Alley and
                                      500 block of Minor
                                      Street
                                      From 600 block of
Unnamed Alley    Grading and paving   Pine Street to 600    20-1974  5-22-1974
                                      block of Bingaman
                                      Street
                                      Located east of
                                      Carpenter Street and
Unnamed Alley    Grading and paving   parallel between the  37-1974  9-11-1974
                                      300 block of Chestnut
                                      and Calls Court
                                      Located east of South
                                      Fourth Street between
Unnamed Alley    Grading and paving   the 400 block of      37-1974  9-11-1974
                                      Chestnut Street and
                                      termination
                                      Located south of
                                      Willow Street between
Unnamed Alley    Grading and paving   Bell Alley and the    37-1974  9-11-1974
                                      600 block of Minor
                                      Street
                                      Located north of
                                      Willow Street between
Unnamed Alley    Grading and paving   500 block of Bell     37-1974  9-11-1974
                                      Alley and 500 block
                                      of Minor Street
                                      Between the 1600
                                      block of Locust
Unnamed Alley    Grading and paving   Street and the 1600   44-1974  10-9-1974
                                      block of North
                                      Eleventh Street
Unnamed Alley    Grading and paving   From Spruce Street to 25-1975  6-18-1975
                                      Pearl Street
                                      From Spruce Street to
                                      an unnamed alley a
                                      distance of
Unnamed Alley    Grading and paving   approximatel y 371    25-1975  6-18-1975
                                      feet between Pearl
                                      Street and South
                                      Sixth Street
Unnamed Alley    Grading and paving   From Fourth Street    34-1975  8-6-1975
                                      and Carpenter Street
                                      Between the 300 block
Unnamed Alley    Reconstructing       of McKnight Street    27-1999  10-25-1999
                                      and the 200 block of
                                      North Front Street
                                      Beginning at a point
                                      on the southern
                                      right-of-way line of
                                      Beech Street a corner
                                      of lands of
                                      Opportunity House;
                                      thence along lands of
                                      Opportunity House and
                                      the eastern right-of-
                                      way line of said
                                      unnamed alley South
                                      02 degrees 51 minutes
                                      45 second East 175.07
                                      feet to a point on
                                      the northern right-
                                      of-way line of
                                      Lafayette Street;
                                      thence along the
                                      northern right-of-way
                                      line of Lafayette
Unnamed Alley    Vacating             Street south 76       68-2009  11-23-2009
                                      degrees 44 minutes 18
                                      second West 11.08
                                      feet to a point on
                                      the western side of
                                      said unnamed alley;
                                      thence along the
                                      western right-of- way
                                      of said unnamed alley
                                      North 02 degrees 34
                                      minutes 13 second
                                      West 177.12 feet to a
                                      point on the southern
                                      right-of-way of Beech
                                      Street; thence along
                                      the southern right-
                                      of- way line of Beech
                                      Street North 87
                                      degrees 22 minutes 57
                                      second East 10.00
                                      feet to a point the
                                      place of beginning
Unnamed Alleys   Grading and paving   Certain private       91-1927  7-20-1927
                                      alleys
Unnamed Alleys   Grading and paving   Certain private       108-1927 8-31-1927
                                      alleys
Unnamed Alleys   Paving               Certain private       139-1927 10-18-1927
                                      alleys
Unnamed Alleys   Paving               —                   94-1928  8-15-1928
Unnamed Alleys   Grading and paving   —                   125-1928 11-14-1928
Unnamed Alleys   Grading and paving   —                   38-1929  6-26-1929
Unnamed Alleys   Grading and paving   —                   76-1929  10-16-1929
Unnamed Alleys   Paving and curbing   —                   113-1929 2-5-1930
Unnamed Alleys   Grading and paving   —                   42-1930  7-9-1930
Unnamed Alleys   Grading and paving   —                   49-1930  7-30-1930
Unnamed Alleys   Grading and paving   —                   79-1930  11-12-1930
Unnamed Alleys   Grading and paving   —                   81-1930  11-19-1930
Unnamed Alleys   Grading and paving   —                   84-1930  12-3-1930
Unnamed Alleys   Grading and paving   —                   101-1931 12-9-1931
Unnamed Alleys   Sewers               —                   21-1932  4-13-1932
Unnamed Alleys   Grading and paving   —                   30-1933  9-13-1933
Unnamed Alleys   Grading and paving   —                   57-1934  9-5-1934
Unnamed Alleys   Grading and paving   —                   78-1934  12-5-1934
Unnamed Alleys   Grading and paving   —                   23-1935  5-22-1935
Unnamed Alleys   Grading and paving   —                   35-1935  8-7-1935
Unnamed Alleys   Grading and paving   —                   39-1935  10-2-1935
Unnamed Alleys   Grading and paving   —                   47-1935  11-20-1935
Unnamed Alleys   Grading and paving   —                   50-1935  11-27-1935
Unnamed Alleys   Grading and paving   —                   38-1939  8-16-1939
Unnamed Alleys   Grading and paving   —                   41-1940  9-4-1940
Unnamed Alleys   Grading and paving   —                   30-1942  9-2-1942
Unnamed Alleys   Grading and paving   —                   31-1942  9-2-1942
Unnamed Alleys   Grading and paving   —                   19-1945  7-18-1945
Unnamed Alleys   Grading and paving   —                   31-1946  5-29-1946
Unnamed Alleys   Grading and paving   —                   42-1949  8-17-1949
Unnamed Alleys   Grading and paving   —                   29-1950  8-30-1950
Unnamed Alleys   Grading and paving   —                   18-1953  8-5-1953
Unnamed Alleys   Grading and paving   Amending Ord. No. 18- 22-1953  8-19-1953
                                      1953
Unnamed Alleys   Grading and paving   —                   31-1953  11-4-1953
                                      Between Fifteenth
Unnamed Alleys   Grading and paving   Street and Muhlenburg 50-1955  11-9-1955
                                      Street and Cotton
                                      Street
Unnamed Alleys   Grading and paving   —                   41-1956  7-18-1956
Unnamed Alleys   Grading and paving   —                   30-1957  7-31-1957
Unnamed Alleys   Grading and paving   —                   48-1957  12-11-1957
Unnamed Alleys   Grading and paving   —                   19-1961  7-26-1961
Unnamed Alleys   Grading and paving   —                   16-1962  6-6-1962
Unnamed Alleys   Grading and paving   —                   24-1962  8-29-1962
                                      East of Margaret
                                      Street from
Unnamed Easement Opening              Wyomissing Boulevard  7-1950   3-15-1950
                                      to Old Wyomissing
                                      Road
                                      A portion extending
                                      along the east right-
                                      of-way line of the
Unnamed Street   Vacating             east Pennsylvania     38-1917  6-20-1917
                                      Railroad from
                                      Hiester's Lane to the
                                      north City line
                                      North of Union Street
Unnamed Street   Vacating             from Fifth Street     175-1927 12-31-1927
                                      eastward 40 feet
                 Revising elevations  North of Union Street
Unnamed Street   and grades           from Church Street to 179-1927 12-31-1927
                                      Fifth Street
                                      Immediately west of
                                      and parallel to
Unnamed Street   Placing on           Gordon Street, from   67-1932  11-30-1932
                 topographical survey West Douglass Street
                                      to West Windsor
                                      Street
                                      Immediately west of
                                      and parallel to
Unnamed Street   Opening and grading  Gordon Street, from   69-1932  11-30-1932
                                      West Douglass Street
                                      to West Windsor
                                      Street
                                      Beginning at an
                                      intersection with an
Unnamed Street   Dedicating as a      existing Township     6-1935   2-9-1935
                 state highway        road connecting
                                      Berkley and Maiden
                                      Creek
                 Revising             As located in the
Unnamed Street   topographical survey second section of the 26-1948  7-21-1948
                                      Eighteenth Ward
                                      Extending along the
                                      east side of the Main
                 Vacating and         Line of the Reading
Unnamed Street   removing             Company Railroad      16-1957  4-10-1957
                                      between Hiester's
                                      Lane and North Fifth
                                      Street
                                      Extending along the
                                      west side of the Main
                 Vacating and         Line of the Reading
Unnamed Street   removing             Company Railroad      16-1957  4-10-1957
                                      between Richmond
                                      Street and North
                                      Fifth Street
Unnamed Street   Vacating             As located on Plan    11-1964  4-1-1964
                                      No. 6041
                                      Between Hiesters Lane
                                      and Berks Street, and
Unnamed Street   Vacating and         the Reading Company   3-1966   1-12-1966
                 removing             Railroad (East Penn
                                      Branch) and Adams
                                      Street
                                      Approximate ly 329.82
                                      feet south of Exeter
                                      Street between the
Unnamed Street   Vacating             east building line of 20-1968  4-17-1968
                                      Fifth Street and the
                                      west building line of
                                      Sixth Street
                                      As located in the
                                      Eighteenth Ward,
                 Revising             bounded by Orrton
Unnamed Street   topographical survey Avenue, Reading Belt  23-1968  5-2-1968
                                      Railroad R/W,
                                      Belvedere Avenue and
                                      Morgantown Road
                                      From the western
                                      building line of
Unnamed Street   Opening              Kutztown Road to a    45-1978  10-25-1978
                                      cul-de-sac 1,145.32
                                      feet southwestwa rdly
                                      As shown on plan
Unnamed Streets  Vacating             marked JT-26 on file  56-1922  10-25-1922
                                      in office of the City
                                      Engineer
                                      As shown on plan
Unnamed Streets  Placing on           marked JT-26A on file 57-1922  10-25-1922
                 topographical survey in the office of the
                                      City Engineer
                                      On and through
                                      property belonging to
Unnamed Streets  Realigning           the Reading Housing   10-1957  2-20-1957
                                      Authority in the
                                      Eighteenth Ward
                                      In the Nineteenth
                                      Ward bounded on the
                                      east by Schuylkill
Unnamed Streets  Revising curb grades Avenue, on the west   9-1967   3-29-1967
                                      by Tulpehocken Creek,
                                      on the south by Blair
                                      Avenue, and on the
                                      north by City line
                                      An area bounded by
                                      Kenhorst Boulevard,
Unnamed Streets  Realigning           Lacaster Avenue,      36-1971  10-20-1971
                                      Hancock Street and
                                      the City line
                                      An area bounded by
                                      Pershing Boulevard,
Unnamed Streets  Realigning           Kenhorst Boulevard,   37-1971  10-20-1971
                                      Lancaster Avenue and
                                      City line
                                      An area bounded by
                                      Twelfth Street,
Unnamed Streets  Realigning           Buttonwood Street,    42-1971  11-24-1971
                                      Thirteenth Street and
                                      Elm Street
                                      From Jackson Street
Upland Avenue    Sidewalks            to the western City   173-1926 10-27-1926
                                      line
Upland Avenue    Opening              Between Morgantown    33-1942  8-19-1942
                                      Road and Noble Street
Upland Avenue    Opening              Between Noble Street  41-1941  8-20-1941
                                      and Jackson Street
                                      Between Arlington
Upland Avenue    Changing width       Street and Crestmont  30-1950  10-4-1950
                                      Street
                                      Between St. George
Upland Avenue    Revising grade       Street and the west   22-1961  9-27-1961
                                      City line
                                      Between Kenhorst
Upland Avenue    Changing alignments  Borough/City line and 42-1970  9-23-1970
                 and grades           the west curb of
                                      Jackson Street
 
 
Name          Activity             Location               Ord. No. Date
Victory Place Opening portion      From Trooper Road to   40-1957  12-31-1957
                                   Hill Road
                                   From the northern
                                   building line of
Vine Street   Vacating             Washington Street      43-1969  8-27-1969
                                   northwardly to the
                                   northern building line
                                   of Dick Street
Vine Street   Vacating, abandoning Between Walnut Street  63-1984  6-20-1984
              and removing         and Dick Street
 
Name Activity Location Ord. No. Date
Name       Activity      Location                                                                      Ord. Date
                                                                                                       No.
Walnut     Paving and                                                                                  22-  5-
Street     improving     From Fifth Street to Sixth Street                                             1914 27-
                                                                                                            1914
Walnut     Paving and                                                                                  22-  5-
Street     improving     From Seventh Street to Eighth Street and from Ninth Street to Eleventh Street 1914 27-
                                                                                                            1914
Walnut     Paving and                                                                                  44-  8-
Street     improving     From Fifth Street to Fourth Street                                            1915 10-
                                                                                                            1915
Walnut                                                                                                 18-  3-
Street     Sewers        From Third Street to Tenth Street                                             1922 29-
                                                                                                            1922
Walnut     Sewers        From Third Street to Rose Street                                              28-  5-3-
Street                                                                                                 1922 1922
Walnut                                                                                                 140- 12-
Street     Storm sewers  From Eighth Street to Walnut Street                                           1928 5-
                                                                                                            1928
Walnut     Improving                                                                                   11-  4-
Street     pavement      At the intersection of Twelfth Street                                         1938 20-
                                                                                                            1938
Walnut                                                                                                 6-   2-
Street     Storm sewers  Between Sixth Street and Seventh Street                                       1939 15-
                                                                                                            1939
Walnut                                                                                                 8-   2-
Street     Repaving      Between Fifth Street and Seventh Street                                       1939 21-
                                                                                                            1939
Walnut     Extending     From Front Street to Schuylkill Avenue                                        7-   3-9-
Street                                                                                                 1955 1955
Walnut                                                                                                 49-  12-
Street     Relocating    Of Legislative Route 06208 between Schuylkill Avenue and North Second Street  1957 18-
                                                                                                            1957
Walnut     Improving     From Station 2+33 to Station 65+50 a distance of 6,520.89 feet                19-  7-9-
Street                                                                                                 1958 1958
Walnut     Revising                                                                                    11-  3-
Street     grade         Between Birch Street and Linden Street                                        1962 28-
                                                                                                            1962
Walnut     Widening,                                                                                   64-  1-4-
Street     revising and  Between Schuylkill Avenue and North Front Street                              1977 1978
           opening
Walnut     Changing                                                                                    44-  4-
Street     alignment and North side between Rose Street and Miller Court                               1995 19-
           width                                                                                            1995
Warren     Opening and   From Schuylkill Avenue to Berkshire Drive                                     77-  9-3-
Street     grading                                                                                     1924 1924
Warren     Opening and                                                                                 68-  9-
Street     curbing       From Montgomery Street to Schuylkill Avenue                                   1930 24-
                                                                                                            1930
Warren     Opening and                                                                                 9-   5-
Street     grading       From Schuylkill Avenue to Berkshire Drive                                     1933 31-
                                                                                                            1933
Warren     Changing      Between Montgomery Street and Schuylkill Avenue from 60 feet to 80 feet       53-  11-
Street     width         between building lines                                                        1949 23-
                                                                                                            1949
Warren     Changing                                                                                    37-  11-
Street     width         From Montgomery Street to Schuylkill Avenue                                   1950 22-
                                                                                                            1950
Warren                                                                                                 55-  12-
Street     Improving     —                                                                           1954 20-
                                                                                                            1954
Warren                                                                                                 53-  12-
Street     Removing      From Greenview Avenue to Berkshire Drive                                      1955 21-
                                                                                                            1955
Warren     Placing on                                                                                  53-  12-
Street     topographical From Greenview Avenue to Lehigh Street                                        1955 21-
           survey                                                                                           1955
Warren                                                                                                 32-  5-
Street     Grading       From Greenview Avenue to Lehigh Street                                        1956 29-
                                                                                                            1956
Warren                                                                                                 11-  2-
Street     Opening       From Greenview Avenue to Lehigh Street                                        1957 20-
                                                                                                            1957
Warren     Revising      Along marginal roads north and south between Butler Street and a point 435    26-  8-
Street     grades        feet northeastwardly                                                          1958 13-
                                                                                                            1958
Warren     Revising                                                                                    26-  8-
Street     grade         Between Chester Street and Butler Street                                      1958 13-
                                                                                                            1958
Warren     Establishing                                                                                26-  8-
Street     alignment     Marginal roads north and south of Warren Street                               1958 13-
                                                                                                            1958
Warren     Vacating and                                                                                6-   4-
Street     removing      From Schuylkill Avenue to a point 600 feet eastward                           1959 30-
                                                                                                            1959
Warren     Improving     From Station 88+51 to Station 120+00, a distance of 3,149 feet                5-   2-5-
Street                                                                                                 1969 1969
Washington Installing                                                                                  164- 9-
Court      special radii At the northeast corner of Front Street and Washington Street                 1926 29-
                                                                                                            1926
Washington Paving and                                                                                  18-  4-
Street     improving     From Second Street to Fourth Street                                           1915 14-
                                                                                                            1915
Washington Paving and                                                                                  18-  4-
Street     improving     —                                                                           1915 14-
                                                                                                            1915
Washington                                                                                             30-  5-
Street     Repairing     As necessary                                                                  1917 23-
                                                                                                            1917
Washington Paving and                                                                                  30-  5-
Street     improving     From Mulberry Street to Eleventh Street                                       1917 23-
                                                                                                            1917
Washington                                                                                             26-  4-
Street     Sewers        From Cedar Street to Moss Street                                              1921 13-
                                                                                                            1921
Washington Changing      Between Madison Avenue and the center line of the alley on the western        88-  7-
Street     width         boundary of the Metropolitan Edison Company's new building                    1926 21-
                                                                                                            1926
Washington Changing                                                                                    27-  5-
Street     curbs and     From Madison Avenue to Fifth Street                                           1929 15-
           width                                                                                            1929
Washington                                                                                             77-  10-
Street     Storm sewers  From Moss Street to Tenth Street                                              1930 8-
                                                                                                            1930
Washington Revising      Changing sidewalk width and grade on south side between Reed Street and       4-   2-
Street     topographical Seventh Street                                                                1953 11-
           survey                                                                                           1953
Washington               To 17 feet south of the center line between the east building line of North   18-  5-
Street     Widening      Fourth Street and a point 107.73 feet east along the south curbline           1966 18-
                                                                                                            1966
Washington Revising                                                                                    61-  11-
Street     alignment     —                                                                           1966 30-
                                                                                                            1966
Washington Revising curb                                                                               24-  7-
Street     alignment     As located in Plan 1182-A                                                     1967 19-
                                                                                                            1967
Washington                                                                                             24-  7-
Street     Grading       As located in the City of Reading's Downtown East Project No. R184            1967 19-
                                                                                                            1967
Washington Changing      Between the west building line of Eighth Street and the east building line of 48-  11-
Street     alignment     Seventh Street                                                                1975 5-
                                                                                                            1975
Washington Widening,     Between North Front Street and North Second Street and the intersection of    46-  12-
Street     revising and  West Washington Street, North Front Street and River Road                     1977 21-
           opening                                                                                          1977
Washington Paving and                                                                                  29-  5-
Street     improving     Over the P. and R. Railway from Vine Street to Seventh Street                 1915 17-
Bridge                                                                                                      1915
Washington Paving and                                                                                  30-  5-
Street     improving     East approach over the P. and R. Railway tracks                               1917 23-
Bridge                                                                                                      1917
Water                                                                                                  48-  11-
Street     Moving        Between Spruce Street and Bingaman Street                                     1954 24-
                                                                                                            1954
Water      Revising                                                                                    34-  8-
Street     topographical From Franklin Street to Chestnut Street                                       1955 24-
           survey                                                                                           1955
Water      Opening       From Chestnut Street northward to the former Schuylkill Canal                 68-  2-1-
Street                                                                                                 1955 1956
Water      Revising                                                                                    27-  8-
Street     grade         Between Spruce Street and Bingaman Street                                     1958 13-
                                                                                                            1958
Water      Vacating and  From the west building line of South Front Street to the south building line  43-  10-
Street     removing      of Spruce Street                                                              1972 18-
                                                                                                            1972
Water                    Between the south building line of Spruce Street and the proposed Water       4-   1-
Street     Vacating      Street                                                                        1974 23-
                                                                                                            1974
           Opening,                                                                                         1-
Water      establishing  From southern building line of Riverfront Drive to the northern building line 6-   30-
Street     alignment and of Bingaman Street                                                            1974 1974
           grading
Wayne      Placing on                                                                                  86-  6-
Street     topographical From Mercer Street to the northern City line                                  1926 23-
           survey                                                                                           1926
Wayne      Revising                                                                                    87-  6-
Street     grades and    From Lackawana Street to the northern City line                               1926 23-
           elevations                                                                                       1926
Wayne                                                                                                  37-  9-
Street     Opening       From Lehigh Street to Columbia Street                                         1955 21-
                                                                                                            1955
Wayne      Vacating and  Between Columbia Street and the right-of-way of the Reading Belt of the       45-  10-
Street     removing      Reading Railroad Company                                                      1955 5-
                                                                                                            1955
Wayne                                                                                                  51-  11-
Street     Opening       Between Warren Street and Lehigh Street                                       1955 16-
                                                                                                            1955
Wayne                    Between the northern building line of Warren Street and a point 339.54 feet   19-  3-
Street     Opening       north of the northern building line of Warren Street                          1965 24-
                                                                                                            1965
Wayne                    From the south building line of Lackawanna Street to a point 198.74 feet      28-  6-1-
Street     Opening       south along the west building line and a point 191.99 feet south along the    1966 1966
                         east building line of Wayne Street
Wayne                    Between the north building line of Lackawanna Street and the south building   23-  5-
Street     Vacating      line of Mercer Street                                                         1973 30-
                                                                                                            1973
Wedgewood                                                                                              12-  7-
Terrace    Accepting     In the east bank area of the Schuylkill Urban Renewal Project                 2000 10-
                                                                                                            2000
Weiser                                                                                                 46-  7-
Street     Grading       Between Windsor Street and Spring Street                                      1914 14-
                                                                                                            1914
Weiser                                                                                                 39-  8-
Street     Sewers        From Douglass Street to a point about 18 feet north of Jameson Place          1919 29-
                                                                                                            1919
Weiser     Changing      From 80 feet south of the southern building line of Robeson Street to the     92-  7-
Street     elevations    northern curbline of Spring Street                                            1926 27-
           and grades                                                                                       1926
Weiser     Vacating      River Road and the northern City line                                         11-  2-9-
Street                                                                                                 1927 1927
Weiser                                                                                                 36-  2-
Street     Vacating      Amending Ord. No. 10-1927                                                     1927 23-
                                                                                                            1927
Weiser                                                                                                 21-  4-
Street     Sewers        From Robeson Street to Jameson Place                                          1932 13-
                                                                                                            1932
Weiser                                                                                                 55-  10-
Street     Storm sewers  From West Perry Street to West Marion Street                                  1936 14-
                                                                                                            1936
Weiser                                                                                                 55-  10-
Street     Storm sewers  From West Perry Street to West Marion Street                                  1936 14-
                                                                                                            1946
Weiser                   From the northern building line of Perry Street to the southern building line 20-  9-
Street     Vacating      of Pike Street                                                                1944 13-
                                                                                                            1944
Weiser     Vacating and  From a point 64 feet south of the southern line of Perry Street to the        32-  12-
Street     opening       northern line of Perry Street                                                 1945 19-
                                                                                                            1945
Weiser                   From the north building line of West Robeson Street to the north building     20-  6-
Street     Vacating      line of Perry Street                                                          1971 30-
                                                                                                            1971
West Amity                                                                                             7-   4-
Street     Vacating      Between the old and new locations of McKnight Street                          1948 28-
                                                                                                            1948
West                     From River Road eastward to a point 205.78 feet west of western building line 79-  10-
Buttonwood Vacating      of Tulpehocken Street                                                         1931 7-
Street                                                                                                      1931
West       Placing on    From River Road eastward to a point 205.78 feet west of western building line 80-  10-
Buttonwood topographical of Tulpehocken Street                                                         1931 7-
Street     survey                                                                                           1931
West                     From River Road eastward to a point 205.78 feet west of western building line 81-  10-
Buttonwood Opening       of Tulpehocken Street                                                         1931 7-
Street                                                                                                      1931
West                                                                                                   83-  9-9-
Buttonwood Storm sewers  From a point 235 feet west of Tulpehocken Street to Rosenthal Street          1931 1931
Street
West                                                                                                   95-  10-
Buttonwood Paving        From Schuylkill Avenue to approximately 235 feet west of Tulpehocken Street   1931 21-
Street                                                                                                      1931
West       Widening,                                                                                   44-  10-
Buttonwood revising and  Between Schuylkill Avenue and the Buttonwood Street Bridge                    1977 19-
Street     opening                                                                                          1977
West                                                                                                   78-  9-
Douglass   Grading       From the 20-foot-wide alley west of Gordon Street to Clinton Street           1914 30-
Street                                                                                                      1914
West                                                                                                   163- 9-
Douglass   Storm sewers  From Front Street to Weiser Street                                            1926 22-
Street                                                                                                      1926
West                     From River Road south of West Douglass Street to River Road north of West     4-   2-
Douglass   Opening       Douglass Street                                                               1929 20-
Street                                                                                                      1929
West Elm   Vacating,                                                                                   41-  8-5-
Street     abandoning    Between Schuylkill Avenue and River Road                                      1981 1981
           and removing
West                                                                                                   55-  10-
Marion     Storm sewers  From Weiser Street to Center Avenue                                           1936 14-
Street                                                                                                      1936
West                                                                                                   55-  10-
Marion     Storm sewers  From Weiser Street to Centre Avenue                                           1936 14-
Street                                                                                                      1936
West                                                                                                   10-  2-
McKnight   Vacating      Between River Road and the northern City line                                 1927 16-
Street                                                                                                      1927
West Perry                                                                                             56-  10-
Street     Storm sewers  From the river to Centre Avenue                                               1936 14-
                                                                                                            1936
West Perry                                                                                             56-  10-
Street     Storm sewers  From the River to Center Avenue                                               1936 14-
                                                                                                            1936
West Perry               From the east building line of Weiser Street to the west building line of     20-  6-
Street     Vacating      McKnight Street                                                               1971 30-
                                                                                                            1971
West Perry Vacating,                                                                                   38-  3-2-
Street     abandoning    From North Front Street to McKnight Street                                    1982 1983
           and removing
West Pike                From the west curbline of Front Street to the west building line of Weiser    152- 9-
Street     Grading       Street                                                                        1926 15-
                                                                                                            1926
West Road  Renaming      Known as Fulton Street between River Road and Leland Street                   22-  7-8-
                                                                                                       1942 1942
West Road  Vacating      From the Schuylkill River to River Road                                       22-  7-8-
                                                                                                       1942 1942
West                                                                                                   45-  8-
Robeson    Sewers        Between Weiser Street and McKnight Street                                     1934 15-
Street                                                                                                      1934
West                                                                                                   54-  10-
Robeson    Storm sewers  From the river to Front Street                                                1936 14-
Street                                                                                                      1936
West                                                                                                   54-  10-
Robeson    Storm sewers  From the river to Front Street                                                1936 14-
Street                                                                                                      1936
West                     From the east building line of Lincoln Street to a point 117 feet west of the 53-  10-
Robeson    Vacating      west building line of Weiser Street                                           1973 24-
Street                                                                                                      1973
Westside   Opening,                                                                                    35-  3-2-
Road       grading and   From Wyomissing Creek (present City boundary line) to Wyomissing Road         1927 1927
           improving
Westside                                                                                               152- 11-
Road       Paving        From Wyomissing Creek (present boundary line) to Wyomissing Road              1927 23-
                                                                                                            1927
Westside                 Known as Museum Road between the West Reading Borough/Readin g City line and  62-  10-
Road       Renaming      Old Wyomissing Road                                                           1941 22-
                                                                                                            1941
West       Revising curb                                                                               56-  6-
Spring     alignment     200 and 300 Block                                                             2023 26-
Street                                                                                                      2023
West Union Revising                                                                                    7-   4-
Street     topographical Establishing 15-foot reserve building lines from Front Street to River Road   1948 28-
           survey                                                                                           1948
West                                                                                                   9-   4-
Walnut     Opening       From Front Street to Schuylkill Avenue                                        1955 13-
Street                                                                                                      1955
West                                                                                                   47-  12-
Washington Vacating      Between North Front Street and River Road                                     1977 21-
Street                                                                                                      1977
West                                                                                                   41-  6-
Windsor    Storm sewers  From Miltimore Street to Schuylkill Avenue                                    1917 27-
Street                                                                                                      1917
West                                                                                                   11-  3-
Windsor    Sewers        Between McKnight Street and Weiser Street                                     1920 24-
Street                                                                                                      1920
West                                                                                                   8-   2-
Windsor    Improving     As shown on the plan marked BR-14                                             1923 28-
Street                                                                                                      1923
West                     From Schuylkill Avenue to Miltimore, Schuylkill Avenue east and west sides of 62-  8-
Windsor    Improving     southern approach of River Bridge                                             1929 14-
Street                                                                                                      1929
West       Changing curb                                                                               68-  11-
Windsor    elevations    From Gordon Street to a point 171 feet west thereof                           1932 30-
Street     and grades                                                                                       1932
West       Opening and                                                                                 69-  11-
Windsor    grading       From Gordon Street 171 feet west thereof                                      1932 30-
Street                                                                                                      1932
Willow                                                                                                 46-  9-
Street     Sewers        From Seventh Street to a 10-foot alley west of Seventh Street                 1922 13-
                                                                                                            1922
Windsor                                                                                                60a- 3-
Street     Storm sewers  From Front Street to Pear Street                                              1913 18-
                                                                                                            1914
Windsor    Paving and                                                                                  26-  5-
Street     improving     From Tenth Street to Eleventh Street                                          1919 28-
                                                                                                            1919
Windsor                                                                                                19-  3-
Street     Paving        From Weiser Street to Sixth Street                                            1921 30-
                                                                                                            1921
Windsor                                                                                                26-  4-
Street     Sewers        From Second Street to Centre Avenue                                           1921 13-
                                                                                                            1921
Windsor                                                                                                31-  5-
Street     Sewers        From Third Street to Centre Avenue                                            1921 11-
                                                                                                            1921
Windsor    Stormwater    From Twelfth Street to Thirteenth Street                                      50-  7-3-
Street     sewers                                                                                      1929 1929
Windsor    Stormwater    From Ninth Street to Mulberry Street                                          50-  7-3-
Street     sewers                                                                                      1929 1929
Windsor                                                                                                54-  8-
Street     Vacating      From Thirteenth Street to Palm Street                                         1929 21-
                                                                                                            1929
Windsor                                                                                                21-  4-
Street     Sewers        From 150 feet east of Weiser Street to Gordon Street                          1932 13-
(West)                                                                                                      1932
Windsor    Changing curb On the southern side from North Second Street eastward 41 feet and on the     34-  7-
Street     elevations    eastern side North Second Street from Windsor Street southward 50 feet        1941 16-
           and grades                                                                                       1941
Windsor                  Formerly known as Richard Street between Nicolls Street and North Eighth      2-   3-
Street     Naming        Street                                                                        1959 25-
                                                                                                            1959
Wood                                                                                                   64-  11-
Street     Sewers        From Chestnut Street to a point about 410 feet north                          1922 22-
                                                                                                            1922
Wood       Opening       Between Laurel Street and property of the Pennsylvania Railroad Company       29-  5-1-
Street                                                                                                 1946 1946
           Revising                                                                                         7-
Wood       topographical Between Cherry Street and Franklin Street                                     32-  15-
Street     width and                                                                                   1970 1970
           grade
Wood       Revising and  Dedication from the redevelopment authority located in the model cities I — 39-  8-
Street     accepting     urban renewal project and the riverfront urban renewal project                2002 12-
                                                                                                            2002
Woodvale   Naming        Formerly known as East Nineteenth Street and Cotton Street                    62-  9-2-
Avenue                                                                                                 1914 1914
Woodvale   Opening,                                                                                    65-  11-
Avenue     grading and   Between Nineteenth Street and east City line                                  1923 21-
           improving                                                                                        1923
Woodvale   Paving and                                                                                  79-  11-
Avenue     curbing       From Nineteenth Street to eastern City line                                   1929 13-
                                                                                                            1929
Woodvale                                                                                               92-  10-
Avenue     Sewers        From Nineteenth Street to Hiene Street                                        1931 7-
                                                                                                            1931
Woodvale   Opening and                                                                                 41-  7-
Street     grading       From Nineteenth Street to Hiene Street                                        1929 17-
                                                                                                            1929
Woodvale   Paving and    From east building line of Nineteenth Street to west building line of Hiene   101- 5-
Street     curbing       Street                                                                        1929 14-
                                                                                                            1930
Wunder                                                                                                 49-  11-
Street     Storm sewers  From Spruce Street to Muhlenberg Street, approximately 315 feet               1933 29-
                                                                                                            1933
Wyomissing                                                                                             37-  4-
Boulevard  Vacating      From Reading Belt Railroad to Pershing Boulevard                              1928 25-
                                                                                                            1928
Wyomissing Opening and                                                                                 38-  4-
Boulevard  grading       From Burnside Avenue to Reading Belt Railroad                                 1928 25-
                                                                                                            1928
Wyomissing Stormwater    From Brookline Street to Gregg Avenue                                         56-  8-7-
Boulevard  sewers                                                                                      1929 1929
Wyomissing Placing on                                                                                  74-  11-
Boulevard  topographical From Old Wyomissing Road to Kenhorst Boulevard                                1929 13-
           survey                                                                                           1929
Wyomissing Opening and   From Old Wyomissing Road to Kenhorst Boulevard                                95-  1-8-
Boulevard  grading                                                                                     1929 1930
Wyomissing Revising curb                                                                               21-  11-
Boulevard  elevations    Between Lancaster Avenue and a point west of Brookline Street                 1937 10-
           and grades                                                                                       1937
Wyomissing Placing on                                                                                  21-  11-
Boulevard  topographical Between Brookline Street and Parker Avenue                                    1937 10-
           survey                                                                                           1937
Wyomissing                                                                                             21-  11-
Boulevard  Vacating      Between Brookline Street and Parker Avenue                                    1937 10-
                                                                                                            1937
Wyomissing Revising      Between the eastern building line of Parker Avenue and the northwestern       15-  3-
Boulevard  topographical building line of Gregg Avenue                                                 1940 13-
           survey                                                                                           1940
Wyomissing Establishing  From south side at Borough of Wyomissing and City of Reading line to Powder   48-  10-
Boulevard  grade         House Road                                                                    1940 30-
                                                                                                            1940
Wyomissing Placing on                                                                                  43-  9-3-
Boulevard  topographical From Kenhorst Boulevard to Margaret Street                                    1941 1941
           survey
Wyomissing Opening       Between Kenhorst Boulevard and Margaret Street                                5-   4-3-
Boulevard                                                                                              1946 1946
Wyomissing Placing on    Between Margaret Street to Brookline Plaza and a 5-foot easement from         52-  11-
Boulevard  topographical Wyomissing Boulevard to Old Wyomissing Road for storm and sanitary sewers     1949 23-
           survey                                                                                           1949
Wyomissing                                                                                             58-  12-
Boulevard  Opening       Between Margaret Street and property of Textile Machine Works                 1949 14-
                                                                                                            1949
Wyomissing               Eastward from the property line of Brookline Manor Apartments, Inc. to the    36-  9-
Boulevard  Opening       property line of the Reading Housing Authority                                1954 29-
                                                                                                            1954
Wyomissing                                                                                             41-  12-
Boulevard  Vacating      From Hancock Boulevard to Liggett Avenue                                      1957 31-
                                                                                                            1957
Wyomissing Placing on                                                                                  41-  12-
Boulevard  topographical From Hancock Boulevard to Meade Street                                        1957 31-
           survey                                                                                           1957
Wyomissing                                                                                             41-  12-
Boulevard  Vacating      From the Belt Line Railroad of the Reading Company to Meade Street            1957 31-
                                                                                                            1957
Wyomissing               From the property line located approximately 215 feet northwest of the center 21-  8-
Boulevard  Opening       line of Patton Avenue to a point 125 feet northeast of the building line at   1961 30-
                         the northeast corner of Wyomissing Boulevard and Hancock Boulevard                 1961
Wyomissing Opening and                                                                                 144- 11-
Road       grading       From Westside Road to Barberry Road                                           1927 9-
                                                                                                            1927
Wyomissing                                                                                             153- 11-
Road       Paving        From Westside Road to Barberry Road                                           1927 23-
                                                                                                            1927
 
 
Name        Activity             Location                  Ord. No. Date
York Street Opening, grading and Between Avenue D and East 23-1923  4-11-1923
            improving            Road
 
Chapter A618
WATER
§
A618-101.   Water.
[Below is a listing of ordinances adopted by the City of Reading regarding
water. Full copies of said ordinances can be found in the City Clerk's Office.]
§ A618-101. Water.
Ord. No. Date Description
Ord. No. Date       Description
                    Permitting Gulf Refining Company to lay and construct water
23-1914  5-27-1914  pipe to connect to a water main to provide water to the
                    premises
                    Providing for the payment of the cost of laying water pipes
35-1914  6-16-1914  in the streets and highways of the City by the owners of
                    said ground in front and fixing the rate per foot to be
                    paid by such owners
                    Extending the pipes and improvements of the water works of
30-1915  5-17-1915  the City beyond the City limits for supplying water by the
                    City to persons, corporations, institutions and
                    municipalities within the County of Berks
                    Stipulating form of application and agreement for and
32-1915  6-9-1915   conditions, terms and rates upon which the Council of the
                    City of Reading may grant the use of water from supply
                    mains outside the limits of the City
                    Executing an agreement between the City and H.O. Keller in
39-1915  7-21-1915  reference to a water supply for premises 126-128 North
                    Fifth Street
74-1916  12-20-1916 Permitting the Schuylkill Navigation Company to lay and
                    construct a water pipe
                    Accepting the offer of the Glenside Water Company to grant
81-1916  12-27-1916 the City an option to purchase its plant and appropriating
                    the money for the payment of such option
                    Permitting Reading Chain Block Company, Inc., to lay and
44-1917  7-25-1917  construct at its own expense and under certain conditions a
                    1-inch water pipe from the City water main into their
                    property
                    Purchasing the water works plant and system with all the
56-1917  11-7-1917  equipment of the Glenside Water Supply Company in Bern
                    Township
                    Permitting Reading Steel Casting Company to lay and
                    construct at its own expense and under certain conditions a
5-1918   1-16-1918  6-inch water pipe to connect with the 6-inch water main
                    near Tulpehocken and Green Streets for the purpose of
                    supply with a water a fire sprinkler system
                    Permitting the D.S. and W. Hosiery Company, Inc. to lay and
26-1918  8-14-1918  construct at its own expense and under certain conditions a
                    2-inch water pipe for the purpose of providing general
                    water service to the premises
                    Permitting the D.S. and W. Hosiery Company, Inc. to lay and
27-1918  8-30-1918  construct at its own expense and under certain conditions a
                    2-inch water pipe for the purpose of providing general
                    water service to the premises
20-1919  4-16-1919  Permitting the Reading Iron Company to lay water pipes
                    underground
                    Permitting Dives, Pomeroy and Stewart to lay and construct
52-1920  9-8-1920   at their own expense and under certain conditions a 12-inch
                    water pipe for the purpose of supplying with water a fire
                    sprinkler system for their property
                    Permitting Scott Kitzmiller Co., Inc., to lay and construct
70-1920  12-29-1920 a 4-inch water pipe for the purpose of supplying with water
                    a fire sprinkler system on the property
                    Permitting Scott Kitzmiller Co., Inc., to lay and construct
2-1921   1-19-1921  at its own expense and under certain conditions a 4-inch
                    water pipe for the purpose of supplying said property with
                    water from the intermediate service
                    Permitting Richard Meinig Co., Inc., to lay and construct
47-1921  8-31-1921  at its own expense and under certain conditions a 6-inch
                    water pipe for the purpose of supplying said property with
                    water for fire purposes
62-1921  12-31-1921 Amending Ord. No. 32-1915
                    Permitting Rajah Temple, A.A.O.N.M.S., to lay and construct
17-1922  3-22-1922  at their own expense a 12-inch water pipe for the purpose
                    of supplying water to a fire sprinkler system on the
                    property
                    Permitting the Reading Hardware Company to lay and
43-1922  9-6-1922   construct at its own expense and under certain conditions a
                    10-inch water pipe for the purpose of supplying water to a
                    fire sprinkler system
                    Permitting Frank C. Kolb to lay and construct at his own
                    expense and under certain conditions a 6-inch water pipe
60-1922  11-5-1922  from the end of the private fire service pipe of Chas. E.
                    Leippe, for the purpose of supplying water to a fire
                    sprinkler system on certain property, providing consent of
                    Chas. E. Leippe is first secured
35-1923  6-13-1923  Permitting Bright and Nolan to extend the water main of the
                    City along Bernville Road in the Township of Bern
                    Permitting Wm. H. Lunden, Inc., to lay at their own expense
40-1923  6-27-1923  a 6-inch water main for the purpose of supplying water to a
                    fire sprinkler system
                    Permitting Lengle-Fencil Company to lay and construct a 6-
26-1924  3-26-1924  inch water pipe for the purpose of supplying with water a
                    fire sprinkler system
                    Permitting Reading Hardware Company to lay and construct a
35-1924  4-23-1924  3-inch water pipe from its private fire main to its new
                    building for purposes of supplying the new building with
                    water from the intermediate service district
                    Desiring to extend the City's water plant into and operate
46-1924  6-4-1924   the same in the Eighteenth Ward of the City and to acquire
                    the plant now owned and operated by the Angelica Water and
                    Ice Company
61-1924  7-16-1924  Permitting Bright and Nolan to connect water mains in
                    Greenfields with the City water mains
                    Permitting E. Richard Meining Company, Inc., to lay and
81-1924  9-17-1924  construct an 8-inch water pipe for the purpose of supplying
                    water a fire sprinkler system
                    Permitting Tobias Knobauch to connect water mains by him in
                    Melrose with the Antietem water supply main of the City
97-1924  11-19-1924 upon the condition Tobias Knobauch conveys to the City free
                    of all encumbrances a certain tract of land in Lower Alsace
                    Township
25-1925  4-29-1925  Permitting Nolan, Stauffer and Heizman to connect water
                    mains in Oakgrove to the City's water mains
                    Permitting Reading Rag and Metal Co., Inc. to lay and
53-1925  10-7-1925  construct a six inch water pipe into its warehouse to
                    provide water for a fire sprinkler system
                    Permitting the Reading Company to lay, construct and
89-1927  7-27-1927  maintain at its own expense a 12-inch water pipe with
                    appurtenances for the conveyance of water from its spring
                    source
28-1928B 3-21-1928  Permitting Reading Lodge to connect water mains laid or to
                    be laid in Cathedral Heights with the City water mains
                    Permitting the Bee-Hive Laundry Company, Inc., to lay and
13-1929  2-27-1929  construct a 6-inch high water pipe for the purpose of
                    supplying additional supply of water from the intermediate
                    service district
29-1929  5-8-1929   Permitting D.S. & W. Hosiery Company to construct and
                    maintain cement concrete pipe conduit for conveying water
                    Executing an agreement between the City and the Reading
91-1929  11-20-1929 Company for the placing and maintaining of a pipe line for
                    water supply purposes above and across Seventh Street tacks
                    Permitting the Reading Times Company to lay at their own
93-1929  11-27-1929 expense a 6-inch water main for the purpose of supplying a
                    fire sprinkler system with water
                    Executing an agreement between the City and the Reading
16-1930  2-26-1930  Company to place and maintain a pipeline for water supply
                    purposes below and across Lebanon Valley Branch Tracks and
                    property of the Reading Company
                    Permitting Oakbrook Hosiery Mills, Inc., to lay and
59-1930  7-30-1930  construct private water pipes 4 inches in diameter and 8
                    inches in diameter for purposes of providing water to fire
                    sprinklers and industrial service
52-1931  6-17-1931  Granting permission to Joseph Block and Son to connect
                    water mains laid in Park-Edge
63-1931  7-22-1931  Granting permission to Mt. Penn Suburban Water Company to
                    supply water to the property of Alexander Griesemar
71-1931  8-5-1931   Granting permission to Joseph Block and Son to connect
                    water mains hid in Park-Edge addition
                    Executing an agreement between the Schuylkill Navigation
86-1931  9-16-1931  Company and the City to provide the placing and maintenance
                    of cast iron water main across the canal
                    Permitting Oakbrook Hosiery Mills, Inc. to install and
105-1931 12-23-1931 construct a reinforced concrete conduit for the
                    accommodation of power, steam and water pipes
30-1932  4-20-1932  Assigning the property known as Driscoll Farm to the use of
                    the Bureau of Water
44-1936  10-21-1936 Imposing use restrictions on private water service
                    Authorizing choice rates and charges for consumers of
57-1937  9-29-1937  Angelica Water System outside the City and filing change of
                    tariff with the Pennsylvania Public Utility Commission
                    Executing an agreement between the City and Birdsboro Steel
66-1941  11-19-1941 Foundry and Machine Company the privilege to construct and
                    maintain a 6-inch water main and 3/4-inch galvanized iron
                    airline under the sidewalk
                    Authorizing the sale by the City of the Lynoak water
55-1942  12-30-1942 distribution system of the City to the Borough of
                    Shillington
                    Granting Consumers Gas Company the privilege of
26-1944  11-8-1944  constructing and maintaining a water line and an insulated
                    steam line under Canal Street
29-1945  10-24-1945 Granting Thomas Demaio permission to connect water lines to
                    be laid in Greenfields Manor with the City water mains
28-1947  8-27-1947  Granting Harry B. Davis permission to connect water lines
                    to be laid in College Heights with the City water mains
                    Granting Anne Miliken Cullum permission to connect water
37-1947  12-10-1947 lines to be laid in Riveredge Acres with the City water
                    mains
                    Executing an agreement between the City and Harry B. Davis
9-1949   3-30-1949  to permit Harry B. Davis to construct a 12-inch water line
                    in Hampden Boulevard
                    Executing an agreement between the City and Parish Pressed
16-1950  5-24-1950  Steel Company to permit Parish Pressed Steel Company to
                    construct and maintain a 4-inch cast iron underground water
                    pipe line for the purpose of conveying water from a well
36-1950  10-4-1950  Granting M.J. Eckel permission to connect water lines to
                    land in Wedgewood Heights with the City's water mains
25-1952  5-14-1952  Providing for the fluoridation of the water supply of the
                    City
                    Appropriating and condemning a right-of-way through the
23-1955  6-22-1955  real estate of Carmello Brunetto and Robert S. Kline for
                    the purpose of constructing, establishing and maintaining a
                    pipe line
                    Appropriating and condemning a right-of-way through the
24-1955  6-22-1955  real estate of Jacob Ebling for the purpose of
                    constructing, establishing and maintaining a pipe line
                    Appropriating and condemning a right-of-way through the
25-1955  6-22-1955  real estate of William Lohman and Company for the purpose
                    of constructing, establishing and maintaining a pipe line
                    Granting H.K. Hollenback permission to connect water lines
38-1955  8-31-1955  to be laid in Riverbridge Acres with water mains of the
                    City
                    Granting Berkshire Greens, Inc., permission to connect a
50-1955  11-21-1955 water line to be laid in Holiday Colony Road with the City
                    water mains
                    Granting Wingert Construction Company, Inc., permission to
33-1957  8-21-1957  connect water lines to be laid in their development in
                    Ontelaunee and Muhlenberg Townships with the City water
                    main
7-1959   5-13-1959  Granting permission to Ward W. Hayes to connect water mains
                    laid or to be laid in Greenfields with City water mains
                    Prohibiting the furnishing of water server without charge
                    to any person, firm, partnership, corporation or
31-1959  12-2-1959  institution within or without the City, except premises
                    owned, leased, occupied or used by the City for carrying
                    out its corporate purposes
20-1960  5-11-1960  Granting permission to Roy E. Hayes to connect water main
                    laid or to be laid in Greenfields with City water mains
33A-1960 11-23-1960 Amending Ord. No. 44-1936
                    Granting permission to Richard C. and Angeline K. Doty to
21-1963  7-10-1963  connect water mains or to be laid in the City and partly in
                    Greenfields, Bern Township with the City water mains
53-1975  12-31-1975 Establishing rates, charges, rules and regulations of water
                    service
24-1976  8-11-1976  Amending Ord. No. 53-1975
9-1979   4-25-1979  Amending Ord. No. 53-1975
5-1980   1-30-1980  Amending Ord. No. 53-1975
25-1980  5-28-1980  Amending Ord. No. 53-1975
56-1980  11-26-1980 Amending Ord. No. 53-1975
60-1981  12-23-1981 Amending Ord. No. 44-1936
2-1982   1-13-1982  Amending Ord. No. 53-1975
12-1982  4-1-1982   Amending Ord. No. 53-1975
21-1992  3-18-1992  Amending Ord. No. 53-1975
                    Consenting to the incurrence of indebtedness by the Reading
38-1996  11-25-1996 Area Water Authority through a loan through Pennvest for
                    various water system improvements in an amount not
                    exceeding $6,000,000
20-1997  9-22-1997  Terminating the lease agreement between the City and the
                    Reading Area Water Authority
                    Directing the Administration and the Executive Director of
105-2006 12-26-2006 the Reading Area Water Authority to take the necessary
                    action(s) to provide a water utility systems analysis
                    Authorizing the transfer of $248,500 from the self-
2-2009   1-26-2009  insurance fund water/sewer main break account into the
                    incurred liability claims account
                    Notifying the Reading Area Water Authority of the
                    termination of the lease and operating agreement;
                    dissolving the Authority, requiring the Authority to convey
                    the water system and all property of the Authority to the
46-2014  5-27-2014  City of Reading; establishing a deadline by which the
                    Reading Area Water Authority shall convey by appropriate
                    instrument the water system and all property of said
                    Authority to the City of Reading; imposing necessary
                    penalties
66-2014  9-8-2014   Repealing Ord. No. 46-2014, which dissolves the Reading
                    Area Water Authority
22-2016  6-13-2016  Terminating water lease with Reading Area Water Authority
28-2021  4-12-2021  Authorizing the acceptance of the MS4 pollution reduction
                    plan (PRP) for the city
 
 
Chapter A619
ZONING; PRIOR ORDINANCES
§
A619-101.   Prior Zoning Ordinances and amendments.
[Below is a chronological listing of ordinances adopted by the City of Reading
regarding prior amendments to the Zoning Chapter and Zoning Map. Full copies of
said ordinances can be found in the City Clerk's Office. The current Zoning
Ordinance, as amended, is included in
Chapter 600 of the Code of the City of Reading.]
§ A619-101. Prior Zoning Ordinances and amendments.
Ord. No./ Res. No. Date Description
Ord. No./ Res. No. Date       Description
7-1957             2-6-1957   1957 Zoning Ordinance
38A-1960           2-10-1960  Amending the Zoning Map
38B-1960           3-9-1960   Amending the Zoning Map
15-1961            8-2-1961   Amending 1957 Zoning Ordinance
26-1965            6-23-1965  Amending the Zoning Map
11-1966            4-13-1966  Amending the Zoning Map
12-1966            4-20-1966  Amending the Zoning Map
43-1966            11-23-1966 Amending the Zoning Map
45-1966            11-23-1966 Amending the Zoning Map
59-1966            11-23-1966 Amending 1957 Zoning Ordinance
36-1968            7-31-1968  Amending 1957 Zoning Ordinance
6-1969             2-26-1969  Amending the Zoning Map
21-1969            7-2-1969   Amending the Zoning Map
36-1969            8-27-1969  Amending 1957 Zoning Ordinance
59-1969            4-1-1970   Amending 1957 Zoning Ordinance
60-1969            11-19-1969 Amending 1957 Zoning Ordinance
19-1970            5-27-1970  Amending 1957 Zoning Ordinance
59-1970            4-1-1970   Amending the Zoning Map
49-1971            11-10-1971 1971 Zoning Ordinance
37-1972            10-11-1972 Amending 1971 Zoning Ordinance
54-1973            11-21-1973 Amending the Zoning Map
57-1973            11-28-1973 Amending 1971 Zoning Ordinance
2-1974             2-13-1974  Amending 1971 Zoning Ordinance
8-1974             2-27-1974  Amending 1971 Zoning Ordinance
14-1974            5-8-1974   Amending 1971 Zoning Ordinance
18-1974            6-5-1974   Amending 1971 Zoning Ordinance
21-1974            6-26-1974  Amending 1971 Zoning Ordinance
30-1974            8-21-1974  Amending the Zoning Map
18-1975            5-28-1975  Amending 1971 Zoning Ordinance
6-1976             3-3-1976   Amending 1971 Zoning Ordinance
20-1976            6-16-1976  Amending the Zoning Map
9-1977             4-13-1977  Amending 1971 Zoning Ordinance
20-1977            7-20-1977  Amending the Zoning Map
21-1977            7-20-1977  Amending 1971 Zoning Ordinance
33-1977            9-21-1977  Amending 1971 Zoning Ordinance
36-1977            9-28-1977  Amending the Zoning Map
3-1978             3-15-1978  Amending 1971 Zoning Ordinance
5-1978             2-22-1978  Amending the Zoning Map
10-1978            3-22-1978  Amending 1971 Zoning Ordinance
23-1978            6-21-1978  Amending 1971 Zoning Ordinance
36-1978            9-20-1978  Amending 1971 Zoning Ordinance
46-1978            12-6-1978  Amending the Zoning Map
54-1978            12-13-1978 Amending the Zoning Map
3-1980             5-14-1980  Amending the Zoning Map
50-1980            11-26-1980 Amending 1971 Zoning Ordinance
5-1981             3-25-1981  Amending 1971 Zoning Ordinance
6-1981             3-25-1981  Amending the Zoning Map
8-1981             4-15-1981  Amending the Zoning Map
18-1981            5-27-1981  Amending 1971 Zoning Ordinance
21-1981            5-27-1981  Amending 1971 Zoning Ordinance
36-1981            7-29-1981  Amending 1971 Zoning Ordinance
43-1981            9-9-1981   Amending 1971 Zoning Ordinance
50-1981            11-4-1981  Amending 1971 Zoning Ordinance
53-1981            1-6-1981   Amending 1971 Zoning Ordinance
8-1982             4-7-1982   Amending 1971 Zoning Ordinance
41-1982            10-20-1982 Amending the Zoning Map
4-1983             2-9-1983   Amending 1971 Zoning Ordinance
5-1983             2-9-1983   Amending the Zoning Map
9-1983             3-2-1983   Amending the Zoning Map
38-1983            9-28-1983  Amending the Zoning Map
20-1984            3-20-1984  Amending 1971 Zoning Ordinance
27-1984            3-21-1984  Amending 1971 Zoning Ordinance
40-1985            5-8-1985   Amending 1971 Zoning Ordinance
41-1985            5-8-1985   Amending the Zoning Map
68-1985            8-28-1985  Amending 1971 Zoning Ordinance
73-1986            9-17-1986  Amending 1971 Zoning Ordinance
19-2001            6-25-2001  2001 Zoning Ordinance
7-2003             2-24-2003  Amending 2001 Zoning Ordinance
57-2005            9-26-2005  Amending the Zoning Map
69-2005            12-12-2005 Amending 2001 Zoning Ordinance
96B-2005           1-9-2006   Amending 2001 Zoning Ordinance and Zoning Map
51-2006            8-16-2006  Amending the Zoning Map
2-2008             1-28-2008  Amending 2001 Zoning Ordinance
47-2008            7-14-2008  Amending the Zoning Map
48-2008            7-14-2008  Amending the Zoning Map
54-2008            8-25-2008  Amending 2001 Zoning Ordinance
66-2008            10-13-2008 Amending 2001 Zoning Ordinance
80-2008            11-24-2008 Amending 2001 Zoning Ordinance
9-2009             2-23-2009  Amending 2001 Zoning Ordinance and Zoning Map
33-2009            6-22-2009  Amending 2001 Zoning Ordinance and Zoning Map
43-2010            8-24-2010  Amending the Zoning Map.
60-2017            7-10-2017  Amending the 2010 Zoning Map
35A-2021           5-10-2021  Amending the 2010 Zoning Map
36-2021            5-10-2021  Amending the 2010 Zoning Map
42-2022            5-9-2022   Amending the Zoning Map
 
 
Chapter DT
DERIVATION TABLE
§
DT-1.   Derivation Table of 2001 Code of Ordinances to 2013 Code
§ DT-1.  Derivation Table of 2001 Code of Ordinances to 2013 Code
 
NCM = Not Code material (legislation is not general or permanent in nature).
REP = Repealed at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Part
      1.
NI  = Not included in Code but saved from repeal.
NLP = New legislation is pending.
Chapter/Title From 2001 Code of Ordinances Location in 2013 Code
Chapter/Title From 2001 Code of         Location in 2013 Code
Ordinances
Fee Schedule                            Ch. 212
Charter                                 Home Rule Charter
Ch. 1, Administration and Government     
Part 1, Administrative Code             Ch. 5
Part 2, Personnel Code                  Ch. 70
Part 3, Compensation of Elected         Ch. 91, Part 1
Officials
Part 4, Authorities                      
A, Municipal Airport Authority          Ch. 14, Part 2
B, Reading Parking Authority            Ch. 14, Part 1
C, Reading Area Water Authority         Ch. 14, Part 3
D, Reading Downtown Improvement         Ch. 14, Part 5
District Authority
E, Berks County Convention Center       Ch. 14, Part 4
Authority
Part 5, Boards, Departments,             
Commissions, Committees and Councils
A, Park and Recreation Citizen's        Repealed by Ord. No. 45-2012
Advisory Committee
B, Board of Health                      Ch. 23, Part 8
C, Human Relations Commission;          Ch. 23, Part 5
Discrimination
D, Blighted Property Review Committee   Ch. 23, Part 9
E, Citizens Advisory Board (CAB)        Ch. 23, Part 3
F, Penn Square Commission               Ch. 23, Part 2
G, Planning Commission                  Ch. 23, Part 1
H, Planning Division of the Department  Ch. 5, Part 8
of Community Development
I, GPU Stadium Commission               Ch. 23, Part 4
J, Building Inspector Civil Service     REP
Board
K, Recreation Committee                 REP
L, Charter Board                        Ch. 23, Part 6
M, Establishing a Minority Business     Ch. 23, Part 7
Procurement Advisory Board
N, Environmental Advisory Board         Ch. 23, Part 11
O, Diversity Board                      Ch. 23, Part 10
P, Reading Main Street Program Board    Ch. 23, Part 12
Part 6, Pensions                         
A, Police Pension Fund                  Ch. 62, Part 4
B, Firemen's Pension Fund               Ch. 62, Part 3
C, Officers and Employees Retirement    Ch. 62, Part 2
System
D, New Officers and Employees Pension   Ch. 62, Part 1
Fund
Part 7, Fire Insurance Proceeds          
A, Fire Insurance Proceeds Escrow       Ch. 231, Part 1
Procedures
B, Control of Fire Insurance Proceeds   Ch. 231, Part 2
Part 8, Department of Police            Ch. 77, Part 1
Part 9, Department of Fire and Rescue   Ch. 36
Services
Part 10, Policy for Access to Public    Ch. 442
Records
Part 11, Initiative and Referendum      Ch. 51
Ch. 2, Animals                           
Part 1, Animal Control                  Ch. 141, Part 2
Part 2, Pigeons                         Ch. 141, Part 1
Ch. 3, Bicycles                          
Part 1, Bicycle Regulations             REP Ch. 4, Buildings
Part 1, Historical Districts            Ch. 295
Part 2, House Numbering                 Ch. 302
Ch. 5, Code Enforcement                  
Part 1, Building Code                    
A, Implementation                       Ch. 180, Part 1
B, International Building Code          Ch. 180, Part 8
C, International Existing Building Code Ch. 180, Part 5
Part 2, International Plumbing Code     Ch. 180, Part 9
Part 3, International Fire Code         Superseded by Ord. No. 60-2012; see now
                                        Ch. 180, Part 14
Part 4, International Electrical Code   Ch. 180, Part 7
Part 5, International Mechanical Code   Ch. 180, Part 6
Part 6, International Property          Superseded by Ord. No. 20-2012; see now
Maintenance Code                        Ch. 180, Part 13
Part 7 (Reserved)                       Omitted
Part 8, International Residential Code  Ch. 180, Part 4
Part 9, Citizens Inspection Program     REP
Part 10, Wildland-Urban Interface Code  Ch. 180, Part 2
Part 11, Performance Code for Buildings Ch. 180, Part 3
and Facilities
Part 12, International Fuel Gas Code    Ch. 180, Part 10
Part 13, International Energy           Ch. 180, Part 11
Conservation Code
Part 14, Property Maintenance Rules and Ch. 180, Part 12
Regulations
Part 15, Power Inspection Program Re-   Ch. 201, Part 1
Introduction
Ch. 6, Conduct                           
Part 1, Alcoholic Beverages              
A, Bottle Clubs                         Ch. 127, Part 3
B, Prohibiting Consumption or Storage
of Alcoholic Beverages on Business      Ch. 127, Part 1
Premises During Certain Hours
C, Prohibiting Consumption of Alcoholic
Beverages Without the Consent of the    Ch. 127, Part 2
Owner
Part 2, Curfew                          Ch. 188, Part 1
Part 3, Graffiti                        Ch. 272
Part 4, Conduct                          
A, Prohibiting the Discharge of         Ch. 219
Firearms
B, Tampering With Public Property       Ch. 536
C, Loitering; Obstructing Public Places Ch. 353
Part 5, Litter and Advertising Material Ch. 346
Part 6, Law Enforcement                  
A, False Reports                        Ch. 325, Part 2
B, Crossing Police Lines                Ch. 325, Part 1
Part 7, School Time Curfew              Ch. 188, Part 2
Part 8, Canvassing and Solicitation     Ch. 410, Part 2
Ch. 7, Fire Prevention and Fire          
Protection
Part 1, Fireworks                       Ch. 225
Part 2, Space Heaters                   REP
Part 3, Smoke, Cinders, Dust, Fly-Ash,  Ch. 237, Part 1
Noxious Acids, Fumes and Gases
Ch. 8, Floodplains (Reserved)            
Omitted Ch. 9, Grading and Excavating    
(Reserved)
Omitted Ch. 10, Health and Safety        
Part 1, Health Code                     Ch. 288, Part 1
Part 2, Noise Control                   Ch. 387
Part 3, Hazardous Substances Control    Ch. 328
Part 4, Weeds                           Superseded by Ord. Nos. 28-2010 and 20-
                                        2012; see Ch. 180
Part 5, Storage of Motor Vehicle        Ch. 564
Nuisances
Part 6, Indoor Furniture                Ch. 288, Part 2
Part 7, Boarded Up Structures           Ch. 288, Part 3
Part 8, Unprotected Vehicle Tires       Ch. 288, Part 5
Part 9, Stagnant Water Pools            Ch. 288, Part 4
Part 10, Commercial Laundry Code        Ch. 173
Part 11, Sexually Oriented Business     Ch. 473
Part 12, Food Code                      Ch. 251
Part 13, City Outdoor Air Policy        REP
Part 14, Regulating Massage             Ch. 364
Establishments
Part 15, Sidewalk Cafes                 Ch. 479
Part 16, Sidewalk Sales                 Ch. 453, Part 1
Part 17, Sidewalk Vendors               Ch. 453, Part 2
Part 18, Health and Safety Inspection   Repealed by Ord. No. 75-2011; see now
Ordinance                               Ch. 431, Part 2
Part 19, Regulation and Limitation of   Ch. 502, Part 1
Portable Home Storage Units Ordinances
Part 20, Mobile Vendors                 Ch. 453, Part 3
Part 21, Vending Machines               Ch. 583, Part 1
Ch. 11, Housing - Rental                 
Part 1, Rental                          Ch. 308, Part 1
Part 2, Waiver of Fees                  Ch. 308, Part 2
Ch. 12, Libraries                        
Part 1, Public Library                  Ch. 332
Ch. 13, Licenses, Permits and General    
Business Regulations
Part 1, Burglary and Robbery Alarm      Ch. 120
Systems
Part 2, Licenses                        Ch. 339, Part 1
Part 3, Transient Retail Business       Ch. 410, Part 1
Part 4, Business Privilege License      Ch. 339, Part 2
Part 5, Vending Machines                REP
Part 6, Milk and Milk Products          REP
Part 7, Frozen Desserts                 REP
Part 8, Meat and Meat Products          REP
Part 9, Poultry                         REP
Part 10, Vehicle Repair Shops           Ch. 570
Part 11, Ambulances                     REP
Part 12, Poles                          Ch. 424
Part 13, Pawnbrokers                    Ch. 403
Part 14, Cable Television               Ch. 166
Part 15, Scrap Metal Dealers            Ch. 460
Ch. 14, Mobile Homes and Mobile Home    Omitted
Parks (Reserved)
Ch. 15, Motor Vehicles and Traffic      Ch. 576
Ch. 16, Parks and Recreation             
Part 1, Park Code                       Ch. 396, Part 3
Part 2, Penn Square                     Ch. 396, Part 2
Part 3, Firemen's Memorial Band Shell   Ch. 396, Part 1
Ch. 17, Planned Residential Development Omitted
(Reserved)
Ch. 18, Sewers and Sewage Disposal       
Part 1, Sewer Uses                      Ch. 467, Part 2
Part 2, Septic Tanks                    Superseded by Ord. No. 17-1998
Part 3, Sewer Service Rental            Ch. 467, Part 1
Ch. 19, Signs and Billboards             
Part 1, Political Campaign Matter       Ch. 485, Part 1
Part 2, Unauthorized Roadside and       Ch. 485, Part 2
Utility Pole Signs Prohibited
Ch. 20, Solid Waste                      
Part 1, Solid Waste                     Ch. 496, Part 2
Part 2, Dumpster Placement              Ch. 496, Part 1
Ch. 21, Streets and Sidewalks           Ch. 508
Ch. 22, Subdivision and Land            Ch. 515
Development
Ch. 23, Swimming Pools                   
Part 1, Private Swimming Pools          REP
Ch. 24, Taxation; Special                
Part 1, Per Capita Tax                  Ch. 549, Part 6
Part 2, Earned Income Tax                
A, Local Tax Enabling Act               Ch. 549, Part 2
B, Home Rule Earned Income Tax          Superseded by Ord. No. 71-2011; see Ch.
                                        549, Part 11
C, Nonresident Earned Income and Net    Superseded by Ord. No. 61-2011; see Ch.
Profits Tax                             549, Part 10
Part 3, Realty Transfer Tax              
A, Realty Transfer Tax                  Ch. 549, Part 3A
B, Home Rule Realty Transfer Tax        Ch. 549, Part 3B
Part 4, Local Services Tax              Ch. 549, Part 8
Part 5, Business Privilege Tax           
A, Business Privilege Tax Ordinance     Ch. 549, Part 4
B, Business Privilege Tax Regulations   Ch. 549, Part 5
Part 6, Amusement Tax                   Ch. 549, Part 7
Part 7, Tax Abatement                    
A, Residential Tax Abatement            Ch. 543, Part 1
B, Local Economic Revitalization Tax    Ch. 543, Part 2
Assistance (LERTA) Program
C, Enterprise Zone LERTA Opportunity    Ch. 543, Part 3
Part 8, Discount and Penalties          Ch. 549, Part 1
Part 9, Schedule of Attorney's Fees for Ch. 378, Part 1
Collection of Delinquent Taxes
Part 10, Schedule of Attorney's Fees
for Collection of Delinquent Earned
Income Taxes, Business Privilege Taxes  Ch. 378, Part 3
and Fees, Per Capita Taxes, and Other
Non-Real Estate Based Taxes and
Receivables
Ch. 25, Trees                            
Part 1, Shade Trees                     Ch. 555, Part 1
Ch. 26, Water                            
Part 1, Watershed Stormwater Management Ch. 505, Part 1
Ch. 27, Zoning                          Ch. 600
Appendix                                 
A. Annexation of Territory              Ch. A610
B. Bond Issues and Loans                Ch. A611
C. Franchises and Services              Ch. A612
D. Governmental and Intergovernmental   Ch. A613
Affair
E. Plan Approval                        Ch. A614
F. Public Property                      Ch. A615
G. Sewers                               Ch. A616
H. Streets and Sidewalks                Ch. A617
I. Water                                Ch. A618
J. Zoning; Prior Ordinances             Ch. A619
 
Chapter DL
DISPOSITION LIST
§
DL-101.   Disposition of legislation.
§ DL-101. Disposition of legislation.
Ordinance No. Adoption Date Subject Disposition
Ordinance Adoption Subject                                                       Disposition
No.       Date
26-1958   8-13-    Streets and sidewalks: street vacation                        Ch. A617
          1958
Res. 22   1-23-    Parking limitation in designated area                         Ch. 576,
          1974                                                                   Part 4
1-2013    1-28-    Transfer of funds                                             NCM
          2013
2-2013    1-28-    Fee Schedule amendment                                        Ch. 212,
          2013                                                                   Part 1
3-2013    1-28-    Transfer of funds                                             NCM
          2013
4-2013    1-28-    Reading Downtown Improvement District Authority amendment     Ch. 14,
          2013                                                                   Part 5
          1-28-                                                                  Repealed by
5-2013    2013     Main Street Program Board amendment                           Ord. No.
                                                                                 40-2018
6-2013                                                                         Withdrawn
7-2013    2-11-    Diversity Board amendment                                     Ch. 23,
          2013                                                                   Part 10
8-2013    2-11-    Sewers: agreement for sewer transportation and treatment      Ch. A616
          2013     services with Laureldale Borough
9-2013    3-7-2013 Governmental and intergovernmental affairs: employee          Ch. A613
                   positions amendment
10-2013   2-25-    Governmental and intergovernmental affairs: amended           Ch. A613
          2013     memorandum of understanding
11-2013   2-25-    Administrative Code amendment                                 Vetoed
          2013
12-2013   3-11-    International Fire Code amendment                             Ch. 180,
          2013                                                                   Part 14
13-2013   3-11-    Bond issues and loans: issuance of promissory notes           Ch. A611
          2013
14-2013                                                                        Withdrawn
15-2013   3-11-    Transfer of funds                                             NCM
          2013
16-2013   4-8-2013 Charter Board amendment                                       Ch. 23,
                                                                                 Part 6
          3-25-                                                                  Ch. 308,
17-2013   2013     Housing: rental and vacant property; disruptive conduct       Parts 1 and
                                                                                 1A
18-2013   3-25-    Governmental and intergovernmental affairs: amended           Ch. A613
          2013     memorandum of understanding
19-2013   4-8-2013 Public property: execute lease with Egelman's Park            Ch. A615
                   Association
20-2013   3-25-    Bond issues and loans: transfer of real estate and assumption Ch. A611
          2013     of associated loan obligation
21-2013   3-25-    Governmental and intergovernmental affairs: employee          Ch. A613
          2013     positions amendment
                                                                                 Repealed
          4-22-    Citizens Advisory Board amendment; Citizens Initiative        and
22-2013   2013     Commission                                                    replaced by
                                                                                 Ord. No.
                                                                                 46-2017
23-2013   4-22-    Firemen's Pension Fund amendment                              Ch. 62,
          2013                                                                   Part 3
24-2013   4-22-    Police Pension Fund amendment                                 Ch. 62,
          2013                                                                   Part 4
25-2013   4-22-    Officers and employees retirement system amendment            Ch. 62,
          2013                                                                   Part 2
26-2013   4-22-    New Officers and Employees Pension Fund Amendment             Ch. 62,
          2013                                                                   Part 1
27-2013   5-28-    Transfer of funds                                             NCM
          2013
28-2013   5-28-    Code of Ethics                                                Ch. 5, Part
          2013                                                                   10
29-2013   5-28-    Fees Schedule amendment                                       Ch. 212,
          2013                                                                   Part 1
30-2013   6-24-    Governmental and intergovernmental affairs: lease of portion  Ch. A613
          2013     of WEEU Building
                                                                                 Repealed by
30A-2013  7-8-2013 Fees Schedule amendment                                       Ord. No.
                                                                                 57-2024
31-2013   7-8-2013 Transfer of funds                                             NCM
32-2013   7-8-2013 Fire insurance proceeds escrow procedures amendment           Ch. 231,
                                                                                 Part 1
33-2013   6-22-    Governmental and intergovernmental affairs: conveyance of     Ch. A613
          2013     properties to City
34-2013   8-12-    Housing: rental and vacant property amendment                 Ch. 308
          2013
35-2013   8-26-    General provisions: amendments during codification            Ch. 1, Part
          2013                                                                   2
36-2013   8-26-    Adoption of Code                                              Ch. 1, Part
          2013                                                                   1
37-2013   8-26-    Governmental and intergovernmental affairs: employee          Ch. A613
          2013     positions amendment
38-2013   8-12-    Alarm systems amendment                                       Ch. 120
          2013
39-2013   8-26-    Governmental and intergovernmental affairs: agreement for      
          2013     recycling collection service
40-2013   8-26-    Streets and sidewalks: street vacation                        Ch. A617
          2013
41-2013   9-23-    Tattoo and piercing establishments                            Ch. 540
          2013
42-2013   9-23-    Fees Schedule amendment                                       Ch. 212,
          2013                                                                   Part 1
43-2013   9-23-    Public property: lease agreement for portions of Angelica     Ch. A615
          2013     Park
44-2013   10-28-   Transfer of funds                                             NCM
          2013
45-2013   10-14-   Transfer of funds                                             NCM
          2013
46-2013   10-14-   Governmental and intergovernmental affairs: employee          Ch. A613
          2013     positions amendment
47-2013   10-14-   Transfer of funds                                             NCM
          2013
48-2013   10-14-   Housing: abandoned real property registration                 Ch. 308,
          2013                                                                   Part 3
49-2013   10-28-   Vehicles and traffic amendment                                Ch. 576
          2013
50-2013   10-14-   Public property: first amendment to lease agreement for       Ch. A615
          2013     Angelica Park baseball facilities
50A-2013  10-28-   Transfer of funds                                             NCM
          2013
51-2013   10-28-   Administrative Code amendment                                 Ch. 5
          2013
52-2013   10-28-   Administrative Code amendment                                 Ch. 5
          2013
53-2013   10-28-   Streets and sidewalks amendment                               Ch. 508
          2013
54-2013   11-4-    Governmental and intergovernmental affairs: Municipalities    Ch. A613
          2013     Financial Recovery Act Recovery Plan amendment
55-2013   11-12-   Parks and recreation: memorial structures and public property Ch. 396,
          2013                                                                   Part 5
56-2013   11-12-   Public property: easement agreement with Muhlenberg Township  Ch. A613
          2013     Authority
57-2013   11-12-   Transfer of funds                                             NCM
          2013
58-2013   11-12-   Rain barrels amendment                                        Ch. 438
          2013
59-2013   11-12-   City of Reading Revitalization and Improvement Zone Authority Ch. 14,
          2013                                                                   Part 7
60-2013   11-25-   2014 real estate taxes                                        NCM
          2013
61-2013   Not                                                                    
          adopted
62-2013   11-25-   2014 budget                                                   NCM
          2013
63-2013   11-25-   2014 capital improvement plan budget                          NCM
          2013
64-2013   11-25-   Governmental and intergovernmental affairs: 2014 employee     Ch. A613
          2013     positions
65-2013                                                                        Withdrawn
66-2013                                                                        Withdrawn
67-2013   11-25-   Home Rule per capita tax                                      Ch. 549,
          2013                                                                   Part 11
          12-9-                                                                  Superseded
68-2013   2013     Nonresident earned income and net profits tax                 by Ord. No.
                                                                                 92-2014
69-2013   12-9-    Vehicles and traffic amendment                                Ch. 576
          2013
70-2013   12-9-    Solid waste: dumpster placement amendment                     Ch. 496,
          2013                                                                   Part 1
                                                                                 Repealed
          12-9-                                                                  and
71-2013   2013     Solid waste: storage and collection amendment                 replaced by
                                                                                 Ord. No.
                                                                                 49-2020
72-2013   12-9-    Construction codes: property maintenance rules and            Ch. 180,
          2013     regulations amendment                                         Part 12
                                                                                 Repealed
          12-9-                                                                  and
73-2013   2013     Food Code amendment                                           replaced by
                                                                                 Ord. No.
                                                                                 26-2023
74-2013   12-9-    Streets and sidewalks amendment                               Ch. 508
          2013
75-2013   12-9-    Governmental and intergovernmental affairs: memorandum of     Ch. A613
          2013     understanding
76-2013   12-9-                                                                 Not adopted
          2013
77-2013   12-9-                                                                 Not adopted
          2013
78-2013   12-16-   Fees Schedule amendment                                       Ch. 212,
          2013                                                                   Part 1
79-2013   12-16-   Transfer of funds                                             NCM
          2013
80-2013   12-9-    Transfer of funds                                             NCM
          2013
81-2013   12-9-    Sewer service rental agreement                                Ch. 467,
          2013                                                                   Part 1
82-2013   12-9-    Transfer of funds                                             NCM
          2013
83-2013   12-16-   Zoning amendment                                              Ch. 600
          2013
84-2013   12-9-    Governmental and intergovernmental affairs: Municipalities    Ch. A613
          2013     Financial Recovery Act Recovery Plan amendment
1-2014    1-27-    Transfer of funds                                             NCM
          2014
2-2014    1-27-    Transfer of funds                                             NCM
          2014
3-2014    1-27-    Transfer of funds                                             NCM
          2014
4-2014    1-27-    Per capita tax amendment                                      Ch. 549,
          2014                                                                   Part 6
5-2014                                                                         Withdrawn
6-2014    1-27-    Administrative Code amendment                                 Ch. 5
          2014
7-2014    1-27-    Administrative Code amendment                                 Ch. 5
          2014
8-2014    1-27-    Administrative Code amendment                                 Ch. 5
          2014
9-2014                                                                         Withdrawn
10-2014   4-14-    Public property: temporary easement agreement for             Ch. A615
          2014     construction purposes
11-2014   4-14-    Public property: conveyance of property                       Ch. A615
          2014
          2-10-    Governmental and intergovernmental affairs: placing           Repealed by
12-2014   2014     referendum on primary ballot                                  Ord. No.
                                                                                 32-2014
13-2014                                                                        Not adopted
          2-10-    Governmental and intergovernmental affairs: placing           Repealed by
14-2014   2014     referendum on primary ballot                                  Ord. No.
                                                                                 28-2014
          2-10-    Governmental and intergovernmental affairs: placing           Repealed by
15-2014   2014     referendum on primary ballot                                  Ord. No.
                                                                                 31-2014
          2-10-    Governmental and intergovernmental affairs: placing           Repealed by
16-2014   2014     referendum on primary ballot                                  Ord. No.
                                                                                 27-2014
          2-10-    Governmental and intergovernmental affairs: placing           Repealed by
17-2014   2014     referendum on primary ballot                                  Ord. No.
                                                                                 30-2014
18-2014                                                                        Number not
                                                                                 used
19-2014   2-24-    Transfer of funds                                             NCM
          2014
                                                                                 Repealed
          3-10-                                                                  and
20-2014   2014     Solid waste: storage and collection amendment                 replaced by
                                                                                 Ord. No.
                                                                                 49-2020
21-2014   3-10-    Fees Schedule amendment                                       Ch. 212,
          2014                                                                   Part 1
22-2014   3-10-    Transfer of funds                                             NCM
          2014
23-2014   3-10-    Transfer of funds                                             NCM
          2014
24-2014   4-14-    Housing permits amendment                                     Ch. 308,
          2014                                                                   Part 1
25-2014   4-14-    Fees Schedule amendment                                       Ch. 212,
          2014                                                                   Part 1
26-2014                                                                        Withdrawn
27-2014   4-14-    Governmental and intergovernmental affairs: placing           Ch. A613
          2014     referendum on general election ballot
28-2014   4-14-    Governmental and intergovernmental affairs: placing           Ch. A613
          2014     referendum on general election ballot
29-2014   4-14-    Governmental and intergovernmental affairs: placing           Ch. A613
          2014     referendum on general election ballot
30-2014   4-14-    Governmental and intergovernmental affairs: placing           Ch. A613
          2014     referendum on general election ballot
31-2014   4-14-    Governmental and intergovernmental affairs: placing           Ch. A613
          2014     referendum on general election ballot
32-2014   4-14-    Governmental and intergovernmental affairs: placing           Ch. A613
          2014     referendum on general election ballot
33-2014   4-14-    Litter and advertising material amendment                     Ch. 346
          2014
34-2014   4-14-    2014 budget amendment                                         NCM
          2014
          4-14-    Franchises and services: first amendment to agreement between
35-2014   2014     City and Reading School District for Reading Recreation       Ch. A612
                   Commission
36-2014   4-14-    Zoning Map amendment                                          NCM
          2014
37-2014                                                                        Withdrawn
38-2014   4-14-    Administrative Code amendment                                 Ch. 5
          2014
39-2014   6-9-2014 Housing permits amendment                                     Ch. 308
40-2014   4-28-    Fees Schedule amendment                                       Ch. 212,
          2014                                                                   Part 1
41-2014                                                                        Withdrawn
42-2014   6-9-2014 Governmental and intergovernmental affairs: memorandum of     Ch. A613
                   understanding
43-2014   4-28-    Home Rule per capita tax amendment                            Ch. 549,
          2014                                                                   Part 11
44-2014   5-27-    Administrative Code amendment                                 Ch. 5
          2014
45-2014   6-9-2014 Fees Schedule amendment                                       Ch. 212,
                                                                                 Part 1
          5-27-    Water: termination of lease and operating agreement with      Repealed by
46-2014   2014     Reading Area Water Authority                                  Ord. No.
                                                                                 66-2014
47-2014   6-23-    Transfer of funds                                             NCM
          2014
48-2014   6-23-    Animal control amendment                                      Ch. 141,
          2014                                                                   Part 2
49-2014   6-23-    Transfer of funds                                             NCM
          2014
50-2014   7-28-    Vehicles and traffic amendment                                Ch. 576
          2014
51-2014   7-28-    Vehicles and traffic amendment                                Ch. 576
          2014
52-2014   7-28-    Vehicles and traffic amendment                                Ch. 576
          2014
53-2014   7-28-    Vehicles and traffic amendment                                Ch. 576
          2014
54-2014   7-28-    Transfer of funds                                             NCM
          2014
55-2014   7-28-    Government and intergovernmental affairs: intermunicipal      Ch. A613
          2014     cooperation agreement
56-2014   7-28-    Governmental and intergovernmental affairs: employee          Ch. A613
          2014     positions amendment
57-2014   7-28-    Governmental and intergovernmental affairs: employee          Ch. A613
          2014     positions amendment
58-2014   7-28-    2014 budget amendment                                         NCM
          2014
59-2014   8-11-    Governmental and intergovernmental affairs: establishing      Ch. A613
          2014     salary of Director of Public Works
60-2014   8-11-    Governmental and intergovernmental affairs: employee          Ch. A613
          2014     positions amendment
61-2014   8-11-    Personnel amendment                                           Ch. 70
          2014
          8-11-    Public property: execute fourth addendum to lease agreement   Repealed by
62-2014   2014     with RAWA                                                     Ord. No.
                                                                                 99-2014
63-2014                                                                        Withdrawn
64-2014   8-25-    Reading Area Water Authority amendment                        Ch. 14,
          2014                                                                   Part 3
65-2014   9-8-2014 Administrative Code amendment                                 Ch. 5
66-2014   9-8-2014 Water: repeal of dissolution of Reading Area Water Authority  Ch. A618
67-2014                                                                        Number not
                                                                                 used
68-2014   9-22-    Transfer of funds                                             NCM
          2014
69-2014   9-22-    Transfer of funds                                             NCM
          2014
70-2014   9-22-    Governmental and intergovernmental affairs: establishing      Ch. A613
          2014     salary of Director of Fire and Rescue Services
71-2014   9-22-    Governmental and intergovernmental affairs: execution of      Ch. A613
          2014     lease agreement
72-2014   9-22-    Transfer of funds                                             NCM
          2014
73-2014   10-13-   Transfer of funds                                             NCM
          2014
74-2014   10-13-   First Energy Stadium Commission amendment                     Ch. 23,
          2014                                                                   Part 4
75-2014   10-13-   Bond issues and loans: issuance of general obligation bonds   Ch. A611
          2014
76-2014   10-13-   Transfer of funds                                             NCM
          2014
77-2014                                                                        Number not
                                                                                 used
          10-27-                                                                 Repealed by
78-2014   2014     Main Street Program Board amendment                           Ord. No.
                                                                                 40-2018
79-2014   10-27-   Personnel amendment                                           Ch. 70
          2014
80-2014   10-27-   No parking at and near 118 South Ninth Street                 Ch. 576,
          2014                                                                   Part 4
81-2014   10-27-   No parking at and near 290 Morgantown Road                    Ch. 576,
          2014                                                                   Part 4
82-2014   10-27-   Governmental and intergovernmental affairs: redevelopment     Ch. A613
          2014     agreement
83-2014   11-10-   No parking across from 1007 Bern Street                       Ch. 576,
          2014                                                                   Part 4
84-2014   12-8-    Governmental and intergovernmental affairs: settlement        Ch. A613
          2014     agreement
85-2014   11-10-   No parking adjacent to 1426 Perkiomen Avenue                  Ch. 576,
          2014                                                                   Part 4
86-2014   11-10-   Transfer of funds                                             NCM
          2014
87-2014   11-10-   Governmental and intergovernmental affairs: employee          Ch. A613
          2014     positions amendment
88-2014   11-10-   Transfer of funds                                             NCM
          2014
89-2014   11-24-   Public property: right-of-way grant                           Ch. A615
          2014
90-2014   11-24-   Governmental and intergovernmental affairs: Municipalities    Ch. A613
          2014     Financial Recovery Act Recovery Plan amendment
91-2014   11-24-   2015 real estate taxes                                        NCM
          2014
          11-24-                                                                 Superseded
92-2014   2014     Nonresident earned income and net profits tax                 by Ord. No.
                                                                                 66-2016
93-2014   11-24-   Governmental and intergovernmental affairs: 2015 employee     Ch. A613
          2014     positions
94-2014   11-24-   2015 budget                                                   NCM
          2014
95-2014   11-24-   2015 capital improvement plan budget                          NCM
          2014
96-2014   11-24-   Public property: grant of right-of- way and easement          Ch. A615
          2014
97-2014   12-8-    Business privilege license amendment                          Ch. 339,
          2014                                                                   Part 2
98-2014   12-8-    Fees Schedule amendment                                       Ch. 212,
          2014                                                                   Part 1
99-2014   12-8-    Public property: execute fourth addendum to lease agreement   Ch. A615
          2014     with RAWA
100-2014  12-8-    Fees Schedule amendment                                       Ch. 212,
          2014                                                                   Part 1
101-2014  12-22-   Sewer service rental amendment                                Ch. 467,
          2014                                                                   Part 1
102-2014  12-22-   Code and License Appeals Board                                Ch. 23,
          2014                                                                   Part 14
103-2014  12-22-   Transfer of funds                                             NCM
          2014
104-2014  12-22-   Transfer of funds                                             NCM
          2014
105-2014  12-22-   Vehicles and traffic amendment                                Ch. 576
          2014
106-2014  12-22-   Vehicles and traffic amendment                                Ch. 576
          2014
107-2014  12-22-   Transfer of funds                                             NCM
          2014
1-2015    1-26-    Reading Area Water Authority amendment                        Ch. 14,
          2015                                                                   Part 3
          1-26-                                                                  Ch. 219,
2-2015    2015     Firearms repealer                                             reference
                                                                                 only
3-2015    1-26-    Administrative Code amendment                                 Ch. 5
          2015
4-2015    1-26-    Administrative Code amendment                                 Ch. 5
          2015
5-2015    1-26-    Fees Schedule amendment                                       Ch. 212,
          2015                                                                   Part 1
6-2015    2-17-    Transfer of funds                                             NCM
          2015
7-2015    2-17-    Fees Schedule amendment                                       Ch. 212,
          2015                                                                   Part 1
8-2015    3-9-2015 Transfer of funds                                             NCM
9-2015    3-9-2015 2015 recycling budget amendment                               NCM
10-2015   3-9-2015 Governmental and intergovernmental affairs: 2015 employee     Ch. A613
                   positions amendment
11-2015   3-9-2015 Personnel amendment                                           Ch. 70
12-2015   3-9-2015 Bond issues and loans: issuance of general obligation bonds   Ch. A611
13-2015   3-23-    Zoning amendment                                              Ch. 600
          2015
14-2015   3-23-    International Plumbing Code amendment                         Ch. 180,
          2015                                                                   Part 9
15-2015   4-13-    Licenses and permits: regulation of businesses, trades and    Ch. 339,
          2015     professions                                                   Part 3
16-2015                                                                        Withdrawn
17-2015                                                                        Withdrawn
18-2015   4-27-    Storage of vehicle nuisances amendment                        Ch. 564
          2015
19-2015                                                                        Not adopted
20-2015                                                                        Not adopted
21-2015   5-11-    Transfer of funds                                             NCM
          2015
22-2015   5-11-    Animal control amendment                                      Ch. 141,
          2015                                                                   Part 2
23-2015   5-26-    Fees Schedule amendment                                       Ch. 212,
          2015                                                                   Part 1
24-2015   5-26-    Transfer of funds                                             NCM
          2015
25-2015   5-26-    Administrative Code amendment                                 Ch. 5
          2015
26-2015   5-26-    Governmental and intergovernmental affairs: 2015 employee     Ch. A613
          2015     positions amendment
27-2015   5-26-    Transfer of funds                                             NCM
          2015
28-2015   5-26-    Transfer of funds                                             NCM
          2015
29-2015   6-22-    Historical and conservation districts amendment               Ch. 295
          2015
30-2015   6-22-    Charter Board amendment                                       Ch. 23,
          2015                                                                   Part 6
31-2015                                                                        Withdrawn
32-2015                                                                        Withdrawn
33-2015   6-22-    Governmental and intergovernmental affairs: lease agreement   Ch. A613
          2015     with Redevelopment Authority
34-2015   6-22-    Personnel amendment                                           Ch. 70
          2015
35-2015                                                                        Number not
                                                                                 used
36-2015                                                                        Number not
                                                                                 used
37-2015   7-27-    Firearms amendment                                            Ch. 219,
          2015                                                                   Part 1
38-2015   7-27-    Transfer of funds                                             NCM
          2015
39-2015   7-27-    Administrative Code amendment                                 Ch. 5
          2015
40-2015   7-27-    Streets and sidewalks amendment                               Ch. 508
          2015
41-2015   8-10-    Vehicles and traffic amendment                                Ch. 576
          2015
42-2015   8-10-    Fees Schedule amendment                                       Ch. 212,
          2015                                                                   Part 1
43-2015   8-24-    Fees Schedule amendment                                       Ch. 212,
          2015                                                                   Part 1
44-2015   8-24-    Fees Schedule amendment                                       Ch. 212,
          2015                                                                   Part 1
45-2015   8-24-    Historical and conservation districts amendment               Ch. 295
          2015
46-2015   9-8-2015 Fees Schedule amendment                                       Ch. 212,
                                                                                 Part 1
47-2015   9-14-    Police Pension Fund amendment                                 Ch. 62,
          2015                                                                   Part 4
48-2015   11-9-    Reading Downtown Improvement District Authority amendment     Ch. 14,
          2015                                                                   Part 5
49-2015   9-28-    Transfer of funds                                             NCM
          2015
50-2015   9-28-    Sidewalk sales amendment                                      Ch. 453,
          2015                                                                   Part 1
51-2015   9-28-    Streets and sidewalks amendment                               Ch. 508
          2015
52-2015   9-28-    Diversity Board amendment                                     Ch. 23,
          2015                                                                   Part 10
53-2015   10-12-   Public property: lease agreement with "Reading's Christmas on Ch. A615
          2015     the Mountain"
54-2015   10-12-   Vehicles and traffic amendment                                Ch. 576
          2015
55-2015   10-12-   Administrative Code amendment                                 Ch. 5
          2015
56-2015   11-9-    Streets and sidewalks: street vacation                        Ch. A617
          2015
57-2015   10-26-   Zoning amendment                                              Ch. 600
          2015
58-2015   10-26-   Zoning amendment                                              Ch. 600
          2015
59-2015   10-26-   Vehicles and traffic amendment                                Ch. 576
          2015
60-2015   11-9-    Storage of vehicle nuisances amendment                        Ch. 564
          2015
61-2015   10-26-   Sales: sidewalk vendors amendment                             Ch. 453,
          2015                                                                   Part 2
62-2015   10-26-   Bond issues and loans: issuance of revenue notes              Ch. A611
          2015
63-2015   11-9-    Transfer of funds                                             NCM
          2015
64-2015   11-9-    Transfer of funds                                             NCM
          2015
65-2015   11-9-    Transfer of funds                                             NCM
          2015
66-2015   11-23-   Nonresident earned income and net profits tax                 Ch. 549,
          2015                                                                   Part 9
67-2015   11-23-   2016 real estate taxes                                        NCM
          2015
68-2015   11-23-   2016 budget                                                   NCM
          2015
69-2015   11-23-   2016 capital improvement budget                               NCM
          2015
70-2015   11-23-   Governmental and intergovernmental affairs: 2016 employee     Ch. A613
          2015     positions
71-2015   11-23-   Governmental and intergovernmental affairs: amending salary   Ch. A613
          2015     of City Solicitor
72-2015   11-23-   Fees Schedule amendment                                       Ch. 212,
          2015                                                                   Part 1
73-2015   11-23-   Transfer of funds                                             NCM
          2015
74-2015                                                                        Withdrawn
75-2015   12-21-   Public property: execute fifth addendum to lease agreement    Ch. A615
          2015     with RAWA
76-2015                                                                        Withdrawn
77-2015   11-23-   Streets and sidewalks amendment                               Ch. 508
          2015
          11-23-                                                                 Ch. 308,
78-2015   2015     Housing permits amendment; abandoned property registration    Part 1; Ch.
                                                                                 308, Part 3
79-2015   11-23-   Fees Schedule amendment                                       Ch. 212,
          2015                                                                   Part 1
80-2015   11-23-   Fees Schedule amendment                                       Ch. 212,
          2015                                                                   Part 1
81-2015   11-23-   Administrative Code amendment                                 Ch. 5
          2015
82-2015   11-23-   Administrative Code amendment                                 Ch. 5
          2015
83-2015   12-7-    Designated portions of earned income tax for 2016 capital     NCM
          2015     improvements
84-2015   12-7-    Transfer of funds                                             NCM
          2015
85-2015   12-21-   Transfer of funds                                             NCM
          2015
86-2015   12-21-   Transfer of funds                                             NCM
          2015
1-2016    1-27-    Administrative Code amendment                                 Ch. 5
          2016
2-2016    1-27-    Administrative Code amendment                                 Ch. 5
          2016
3-2016    1-27-    Stop intersection                                             NCM
          2016
4-2016    1-27-    Governmental and intergovernmental affairs: employee          Ch. A613
          2016     positions amendment
5-2016    1-27-    2016 budget amendment                                         NCM
          2016
6-2016    2-22-    Fees Schedule amendment                                       Ch. 212,
          2016                                                                   Part 1
7-2016    2-22-    Appropriations transfer                                       NCM
          2016
8-2016    3-28-    First Energy Stadium Commission amendment                     Ch. 23,
          2016                                                                   Part 4
9-2016    2-22-    Public property: right-of-way grant                           Ch. A615
          2016
10-2016   2-22-    Public property: grant of temporary easement                  Ch. A615
          2016
11-2016   3-14-    Fees Schedule amendment                                       Ch. 212,
          2016                                                                   Part 1
12-2016   2-22-    Governmental and intergovernmental affairs: employee          Ch. A613
          2016     positions amendment
13-2016   3-28-    Governmental and intergovernmental affairs: employee          Ch. A613
          2016     positions amendment
          3-28-                                                                  Repealed by
14-2016   2016     Fees Schedule amendment                                       Ord. No.
                                                                                 57-2024
15-2016   3-28-    Parking restrictions at South 5th and Franklin Streets        Ch. 576,
          2016                                                                   Part 4
16-2016   4-11-    Parking restrictions along North 5th Street                   Ch. 576,
          2016                                                                   Part 4
18-2016   5-9-2016 Administrative Code amendment                                 Ch. 5
19-2016   5-23-    Governmental and intergovernmental affairs: employee          Ch. A613
          2016     positions amendment
20-2016   6-13-    Governmental and intergovernmental affairs: employee          Ch. A613
          2016     positions amendment
21-2016   6-13-    Governmental and intergovernmental affairs: employee          A613
          2016     positions amendment
22-2016   6-13-    Water: termination of lease with Reading Area Water Authority Ch. A618
          2016
22A-2016  7-25-    Authorizing collection agency fees                            NCM
          2016
23-2016   7-25-    Authorizing an appropriations transfer within the Shade Tree  NCM
          2016     Fund
24-2016   7-25-    2016 budget amendment                                         NCM
          2016
25-2016   7-25-    2016 budget amendment                                         NCM
          2016
26-2016   7-25-    Construction codes: property maintenance rules and            Ch. 496,
          2016     regulations amendment                                         Part 1
                                                                                 Repealed
          7-25-                                                                  and
27-2016   2016     Solid waste: storage and collection amendment                 replaced by
                                                                                 Ord. No.
                                                                                 49-2020
28-2016   7-25-    Transfer of funds                                             NCM
          2016
29-2016   8-8-2016 Transfer of funds                                             NCM
30-2016   8-8-2016 Transfer of funds                                             NCM
31-2016   8-8-2016 Vehicles and traffic amendment                                Ch. 576
32-2016   8-8-2016 Adopting 2016 operating budget                                NCM
33-2016   8-8-2016 Zoning amendment                                              Ch. 600
34-2016   8-22-    Administrative Code amendment                                 Ch. 5
          2016
35-2016   8-22-    Public property: purchase of East Reading pool site           A615
          2016
36-2016   8-22-    Budget amendment                                              NCM
          2016
37-2016   8-22-    Budget amendment                                              NCM
          2016
38-2016   8-22-    Budget amendment                                              NCM
          2016
39-2016   9-26-    Parking restrictions on Reed Street                           Ch. 576,
          2016                                                                   Part 4
40-2016   9-26-    Authorizing an appropriations transfer within the General     NCM
          2016     Fund
41-2016   9-26-    Authorizing an appropriations transfer within the Sewer Fund  NCM
          2016
42-2016   9-26-    Budget amendment                                              NCM
          2016
43-2016   10-10-   Governmental and intergovernmental affairs: employee          Ch. A613
          2016     positions amendment
44-2016   10-10-   Governmental and intergovernmental affairs: intergovernmental Ch. A613
          2016     cooperation agreement
45-2016   10-10-   Budget amendment                                              NCM
          2016
46-2016   10-10-   Appropriations transfer                                       NCM
          2016
47-2016   10-10-   Appropriations transfer                                       NCM
          2016
48-2016   10-10-   Appropriations transfer                                       NCM
          2016
49-2016   10-10-   Appropriations transfer                                       NCM
          2016
50-2016   10-24-   Appropriations transfer                                       NCM
          2016
51-2016   10-24-   Governmental and intergovernmental affairs: employee          Ch. A613
          2016     positions amendment
54-2016   11-28-   Imposition of income tax for 2017                             NCM
          2016
55-2016   11-28-   Designation of taxes for capital improvements                 NCM
          2016
61-2016   11-28-   Bond issues and loans                                         Ch. A611
          2016
62-2016   11-28-   Residential parking                                           Ch. 576
          2016
63-2016   11-25-   Residential parking permit penalty                            Ch. 576
          2016
64-2016   11-25-   Authorizing collection agency fees                            NCM
          2016
65-2016   12-12-   Code of ethics                                                Ch. 5, Part
          2016                                                                   10
67-2016   12-19-   Code of ethics                                                Ch. 5, Part
          2016                                                                   10
68-2016   12-19-   Vehicles and traffic                                          Ch. 576
          2016
69-2016   12-12-   Bond issues and loans                                         Ch. A611
          2016
1-2017    1-9-2017 Franchises and Services                                       Ch. A612
2-2017    1-9-2017 Franchises and Services                                       Ch. A612
3-2017    1-23-    Parking limitation in designated area                         Ch. 576,
          2017                                                                   Part 4
4-2017    1-23-    First Energy Stadium Commission                               Ch. 23,
          2017                                                                   Part 4
5-2017    1-23-    Appropriations transfer                                       NCM
          2017
6-2017    1-23-    Fire Prevention                                               Ch. 212
          2017
7-2017    1-23-    Memorial structures                                           Ch. 396,
          2017                                                                   Part 5
8-2017    1-23-    Payment of bank loans                                         NCM
          2017
10-2017   2-13-    Budget amendment                                              NCMCE
          2017
11-2017   2-27-    Subdivision and Land Development                              Ch. 515
          2017
12-2017   2-27-    Appropriations transfer                                       NCM
          2017
13-2017   2-27-    Appropriations transfer                                       NCM
          2017
14-2017   2-27-    Appropriations transfer                                       NCM
          2017
15-2017   2-27-    Police Department                                             Ch. 77,
          2017                                                                   Part 2
16-2017   2-27-    Franchises and Services                                       Ch. A612
          2017
17-2017   2-27-    Franchises and Services                                       Ch. A612
          2017
19-2017   2-27-    Budget amendment                                              NCM
          2017
20-2017   2-27-    Fees                                                          Ch. 212
          2017
21-2017   3-27-    Zoning amendment                                              Ch. 600
          2017
23-2017   3-13-    Payment of debt                                               NCM
          2017
24-2017   4-10-    Streets and sidewalks: street vacation                        Ch. A617
          2017
25-2017   3-27-    Animals                                                       Ch. 141
          2017
27-2017   3-27-    Pension Fund                                                  Ch. 62
          2017
28-2017   3-27-    Pension Fund                                                  Ch. 62
          2017
30-2017   3-27-    Payment of bank loans; reallocate funds                       NCM
          2017
31-2017   3-27-    Franchises and Services                                       Ch. A612
          2017
32-2017   4-10-    Appropriations transfer                                       NCM
          2017
33-2017   4-10-    Budget amendment                                              NCM
          2017
34-2017   4-10-    Budget amendment                                              NCM
          2017
                                                                                 Repealed
          4-10-                                                                  and
35-2017   2017     Storage of waste                                              replaced by
                                                                                 Ord. No.
                                                                                 49-2020
39-2017   4-4-2017 Pension Fund                                                  Ch. 62
40-2017   5-8-2017 Parking limitation in designated area                         Ch. 576,
                                                                                 Part 4
41-2017   5-8-2017 Housing                                                       Ch. 308
45-2017   5-22-    Parking limitation in designated area                         Ch. 576,
          2017                                                                   Part 4
46-2017   5-22-    Citizens Initiative Commission                                Ch. 23,
          2017                                                                   Part 3
47-2017   5-22-    Youth Commission                                              Ch. 23,
          2017                                                                   Part 15
48-2017   5-22-    Franchises and Services                                       Ch. A612
          2017
51-2017   6-12-    Franchises and Services                                       Ch. A612CE
          2017
53-2017   6-26-    Code and License Appeals Board                                Ch. 23,
          2017                                                                   Part 14
54-2017   6-26-    Vending Machine Permits                                       Ch. 583
          2017
59-2017   7-10-    Zoning amendment                                              Ch. 600
          2017
60-2017   7-10-    Zoning amendment                                              Ch. 600;
          2017                                                                   Ch. A619
62-2017   7-10-    Fees                                                          Ch. 212
          2017
                                                                                 Repealed
          7-24-                                                                  and
64-2017   2017     Solid waste storage and collection                            replaced by
                                                                                 Ord. No.
                                                                                 49-2020
65-2017   7-24-    Property Maintenance Code amendment                           Ch. 180
          2017                                                                   Attachment
66-2017   7-24-    Housing                                                       Ch. 308
          2017
67-2017   8-14-    No parking restrictions                                       Ch. 576,
          2017                                                                   Part 4
70-2017   7-24-    Tow Service Fees                                              Ch. 576
          2017
71-A-2017 7-24-    Juvenile Curfew                                               Ch. 188,
          2017                                                                   Part 1
73-2017   7-24-    Impounding Vehicles                                           Ch. 576,
          2017                                                                   Part 8 A
74-2017   8-14-    Massage Therapists                                            Ch. 364
          2017
75-2017   8-14-    Budget                                                        NCM
          2017
76-2017   8-14-    Special assessments                                           Ch. 14
          2017
77-2017   8-14-    Parks and Recreation                                          Ch. 396
          2017
78-2017   8-14-    Memorandum of understanding                                   Ch. A613
          2017
80-2017   8-14-    Animals                                                       Ch. 141,
          2017                                                                   Part 2
81-2017   8-28-    Employee position ord. amendment                              Ch. A613
          2017
82-2017   8-28-    No parking restrictions                                       Ch. 576,
          2017                                                                   Part 4
83-2017   8-28-    Easement agreement                                            Ch. A615
          2017
84-2017   8-28-    Easement agreement                                            Ch. A615
          2017
85-2017   8-28-    Conveyance of properties                                      Ch. A615
          2017
86-2017   9-11-    Appeals Board                                                 Ch. 23
          2017
87-2017   9-11-    Sidewalk cafes                                                Ch. 479
          2017
88-2017   9-11-    Easement agreement                                            Ch. A615
          2017
89-2017   9-11-    Budget                                                        NCM
          2017
90-2017   9-25-    Intergovernmental agreement                                   Ch. A613
          2017
91-2017   10-9-    Code of Ethics                                                Ch. 5, Part
          2017                                                                   10
92-2017   10-9-    Budget                                                        NCM
          2017
93-2017   11-13-   Amending capital project ordinance                            NCM
          2017
94-2017   10-23-   Bond issues and loans                                         Ch. A611
          2017
95-2017   11-13-   Amending capital project ordinance                            NCM
          2017
99-2017   11-13-   Budget                                                        NCM
          2017
101-2017  11-27-   Nonresident earned income tax                                 Ch. 549
          2017
102-2017  11-27-   Governmental and intergovernmental affairs: establishing      Ch. A613
          2017     employee positions
103-2017  11-27-   Budget                                                        NCM
          2017
104-2017  11-27-   Five year capital plan                                        NCM
          2017
105-2017  11-27-   Budget                                                        NCM
          2017
106-2017  11-27-   Freezing sewer billing rate for 2018                          Ch. 467
          2017
107-2017  11-27-   Appropriations                                                NCM
          2017
108-2017  12-18-   Administrative Code amendment                                 Ch. 5
          2017
109-2017  12-18-   Administrative Code amendment                                 Ch. 5
          2017
110-2017  12-18-   Budget                                                        NCM
          2017
111-2017  12-18-   2018 real estate taxes                                        NCM
          2017
112-2017  12-18-   Fees                                                          Ch. 212
          2017
113-2017  12-18-   Appropriations                                                NCM
          2017
114-2017  12-18-   Fees                                                          Ch. 212
          2017
115-2017  12-18-   Housing                                                       Ch. 308
          2017
116-2017  12-18-   Fees                                                          Ch. 212
          2017
117-2017  12-18-   Transfer of property                                          Ch. A615
          2017
118-2017  12-18-   Conversion therapy                                            Ch. 185
          2017
119-2017  12-18-   Transfer of funds                                             NCM
          2017
1-2018    1-10-    Utility easement agreement                                    Ch. A615
          2018
2-2018    1-22-    No parking restrictions                                       Ch. 576,
          2018                                                                   Part 4
3-2018    1-10-    Lease                                                         Ch. A613
          2018
4-2018    2-12-    Transfer of funds                                             NCM
          2018
5-2018    2-12-    Tattoo and piercing establishments                            Ch. 540
          2018
                                                                                 Repealed
          2-12-                                                                  and
6-2018    2018     Solid waste                                                   replaced by
                                                                                 Ord. No.
                                                                                 49-2020
7-2018    2-26-    Salary of Solicitor                                           Ch. A613
          2018
8-2018    2-26-    Franchises and Services                                       Ch. A612
          2018
9-2018    2-26-    Transfer of funds                                             NCM
          2018
10-2018   2-26-    Amending general budget                                       NCM
          2018
11-2018   2-26-    Amending general budget                                       NCM
          2018
12-2018   2-26-    Employee position amendment                                   Ch. A613
          2018
13-2018   2-26-    Amending sewer budget ordinance                               NCM
          2018
17A-2018  6-25-    Fees                                                          Ch. 212
          2018
8-2018    2-26-    Franchises and Services                                       Ch. A612
          2018
18A-2018  6-25-    Amending sewer fund budget ord.                               NCM
          2018
20-2018   6-25-    Transfer of funds                                             NCM
          2018
21-2018   6-25-    Partnership council of governments                            Ch. A613
          2018
22-2018   6-25-    Authorizing a full time planning manager position             Ch. A613
          2018
23-2018   7-23-    Zoning fees                                                   Ch. 212
          2018
24-2018   6-25-    Amending general budget                                       NCM
          2018
25-2018   6-25-    Purchasing                                                    NCM
          2018
26-2018   6-25-    Cooperative purchasing agreement                              Ch. A613
          2018
27-2018   6-25-    Amending the budget                                           NCM
          2018
28-2018   6-25-    Transfer of funds                                             NCM
          2018
29-2018   6-25-    Amending the budget                                           NCM
          2018
19A-2018  7-9-2018 Parking permit fees                                           Ch. 212
31-2018   7-9-2018 Removal of traffic signal and install stop signs              NCM
32-2018   7-9-2018 Amending budget                                               NCM
33-2018   7-9-2018 Acquiring right-of-way for road project                       NCM
35-2018   7-9-2018 Capital project funds amendment                               NCM
36-2018   7-9-2018 Capital project funds amendment                               NCM
37-2018   7-9-2018 Reclassifying position                                        Ch. A613
38-2018   7-9-2018 Amending shade tree fund budget                               NCM
          7-23-                                                                  Ch. 23,
40-2018   2018     Main Street Board repealer                                    reference
                                                                                 only
41-2018   7-23-    Downtown Revitalization Public Private Partnership            Ch. 23
          2018
43-2018   7-23-    Amending budget                                               NCM
          2018
44-2018   7-23-    Amending budget                                               NCM
          2018
45-2018   8-27-    Fireworks                                                     Ch. 225
          2018
47-2018   8-27-    Vehicles and traffic                                          Ch. 576
          2018
49-2018   8-13-    Franchises and Services                                       Ch. A612
          2018
50-2018   8-13-    Amending sewer fund budget                                    NCM
          2018
51-2018   8-27-    Capital project funds amendment                               NCM
          2018
52-2018   8-27-    Parks and Recreation                                          Ch. 396
          2018
53-2018   8-27-    Parking restrictions                                          NCM
          2018
54-2018   8-27-    Amending general fund budget                                  NCM
          2018
55-2018   8-27-    Franchises and Services                                       Ch. A612
          2018
56-2018   8-27-    Amending general fund budget                                  NCM
          2018
57-2018   11-26-   Authorizing the creation of an OPEB (Other Post-Employment    Ch. 70,
          2018     Benefits) trust agreement                                     Part 4
58-2018   9-10-    Authorizing a residential permit parking zone                 NCM
          2018
59-2018   9-24-    Establishing reasonable costs of collection for delinquent    NCM
          2018     taxes
60-2018   9-24-    Stop intersection                                             NCM
          2018
61-2018   11-13-   Amending budget                                               NCM
          2018
62-2018   9-24-    Amending 2018 self insurance budget                           NCM
          2018
63-2018   11-26-   Amending budget                                               NCM
          2018
64-2018   11-13-   Amending budget                                               NCM
          2018
65-2018   9-24-    Amending capital project budget                               NCM
          2018
66-2018   10-8-    Downtown Revitalization Public Private Partnership            Ch. 23
          2018
67-2018   10-8-    Personnel                                                     Ch. A613
          2018
68-2018   10-22-   Personnel                                                     Ch. A613
          2018
70-2018   11-13-   Department Directors                                          Ch. 5
          2018
71-2018   10-22-   Amending 2018 self insurance fund budget                      NCM
          2018
72-2018   11-13-   Fireworks; Construction Codes                                 Ch. 180,
          2018                                                                   225
75-2018   11-26-   Personnel                                                     Ch. A613
          2018
76-2018   11-26-   Amending general fund budget                                  NCM
          2018
77-2018   11-26-   Amending general fund budget                                  NCM
          2018
78-2018   11-26-   Amending general fund budget                                  NCM
          2018
79-2018   12-3-    Amending 2018 self insurance fund budget                      NCM
          2018
80-2018   12-10-   2019 real estate taxes                                        NCM
          2018
81-2018   12-10-   Income tax for non-residents                                  NCM
          2018
83-2018   12-10-   Personnel                                                     Ch. A613
          2018
84-2018   12-10-   Five year capital plan                                        NCM
          2018
87-2018   12-17-   Amending general fund budget                                  NCM
          2018
88-2018   12-17-   Amending general fund budget                                  NCM
          2018
89-2018   12-17-   Freezing sewer billing rate for 2019                          Ch. 467
          2018
90-2018   12-17-   Amending solid waste fund budget                              NCM
          2018
1-2019    1-28-    Memorial structures                                           Ch. 396
          2019
2-2019    1-28-    Amending self insurance fund budget                           NCM
          2019
3-2019    1-28-    Sewers: reimbursement for overpayment for sewer               Ch. A616
          2019     transportation and treatment services
6-2019    2-19-    Amending general fund budget                                  NCM
          2019
7-2019    3-11-    Amending general fund budget                                  NCM
          2019
8-2019    3-11-    Salary of Director of Administrative Services                 Ch. A613
          2019
9-2019    3-25-    Authorizing execution of an agreement of sale                 Ch. A615
          2019
10-2019   4-8-2019 Sewers: reimbursement for overpayment for sewer               Ch. A616
                   transportation and treatment services
11-2019   4-8-2019 Amending budget                                               NCM
12-2019   4-22-    Amending budget                                               NCM
          2019
13-2019   5-28-    Amending capital project                                      NCM
          2019
14-2019   5-13-    Parks and Recreation                                          Ch. 396
          2019
15-2019   5-28-    Administrative Code amendment                                 Ch. 5
          2019
16-2019   5-28-    Dedicating city property for the use of road right of way and Ch. A615
          2019     temporary construction easements
17-2019   5-28-    Amending capital project                                      NCM
          2019
18-2019   5-28-    Amending capital project                                      NCM
          2019
19-2019   5-28-    Adding handicapped parking definitions and regulations        Ch. 5, 576
          2019
20-2019   5-28-    Pay rate increase for part-time telecommunicator              Ch. A613
          2019
22-2019   7-9-2019 Approving removal of a residential permit parking area        NCM
                   designation
23-2019   7-22-    Defining which elected officials are eligible for city        Ch. 70
          2019     benefits
26-2019   8-12-    Zoning Map amendment                                          NCM
          2019
Res. 81-  8-12-    Transferring ownership of property to City of Reading         Ch. A615
2019      2019
28-2019   8-26-    Setting fees for administrative costs for HUD Section 108     NCM
          2019     loan and BEDI grant funds
29-2019   8-26-    Amending general fund budget                                  NCM
          2019
30-2019   8-26-    Amending budget                                               NCM
          2019
31-2019   9-9-2019 Amending general fund budget                                  NCM
32-2019   9-9-2019 Amending general fund budget                                  NCM
33-2019   9-9-2019 Amending general fund budget                                  NCM
34-2019   9-9-2019 Amending general fund budget                                  NCM
35-2019   9-9-2019 Authorizing implementation of the Sidewalk Repair and         NCM
                   Replacement Grant Pilot Program
Res. 80-  9-9-2019 Appointing members to the Charter Review Commission           Ch. A613
2019
36-2019   9-23-    Bond issues and loans: issuance of general obligation bonds   Ch. A611
          2019
37-2019   9-23-    Salary of Director of Community Development                   Ch. A613
          2019
Res. 96-  9-23-    Governmental and intergovernmental affairs: renewal of        Ch. A613
2019      2019     agreement for recycling collection service
38-2019   10-14-   Amending general fund budget                                  NCM
          2019
40-2019   10-28-   Amending general fund budget                                  NCM
          2019
42-2019   10-14-   Amending capital project fund budget                          NCM
          2019
43-2019   10-28-   Amending WWTP operating budget                                NCM
          2019
44-2019   10-28-   Amending general fund budget                                  NCM
          2019
45-2019   10-28-   Amending general fund budget                                  NCM
          2019
46-2019   10-28-   Amending capital projects fund budget                         NCM
          2019
47-2019   10-28-   Amending employee position ordinance                          Ch. A613
          2019
50-2019   12-9-    Transfer of funds                                             NCM
          2019
51-2019   11-12-   Amending general fund budget                                  NCM
          2019
52-2019   11-12-   Authorizing purchase of computer equipment                    NCM
          2019
53-2019   11-12-   Establishing maximum allowable industrial loadings (MAILs)    467-202
          2019     for pollutants of concern
54-2019   11-12-   Amending employee position ordinance                          Ch. A613
          2019
55-2019   11-12-   Amending general fund budget                                  NCM
          2019
56-2019   12-9-    Real estate taxes                                             NCM
          2020
57-2019   12-9-    Earned income tax                                             NCM
          2020
58-2019   12-9-    Personnel                                                     Ch. A613
          2019
59-2019   12-9-    Establishing budget                                           NCM
          2019
60-2019   12-9-    Establishing five year Capital Plan                           Ch. A614
          2019
61-2019   12-9-    Amending general fund budget                                  NCM
          2019
62-2019   12-9-    Increasing compensation for Police Academy instructors        Ch. A613
          2019
63-2019   12-9-    Freezing sewer billing rate for 2020                          Ch. 467
          2019
64-2019   12-9-    Authorizing purchase of property                              Ch. A615
          2019
Res. 123- 12-9-    Memorandum of understanding for animal services               Ch. A612
2019      2019
Res. 128- 12-23-   Sewer module review                                           Ch. A616
2019      2019
1-2020    1-13-    Appropriations within the Sewer Fund                          NCM
          2020
2-2020    1-13-    Amending general fund budget                                  NCM
          2020
3-2020    1-13-    Zoning amendment                                              Ch. 600
          2020
4-2020    1-13-    Zoning amendment                                              Ch. 600
          2020
5-2020    1-27-    Zoning amendment                                              Ch. 600
          2020
6-2020    1-27-    Zoning amendment                                              Ch. 600
          2020
7-2020    1-13-    Referendum question on the 2020 primary ballot                NCM
          2020
8-2020    1-13-    Referendum question on the 2020 primary ballot                NCM
          2020
9-2020    1-13-    Referendum question on the 2020 primary ballot                NCM
          2020
10-2020   1-13-    Referendum question on the 2020 primary ballot                NCM
          2020
11-2020   1-13-    Referendum question on the 2020 primary ballot                NCM
          2020
12-2020   1-27-    Personnel amendment                                           Ch. 70
          2020
13-2020   1-27-    Amending budget ordinance by authorizing creation of the      NCM
          2020     Public Libraries Improvements Fund
14-2020   1-27-    Amending general fund budget                                  NCM
          2020
16-2020   2-10-    Amending employee position ordinance                          Ch. A613
          2020
17-2020   2-10-    Transfer of funds for the Charter Board                       NCM
          2020
18-2020   2-10-    Amending general fund budget                                  NCM
          2020
19-2020   2-10-    Salary of Managing Director                                   Ch. A613
          2020
20-2020   2-24-    Salary of Property Maintenance Manager, Community Development Ch. A613
          2020     Department
21-2020   2-24-    Salary of Community Development Director                      Ch. A613
          2020
22-2020   2-24-    Amending capital projects fund and agency fund budgets        NCM
          2020
23-2020   2-24-    Amending general fund budget                                  NCM
          2020
24-2020   2-24-    Amending personnel code                                       Ch. A613
          2020
25-2020   2-24-    Amending general fund budget                                  NCM
          2020
Res. 39-  2-24-    Bond issues and loans: issuance of general obligation bonds   Ch. A611
2020      2020
26-2020   3-23-    Vacating a portion of Moss Street                             NCM
          2020
29-2020   3-16-    Authorizing suspension of standard operating procedures for   Ch. A613
          2020     purchasing - COVID-19
Res. 41A- 3-16-    Ratifying declaration of disaster emergency - COVID-19        Ch. A613
2020      2020
30-2020   3-23-    Zoning amendment                                              Ch. 600
          2020
31-2020   3-23-    Zoning amendment                                              Ch. 600
          2020
32-2020   3-23-    Zoning amendment                                              Ch. 600
          2020
33-2020   3-23-    Zoning amendment                                              Ch. 600
          2020
34-2020   3-23-    Amending general fund budget                                  NCM
          2020
35-2020   3-23-    Amending general fund budget                                  NCM
          2020
36-2020   3-23-    Amending general fund budget                                  NCM
          2020
37-2020   3-23-    Amending general fund budget                                  NCM
          2020
38-2020   4-13-    Bond issues and loans: issuance of general obligation bonds   Ch. A611
          2020
39-2020   4-27-    Amending capital improvement fund budget                      NCM
          2020
40-2020   4-27-    Authorizing submission of a bid                               NCM
          2020
41-2020   4-27-    Salary of Chief of Police                                     Ch. A613
          2020
42-2020   4-27-    Authorizing an appropriations transfer                        NCM
          2020
Res. 71-  4-27-    Emergency fund for small businesses - COVID-19                Ch. A613
2020      2020
43-2020   5-11-    Amending the agency fund budget                               NCM
          2020
44-2020   5-11-    Amending the 2020 position ordinance                          Ch. A613
          2020
Res. 83-  5-11-    Authorizing escalator clauses in paving contracts             Ch. A613
2020      2020
Res. 85-  5-11-    Appointing City Solicitor                                     Ch. A613
2020      2020
Res. 108- 6-8-2020 Extending and renewing declaration of disaster emergency -    Ch. A613
2020               COVID-19
Res. 109- 6-8-2020 Sidewalk cafes                                                Ch. A613
2020
46-2020   6-22-    Amending general fund budget                                  NCM
          2020
47-2020   6-9-2020 Authorizing the filing of a declaration of taking             NCM
48-2020   6-15-    Reenacting Bill No. 29-2020, authorizing suspension of        Ch. A613
          2020     standard operating procedures for purchasing - COVID-19
49-2020   7-13-    Solid waste storage and collection                            Ch. 496
          2020
50-2020   6-22-    Amending capital improvement fund budget                      NCM
          2020
53-2020   7-13-    Referendum question on the 2020 general election ballot       Ch. A613
          2020
54-2020   7-13-    Referendum question on the 2020 general election ballot       Ch. A613
          2020
55-2020   7-13-    Amending water fund budget                                    NCM
          2020
56-2020   7-13-    Amending the 2020 position ordinance                          Ch. A613
          2020
57-2020   7-13-    Amending shade tree regulations                               Ch. 555
          2020
58-2020   8-10-    Amending the 2020 position ordinance                          Ch. A613
          2020
59-2020   8-24-    Adopting 2020 operating budget of Community Development Fund  NCM
          2020     31
60-2020   8-24-    Amending capital improvement fund budget                      NCM
          2020
61-2020   9-14-    First Energy Stadium Commission                               Ch. 23
          2020
62-2020   9-14-    Amending capital improvement fund budget                      NCM
          2020
63-2020   9-14-    Reenacting Bill No. 48-2020, authorizing suspension of        Ch. A613
          2020     standard operating procedures for purchasing - COVID-19
64-2020   10-12-   Repealing and replacing animal control regulations            Ch. 141
          2020
65-2020   10-12-   Amending Health and Safety Code                               Ch. 288
          2020
66-2020   10-12-   Amending fees                                                 Ch. 212
          2020
Res. 152- 10-12-   Authorizing a residential parking zone                        NCM
2020      2020
67-2020   10-26-   First Energy Stadium Commission                               Ch. 23
          2020
69-2020   10-26-   Bond issues and loans: issuance of general obligation bonds   Ch. A611
          2020
70-2020   10-26-   Amending Public Works Organization Chart                      Ch. 5
          2020
71-2020   11-9-    Amending storage facilities regulations                       Ch. 502
          2020
72-2020   11-9-    Amending general fund budget                                  NCM
          2020
73-2020   11-9-    Amending general fund budget                                  NCM
          2020
74-2020   11-9-    Amending general fund budget                                  NCM
          2020
75-2020   11-9-    Amending general fund budget                                  NCM
          2020
Res. 166- 11-9-    Appointing Managing Director                                  Ch. A613
2020      2020
76-2020   11-23-   Setting salary of Managing Director                           Ch. A613
          2020
77-2020   11-23-   Curbside collection fees                                      Ch. 212
          2020
78-2020   11-23-   Personnel                                                     70-701
          2020
80-2020   12-14-   Real estate taxes                                             NCM
          2020
81-2020   12-14-   Earned income tax                                             NCM
          2020
82-2020   12-14-   Employee positions                                            Ch. A613
          2020
83-2020   12-14-   Budget for 2021                                               NCM
          2020
84-2020   12-14-   Capital improvement budget                                    NCM
          2020
85-2020   12-14-   Salary of human resources director                            Ch. A613
          2020
86-2020   12-14-   Transfer funds                                                NCM
          2020
87-2020   12-14-   Amending capital fund budget                                  NCM
          2020
88-2020   12-14-   Repealing 18-2020                                             NCM
          2020
89-2020   12-14-   Amending 2020 general fund budget                             NCM
          2020
90-2020   12-14-   Amending 2020 general fund budget                             NCM
          2020
93-2020   12-28-   Lease agreement                                               Ch. A613
          2020
95-2020   12-28-   Tax assistance (LERTA)                                        Ch. 543
          2020
96-2020   12-28-   Fees                                                          Ch.212
          2020
98-2020   1-4-2021 Parking fines updated                                         Ch. 564
99-2020   1-4-2021 Sundays and holidays excepted                                 Ch. 576
100-2020  1-4-2021 Daily parking permits                                         Ch. 576
101-2020  1-11-    Loading zones                                                 Ch. 576
          2021
102-2020  1-25-    Parking fines and penalties                                   Ch. 576
          2020
Res. 178- 12-14-   Donating a truck                                              NCM
2020      2020
Res. 179- 12-14-   Appointment to Electrical Examining Board                     Ch. A613
2020      2020
Res. 180- 12-14-   Background check policy                                       Ch. A613
2020      2020
Res. 182- 1-4-2021 Parking facilities agreement                                  Ch. A613
2020
Res. 183- 12-21-   Local disaster declaration                                    Ch. A613
2020      2020
Res. 184- 12-28-   Promotion in fire dept.                                       Ch. A613
2020      2020
Res. 185- 12-28-   Not reauthorize DID                                           NCM
2020      2020
Res. 186- 12-28-   Collective bargaining agreement                               Ch. A613
2020      2020
2-2021    1-11-    Fees                                                          Ch. 212
          2021
3-2021    1-25-    Fees                                                          Ch. 212
          2021
4-2021    1-25-    Parking zones established; traffic control maps               Ch. 576
          2021
5-2021    2-8-2021 Notice of violations; waiver                                  Ch. 576
6-2021    1-25-    Pension code                                                  Ch. 62
          2021
7-2021    1-25-    Property maintenance amendments                               Ch. 180
          2021
8-2021    1-25-    Solid waste                                                   Ch. 496
          2021
10-2021   2-8-2021 Notice of violation; waivers                                  Ch. 576
11-2021   2-8-2021 Enforcement; notice of violation                              Ch. 576
12-2021   2-22-    Reclassify Human Resource Assistant to Full-Time Training and Ch. A613
          2021     Employment Coordinator
13-2021   2-22-    Amending 2021 budget                                          NCM
          2021
14-2021   2-22-    Establishing employee positions for 2021                      Ch. A613
          2021
21-2021   4-12-    Vacating a street                                             Ch. A617
          2021
Res. 22-  2-22-    Rejected bids                                                 NCM
2021      2021
Res. 23-  2-22-    Winding down of DID                                           NCM
2021      2021
Res. 25-  2-22-    Promotion increase in salary                                  Ch. A613
2021      2021
22-2021   3-22-    Subdivision and land development                              Ch. 515
          2021
25-2021   4-12-    Realigning a street                                           Ch. A617
          2021
26-2021   3-22-    Amending vehicles and traffic                                 Ch. 576
          2021
27-2021   4-12-    Setting forth salary of Chief of Police                       Ch. A613
          2021
28-2021   4-12-    Authorizing pollution reduction plan                          Ch. A618
          2021
29-2021   4-12-    Changing median widths on a street                            Ch. A617
          2021
30-2021   4-26-    Amending position ordinance                                   Ch. A613
          2021
31-2021   5-10-    Police promotions                                             Ch. 77,
          2021                                                                   Part 2
32-2021   4-26-    Sale of property                                              Ch. A615
          2021
33-2021   4-26-    Sale of property                                              Ch. A615
          2021
Res. 34-  3-22-    Comply with grant to obtain funds                             Ch. A613
2021      2021
Res. 35-  3-25-    Appointing members to Youth Commission                        Ch. A613
2021      2021
35A-2021  5-10-    Amending zoning map                                           Ch. A619
          2021
36-2021   5-10-    Amending zoning map                                           Ch. A619
          2021
37-2021   5-10-    Loitering and panhandling                                     Ch. 353
          2021
Res. 37-  4-12-    Disposition of records                                        NCM
2021      2021
38-2021   5-24-    Transfer of donations                                         NCM
          2021
Res. 38-  4-12-    Disposition of records                                        NCM
2021      2021
39-2021   5-10-    Budget amendment                                              NCM
          2021
Res. 39-  4-12-    Grant application                                             NCM
2021      2021
Res. 40-  4-12-    Appointment to Board of Ethics                                Ch. A613
2021      2021
Res. 41-  4-12-    Appointment to Youth Commission                               Ch. A613
2021      2021
Res. 40-  4-12-    Appointment to Board of Ethics                                Ch. A613
2021      2021
Res. 41-  4-12-    Appointment to Youth Commission                               Ch. A613
2021      2021
Res. 42-  4-26-    Agreement                                                     NCM
2021      2021
Res. 43-  4-26-    Reappointment to Environmental Advisory Council               Ch. A613
2021      2021
Res. 44-  4-26-    Appointment to Recreation Commission                          Ch. A613
2021      2021
42-2021   5-24-    Amending budget                                               NCM
          2021
43-2021   6-14-    Parking Sundays and holidays                                  Ch. 576
          2021
44-2021   6-14-    Motorized devices and all-terrain vehicles                    Ch. 576
          2021
45-2021   6-14-    Code and License Appeals Board                                Ch. 23
          2021
46-2021   6-14-    Fees for towing ATVs, snow mobiles and dirt bikes             Ch. 212
          2021
Res. 46-  5-10-    Authorizing a bank account                                    Ch. A613
2021      2021
47-2021   6-28-    Budget                                                        NCM
          2021
Res. 47-  5-10-    Appointment to Youth Commission                               Ch. A613
2021      2021
48-2021   6-28-    Parking restrictions                                          Ch. 576,
          2021                                                                   Part 4
Res. 48-  5-10-    Appointment to Diversity Board                                Ch. A613
2021      2021
49-2021   6-28-    Budget                                                        NCM
          2021
Res. 49-  5-24-    approving bids                                                NCM
2021      2021
50-2021   6-28-    Cooperation agreement                                         Ch. A613
          2021
Res. 50-  5-24-    Application for grant                                         NCM
2021      2021
51-2021   6-28-    Transfer of funds                                             NCM
          2021
Res. 51-  5-24-    Traffic signal maintenance agreement with Penn DOT            Ch. A613
2021      2021
52-2021   6-28-    Salary of city solicitor                                      Ch. A613
          2021
Res. 52-  6-1-2021 Ratifying collective bargaining agreement                     Ch. A613
2021
53-2021   6-28-    Transfer of funds                                             NCM
          2021
Res. 54-  5-24-    Confirming Frederick T. Lachat as City Solicitor              Ch. A613
2021      2021
55-2021   7-26-    Amending rules of procedure                                   Ch. 5
          2021
Res. 55-  6-14-    Authorizing a Home Action Plan                                Ch. A613
2021      2021
56-2021   7-26-    Amending section concerning public participation              Ch. 5
          2021
Res. 56-  6-14-    Accepting and rejecting bids                                  NCM
2021      2021
57-2021   7-26-    Parking restriction on Chestnut Street                        Ch. 576,
          2021                                                                   Part 4
Res. 57-  6-14-    PennDOT online reporting                                      A613
2021      2021
58-2021   7-26-    Place referendum question on ballot regarding Charter         Charter
          2021                                                                   1110
Res. 58-  6-14-    Filing application for funds                                  Ch. A613
2021      2021
59-2021   7-26-    Place referendum question on ballot regarding Charter         Charter
          2021                                                                   1204
Res. 59-  6-14-    Sewage module review                                          Ch. A616
2021      2021
60-2021   8-9-2021 Downtown revitalization                                       Ch. 23
Res. 60-  6-14-    Appointing member to Youth Commission                         Ch. A613
2021      2021
Res. 60A- 6-28-    Authorizing application forms to Penn DOT                     Ch. A613
2021      2021
61-2021   8-9-2021 Place referendum question on ballot regarding Charter         Ch. A613
62-2021   8-23-    Appropriations transfer                                       NCM
          2021
Res. 62-  6-28-    Approving bids                                                NCM
2021      2021
Res. 63-  6-28-    Approving bids                                                NCM
2021      2021
                                                                                 Repealing
63-2021   9-13-    Place referendum question on ballot regarding Charter         Charter
          2021                                                                   907; Ch.
                                                                                 A613
64-2021   9-13-    Transfer of funds                                             NCM
          2021
Res. 64-  6-28-    Authorizing agreement documents                               NCM
2021      2021
65-2021   9-27-    Transfer of funds                                             NCM
          2021
Res. 65-  6-28-    Sewage module review                                          Ch. A616
2021      2021
Res. 66-  6-28-    Supporting Pennsylvania commission for US semi-quincentennial NCM
2021      2021     (America 250PA)
67-2021   9-27-    Transfer of funds                                             NCM
          2021
Res. 67-  6-28-    Appointment to Board of Health                                Ch. A613
2021      2021
68-2021   9-27-    Transfer of funds                                             NCM
          2021
Res. 68-  6-28-    Appointment to Plumbing Board                                 Ch. A613
2021      2021
Res. 68A- 7-12-    Conditional offers of employment for patrol officers          NCM
2021      2021
69-2021   9-27-    Transfer of funds                                             NCM
          2021
Res. 69-  7-12-    Purchase of equipment for public works                        NCM
2021      2021
70-2021   9-27-    Appropriations                                                NCM
          2021
Res. 70-  7-12-    Grant application                                             NCM
2021      2021
71-2021   9-27-    Transfer of funds                                             NCM
          2021
Res. 71-  7-12-    Commitment to improvement project for FirstEnergy Stadium     NCM
2021      2021
Res. 71-  7-26-    Traffic maintenance agreement with PennDOT                    Ch. A612
A-2021    2021
72-2021   9-27-    Salary of deputy police chief                                 Ch. A613
          2021
Res. 72-  7-26-    Appointing commission member                                  Ch. A613
2021      2021
73-2021   10-11-   Increasing salary of Wastewater Treatment Plant Laboratory    Ch. A613
          2021     Supervisor
Res. 73-  7-26-    Purchase of chassis                                           NCM
2021      2021
74-2021   10-11-   Vehicles and traffic                                          Ch. 576
          2021
Res. 74-  7-26-    Committing funds to convention center and performing arts     NCM
2021      2021     center
Res. 75-  7-26-    Appointment to Historical Committee                           Ch. A613
2021      2021
75-2021   12-13-   Officers and Employees Defined Contribution Plan              Ch. 62,
          2021                                                                   Part 6
76-2021   10-11-   Equal Business Opportunity Advisory Board                     Ch. 23
          2021
Res. 76-  7-26-    Appointment to Shade Tree Commission                          Ch. A613
2021      2021
77-2021   10-11-   Amending salary of Auditing Coordinator                       Ch. A613
          2021
78-2021   10-11-   Appropriation of funds                                        NCM
          2021
79-2021   10-11-   Amending new officers and employees pension fund              Ch. 62
          2021
80-2021   10-25-   Transfer of funds                                             NCM
          2021
Res. 81-  8-23-    Appointment to First Energy Stadium Commission                Ch. A613
2021      2021
Res. 82-  8-23-    Appointment to Human Relations Commission                     Ch. A613
2021      2021
Res. 83-  8-23-    Appointment to Housing Authority                              Ch. A613
2021      2021
83-2021   11-22-   Amending budget                                               NCM
          2021
Res. 84-  8-23-    Appointment to Fire/Building Code Board of Appeals            Ch. A613
2021      2021
Res. 85-  9-13-    Purchase of firewall maintenance renewal for IT               NA?
2021      2021
84-2021   11-22-   Amending budget                                               NCM
          2021
85-2021   12-13-   Authorizing an appropriations transfer                        NCM
          2021
Res. 86-  9-13-    Condition offer of employment                                 NCM
2021      2021
86-2021   12-13-   Budget amendment                                              NCM
          2021
Res. 87-  9-13-    Appointment to Blight property review committee               Ch. A613
2021      2021
87-2021   12-13-   Dumpster and trash receptacle placement                       Ch. 496,
          2021                                                                   Part 1
Res. 88-  9-13-    Appointment to environmental council                          Ch. A 613
2021      2021
88-2021   12-12-   2022 real estate taxes                                        NCM
          2021
Res. 89-  9-27-    Authorizing amendment to purchase fire apparatus              NCM
2021      2021
89-2021   12-13-   Earned income tax                                             NCM
          2021
Res. 90-  9-27-    Grant application                                             NCM
2021      2021
90-2021   12-13-   Governmental and intergovernmental affairs: employee          Ch. A613
          2021     positions amendment
Res. 91-  10-4-    Petition court re income tax                                  NCM
2021      2021
91-2021   12-13-   Budget for 2022                                               NCM
          2021
Res. 92-  10-11-   Approving certificate of insufficiency                        NCM
2021      2021
92-2021   12-13-   2022 capital improvement budget                               NCM
          2021
Res. 93-  10-11-   Ratifying collective bargaining agreement                     Ch. A613
2021      2021
Res. 94-  10-11-   Appointment to Youth Commission                               Ch. A613
2021      2021
Res. 95-  10-25-   Agreement for dispatch services                               Ch. A613
2021      2021
95-2021   12-27-   Budget amendment                                              NCM
          2021
Res. 96-  10-25-   Reserving funds                                               NCM
2021      2021
Res. 97-  11-1-    Appointments to Redistricting Committee                       Ch. A613
2021      2021
97-2021   12-27-   Parks and recreation rules of conduct                         Ch. 396,
          2021                                                                   Part 3
98-2021   12-27-   Solid waste definitions                                       Ch. 496,
          2021                                                                   Part 2
Res. 99-  11-8-    Appointment to Reading Public Library Board                   Ch. A613
2021      2021
99-2021   12-27-   Curbside collection fees                                      Ch. 212,
          2021                                                                   Part 1
Res. 100- 11-8-    Submission of Action Plan                                     Ch. A613
2021      2021
100-2021  12-27-   Sale of real property                                         Ch. A615
          2021
Res. 101- 11-8-    Approving conditional use application                         NCM
2021      2021
101-2021  12-27-   Construction easement                                         Ch. A615
          2021
Res. 102- 11-8-    Authorizing promotion from Sergeant to Lieutenant             Ch. A613
2021      2021
102-2021  12-27-   Budget amendment                                              NCM
          2021
Res.      11-22-   Appointment to Council Solicitor                              Ch. A613
102A-2021 2021
Res. 103- 11-8-    Authorizing promotion from Officer to Sergeant                Ch. A613
2021      2021
103-2021  12-27-   Budget amendment                                              NCM
          2021
Res.      11-22-   Appointment to the Planning Commission                        Ch. A613
103A-2021 2021
104-2021  12-27-   Funds transfer                                                NCM
          2021
Res. 105- 12-13-   Authorizing execution of a stipulated settlement              Ch. A613
2021      2021
Ord. 105- 12-27-   Funds transfer                                                NCM
2021      2021
Res. 106- 12-13-   Approving bids                                                NCM
2021      2021
Res. 107- 12-13-   Appointment to the Youth Commission                           Ch. A613
2021      2021
Res. 108- 12-13-   Appointment to the Code and License Appeals Board             Ch. A613
2021      2021
Res. 109- 12-13-   Denying conditional use application                           NCM
2021      2021
Res.      12-27-   Approving bids                                                NCM
109A-2021 2021
Res. 110- 12-27-   Authorizing addendum to agreement for police service          Ch. A613
2021      2021
Res. 111- 12-27-   Conditional offers of employment for probationary patrol      NCM
2021      2021     officers
Res. 112- 12-27-   Partnership agreement with Boys & Girls Club for Youth Police Ch. A613
2021      2021     Academy management
Res. 113- 12-27-   Purchase of air purifying respirators                         NCM
2021      2021
Res. 1-   1-10-    Authorizing bank accounts                                     Ch. A613
2022      2022
Ord. -    1-10-    Planning Commission number of members                         Ch. 23,
2022      2022                                                                   Part 1
1-2022    1-10-    Allocation of funds                                           NCM
          2022
Res. 2-   1-10-    Ratifying declaration of disaster emergency                   Ch. A613
2022      2022
2-2022    1-10-    Amending budget                                               NCM
          2022
Res. 3-   1-10-    Disposition of records                                        NCM
2022      2022
3-2022    1-10-    Amending budget                                               NCM
          2022
4-2022    1-10-    Budget amendment                                              NCM
          2022
Res. 5-   1-24-    Ratifying the BCTV MAC Channel Program Guidelines             NCM
2022      2022
5-2022    3-14-    Amending the 2022 Position Ordinance                          Ch. A613
          2022
6-2022    1-10-    Invasive plants and noxious weeds                             Ch. 317,
          2022                                                                   Part 1
Res. 6-   1-24-    Appointment to Reading Area Transportation Study (RATS)       Ch. A613
2022      2022     Technical Committee
7-2022    2-14-    Amending snow and ice removal emergency regulations           Ch. 576,
          2022                                                                   Part 9
8-2022    1-24-    Amending water fund budget                                    NCM
          2022
Res. 8-   1-24-    Appointment of Council Vice President                         Ch. A613
2022      2022
Res. 9-   1-24-    Appointment of City Clerk                                     Ch. A613
2022      2022
9-2022    1-24-    Administrative Code amendment                                 Ch. 5, Part
          2022                                                                   2
10-2022   1-24-    Referendum question on the 2022 primary election ballot       Ch. A613
          2022
Res. 10-  1-24-    Appointment to Fire Civil Service Board                       Ch. A613
2022      2022
Res. 11-  1-24-    Appointment to Environmental Advisory Council                 Ch. A613
2022      2022
11-2022   2-14-    International Building Code amendments                        Ch. 180,
          2022                                                                   Part 8
Res. 12-  1-24-    Appointment to Planning Commission                            Ch. A613
2022      2022
Res. 12A- 2-14-    Sewage module review                                          A616
2022      2022
12-2022   2-14-    City holidays                                                 Ch. 70,
          2022                                                                   Part 5
Res. 13-  2-14-    Sewage module review                                          A616
2022      2022
13-2022   2-28-    Amending budget                                               NCM
          2022
Res. 14-  2-14-    Sewage module review                                          A616
2022      2022
14-2022   2-28-    Appropriation of funds                                        NCM
          2022
Res. 15-  2-14-    Sewage module review                                          A616
2022      2022
15-2022   2-28-    Appropriation of funds                                        NCM
          2022
Res. 16-  2-14-    Sewage module review                                          A616
2022      2022
16-2022   2-28-    Construction easement                                         Ch. A615
          2022
Res. 17-  2-14-    Sewage module review                                          A616
2022      2022
Res. 18-  2-14-    Approving bids                                                NCM
2022      2022
18-2022   3-28-    Parking against traffic flow regulations                      Ch. 576,
          2022                                                                   Part 4
Res. 19-  2-14-    Appointment to BCAP                                           Ch. A613
2022      2022
19-2022   3-14-    Amending parking zone exceptions                              Ch. 576,
          2022                                                                   Part 5
Res. 20-  2-14-    Appointment to BCTV Board                                     Ch. A613
2022      2022
20-2022   3-14-    Budget amendment                                              NCM
          2022
Res. 21-  2-14-    Appointment to Blighted Property Review Committee             Ch. A613
2022      2022
21-2022   3-14-    Budget amendment                                              NCM
          2022
Res. 22-  2-14-    Appointment to Conversion Therapy Board                       Ch. A613
2022      2022
22-2022   3- -2022 Correcting salary ranges for Chief of Police and Community    Ch. 70,
                   Development Director                                          Part 7
Res. 23-  2-14-    Appointment to Diversity Board                                Ch. A613
2022      2022
23-2022   3-14-    Establishing an all-way stop intersection                     Ch. 576,
          2022                                                                   Part 2
Res. 24-  2-14-    Appointment to Downtown Revitalization Public Private         Ch. A613
2022      2022     Partnership (P3)
24-2022   3-14-    Establishing an all-way stop intersection                     Ch. 576,
          2022                                                                   Part 2
Res. 25-  2-14-    Appointment to Environmental Advisory Council                 Ch. A613
2022      2022
          3-28-                                                                  Charter
25-2022   2022     Amending Council districts                                    1312; Ch.
                                                                                 5, Part 2
Res. 26-  2-14-    Appointment to Human Relations Commission                     Ch. A613
2022      2022
26-2022   3-28-    Human relations budget amendment                              NCM
          2022
Res. 27-  2-14-    Appointment to Local Redevelopment Authority.                 Ch. A613
2022      2022
27-2022   3-28-    Parking zones established; traffic control maps               Ch. 576,
          2022                                                                   Part 5
Res. 28-  2-14-    Appointment to Mt. Penn Preserve Council of Governments       Ch. A613
2022      2022     Executive Committee
Res. 29-  2-14-    Appointment to OPEB Board                                     Ch. A613
2022      2022
29-2022   4-11-    Appropriation of funds                                        NCM
          2022
Res. 30-  2-14-    Appointment to Planning Commission                            Ch. A613
2022      2022
30-2022   4-11-    Accepting donated land                                        Ch. A615
          2022
Res. 31-  2-14-    Appointment to Reading Area Transportation Study Coordinating Ch. A613
2022      2022     Committee
31-2022   4-11-    Repealing Penn Square from Parks and Recreation and amending  Ch. 396
          2022     permitting provisions
Res. 32-  2-14-    Appointment to Recreation Commission                          Ch. A613
2022      2022
                                                                                 Ch. 212,
32-2022   4-25-    Amending parades, special events and public gatherings;       Part 1 and
          2022     amending corresponding fees                                   Ch. 576,
                                                                                 Part 12
Res. 33-  2-14-    Appointment to School District Work Group                     Ch. A613
2022      2022
33-2022   4-25-    Adopting 2022 funds to the Human Relations Commission         NCM
          2022
Res. 34-  2-14-    Appointment to Shade Tree Commission                          Ch. A613
2022      2022
34-2022   4-25-    Amending mobile vendors provisions at pagoda                  Ch. 453,
          2022                                                                   Part 3
Res. 35-  2-14-    Appointment to Stadium Commission                             Ch. A613
2022      2022
35-2022   4-25-    Adding mobile vending appeals                                 Ch. 23,
          2022                                                                   Part 14
Res. 36-  2-14-    Appointment to Youth Commission                               Ch. A613
2022      2022
36-2022   4-25-    Adding Downtown Commercial Corridor Ambassadors               Ch. A613
          2022
Res. 37-  2-14-    Appointment to Audit Committee                                Ch. A613
2022      2022
37-2022   4-25-    Setting forth the salary of the Chief of Fire and Rescue      Ch. A613
          2022     Services
38-2022   5-9-2022 All-way stop established                                      Ch. 576,
                                                                                 Part 2
Res. 39-  2-14-    Appointment to Revenue Committee                              Ch. A613
2022      2022
Res. 40-  2-14-    Naming Michael Sninsky Deputy Emergency Management            Ch. A613
2022      2022     Coordinator
40-2022   5-9-2022 Adopting and amending 2018 International Fire Code            Ch. 180,
                                                                                 Part 14
Res. 41-  2-14-    Conditional offers of employment for probationary paramedics  NCM
2022      2022
41-2022   5-9-2022 Immobilization of vehicles                                    Ch. 576,
                                                                                 Part 8
Res. 42-  2-14-    Appointment to Reading Area Water Authority                   Ch. A613
2022      2022
42-2022   5-9-2022 Amending the zoning map                                       Ch. A619
Res. 43-  2-14-    Appointment to HVAC Board                                     Ch. A613
2022      2022
                                                                                 Ch. 576,
43-2022   5-9-2022 Parking n private property prohibited                         Part 4 and
                                                                                 Part 8
Res. 44-  2-14-    Appointment to Human Relations Commission                     Ch. A613
2022      2022
                   Prohibiting use of city-owned vehicle and city gas card for   Ch. 5, Part
44-2022   5-9-2022 certain officials                                             2, Part 4
                                                                                 and Part 5
Res. 45-  2-14-    Appointment to Planning Commission                            Ch. A613
2022      2022
45-2022   5-23-    International Electrical Code                                 Ch. 180,
          2022                                                                   Part 7
Res. 46-  2-28-    Approving bids                                                NCM
2022      2022
46-2022   5-23-    Agency fund budget amendment                                  NCM
          2022
Res. 47-  2-28-    Authorizing acceptance of the 2021 actuarial valuation        NCM
2022      2022     results with mortality table changes
47-2022   6-13-    Statement of financial interest and complaints                Ch. 5, Part
          2022                                                                   10
48-2022   6-13-    Adopting award to general agency fund budget                  NCM
          2022
49-2022   7-11-    Authorizing addition of Deputy Managing Director Finance      Ch. A613
          2022     Director and salary adjustment
Res. 50-  2-28-    Grant application                                             NCM
2022      2022
Res. 50A- 2-28-    Authorizing engagement agreement                              Ch. A613
2022      2022
Res. 51-  2-28-    Appointment to Youth Commission                               Ch. A613
2022      2022
51-2022   6-13-    Dumpster placement permitting process                         Ch. 496,
          2022                                                                   Part 1
Res. 52-  2-28-    Appointment to Equal Business Opportunity Board               Ch. A613
2022      2022
52-2022   6-27-    Adding definitions pertaining to trash cans and receptacles,  Ch. 496,
          2022     and clarifying set out of containers and trash bags           Part 2
Res. 53-  2-28-    Appointment to Zoning Hearing Board                           Ch. A613
2022      2022
53-2022   6-27-    Referendum question on the 2022 general election ballot       Ch. A613;
          2022                                                                   Charter 912
          6-27-                                                                  Ch. A613;
54-2022   2022     Referendum question on the 2022 general election ballot       Charter
                                                                                 1102 - 1109
Res. 55-  3-14-    Appointment to Council Nominations and Appointments Committee Ch. A613
2022      2022
Res. 56-  3-14-    Ratifying the recission of the Declaration of Disaster        Ch. A613
2022      2022     Emergency
56-2022   6-27-    Annual licensing fees added to electrical code                Ch. 180,
          2022                                                                   Part 7
Res. 57-  3-14-    Agreement to alternative form of financial security for       Ch. A613
2022      2022     municipal improvements
57-2022   6-27-    Budget amendment                                              NCM
          2022
Res. 58-  3-14-    Purchase of patrol vehicles                                   NCM
2022      2022
Res. 59-  3-14-    Support of the Wyland Mayor's Challenge for Water             NCM
2022      2022     Conservation
59-2022   6-27-    Approving execution of lease agreement                        Ch. A615
          2022
Res. 60-  3-14-    Grant application                                             NCM
2022      2022
Res. 61-  3-14-    Reappointment to Human Relations Commission                   Ch. A613
2022      2022
61-2022   6-27-    Accepting payment on outstanding loans                        Ch. A613
          2022
Res. 62-  3-14-    Reappointment to Human Relations Commission                   Ch. A613
2022      2022
62-2022   7-11-    No parking in the 100 Block of Schiller Street, the 100 Block NCM
          2022     of North 8th Street and the 200 Block of Reed Street
Res. 63-  3-14-    Appointment to Fire/Building Code Board of Appeals            Ch. A613
2022      2022
63-2022   7-11-    Additional authority for law enforcement responding to calls  Ch. 396,
          2022     in parks                                                      Part 3
Res. 64-  3-28-    Approving bids                                                NCM
2022      2022
64-2022   7-11-    References for noise within parks                             Ch. 387
          2022
Res. 65-  3-28-    Authorizing paperwork for PennDOT payments                    Ch. A613
2022      2022
Res. 66-  3-28-    Appointment to Charter Board                                  Ch. A613
2022      2022
66-2022   7-11-    Authorizing the acceptance of conveyance                      Ch. A615
          2022
Res. 67-  3-28-    Reappointment to Human Relations Commission                   Ch. A613
2022      2022
67-2022   7-11-    Budget amendment                                              NCM
          2022
Res. 68-  3-28-    Confirmation of Chief Building Official                       Ch. A613
2022      2022
          7-11-                                                                  Ch. 62,
68-2022   2022     Criteria for a disability pension benefit                     Part 1,
                                                                                 Part 2
Res. 69-  4-11-    Authorizing temporary parking regulation pilot program from   NCM
2022      2022     July 1, 2022 through October 1, 2022
69-2022   7-11-    Council staff evaluations                                     Ch. 5, Part
          2022                                                                   2
Res. 70-  4-4-2022 Appointment to vacant District 1 Council Seat                 Ch. A613
2022
70-2022   7-25-    Budget appropriation                                          NCM
          2022
Res. 71-  4-11-    Authorizing purchase of patrol vehicle                        NCM
2022      2022
71-2022   7-25-    Intergovernmental agreement to join "Berks County Emergency   Ch. A613
          2022     Response Team"
Res. 72-  4-11-    Appointment to Library Board                                  Ch. A613
2022      2022
72-2022   8-8-2022 Conduct of business for Council Solicitor at Council meetings Ch. 5, Part
                                                                                 2
Res. 73-  4-11-    Appointment to Equal Business Opportunity Board               Ch. A613
2022      2022
73-2022   8-8-2022 Budget amendment                                              NCM
Res. 74-  4-25-    Authorizing execution of reimbursement settlement agreement   Ch. A613
2022      2022
74-2022   8-22-    Budget amendment                                              NCM
          2022
Res. 75-  4-25-    Tax exoneration request approved                              NCM
2022      2022
Res. 76-  4-25-    Opposing the private sale of 326 S. 17th 1/2 Street as the    NCM
2022      2022     bid does not meet the amount of tax delinquency
76-2022   8-22-    Budget amendment                                              NCM
          2022
Res. 77-  4-25-    Confirming appointment of the Fire Chief                      Ch. A613
2022      2022
77-2022   8-22-    Appropriating funds                                           NCM
          2022
Res. 78-  5-9-2022 Authorizing sale of tub grinder                               NCM
2022
78-2022   8-22-    Setting forth salary for Managing Director                    Ch. A613
          2022
Res. 79-  5-9-2022 Authorizing Action Plan amendment                             Ch. A613
2022
          9-12-                                                                  Ch. 36 and
79-2022   2022     Fire and rescue services; fees                                Ch. 212,
                                                                                 Part 1
Res. 80-  5-9-2022 Authorizing Action Plan amendment                             Ch. A613
2022
Res. 81-  5-9-2022 Appointment to BCAP                                           Ch. A613
2022
81-2022   9-12-    Budget appropriations                                         NCM
          2022
Res. 82-  5-9-2022 Appointment to BCTV Board                                     Ch. A613
2022
82-2022   9-12-    Budget appropriations                                         NCM
          2022
Res. 83-  5-9-2022 Appointment to Blighted Property Review Committee             Ch. A613
2022
83-2022   9-13-    Authorizing appropriations                                    NCM
          2022
Res. 84-  5-9-2022 Appointment to Diversity Board                                Ch. A613
2022
84-2022   9-13-    Authorizing appropriations                                    NCM
          2022
Res. 85-  5-9-2022 Appointment to Environmental Advisory Council                 Ch. A613
2022
85-2022   9-13-    Authorizing appropriations                                    NCM
          2022
Res. 86-  5-9-2022 Appointment to Human Relations Commission                     Ch. A613
2022
86-2022   9-13-    Authorizing appropriations                                    NCM
          2022
Res. 87-  5-9-2022 Appointment to Shade Tree Commission                          Ch. A613
2022
87-2022   9-13-    Authorizing appropriations                                    NCM
          2022
Res. 88-  5-9-2022 Appointment to Stadium Commission                             Ch. A613
2022
88-2022   9-13-    Authorizing appropriations                                    NCM
          2022
Res. 89-  5-9-2022 Appointment to Recreation Commission                          Ch. A613
2022
89-2022   9-13-    Authorizing appropriations                                    NCM
          2022
Res. 90-  5-19-    Removal from Redevelopment Authority Board                    Ch. A613
2022      2022
90-2022   9-13-    Authorizing appropriations                                    NCM
          2022
Res. 91-  5-23-    Authorizing promotion from 2nd Deputy Chief to 1st Deputy     Ch. A613
2022      2022     Fire Chief
91-2022   9-13-    Authorizing appropriations                                    NCM
          2022
Res. 92-  5-23-    Authorizing promotion of Fire Suppression Lieutenant to 2nd   Ch. A613
2022      2022     Deputy Fire Chief
92-2022   9-13-    Authorizing appropriations                                    NCM
          2022
Res. 93-  5-23-    Authorizing promotion of Firefighter to Fire Suppression      Ch. A613
2022      2022     Lieutenant
93-2022   9-13-    Authorizing appropriations                                    NCM
          2022
Res. 94-  5-23-    Appointment to the Board of Health                            Ch. A613
2022      2022
94-2022   9-13-    Authorizing appropriations                                    NCM
          2022
Res. 95-  5-23-    Reappointing Jeffrey Darlington to the Board of Ethics        Ch. A613
2022      2022
95-2022   9-13-    Authorizing appropriations                                    NCM
          2022
Res. 96-  5-23-    Appointment to the Fire/Building Code Board of Appeals        Ch. A613
2022      2022
96-2022   9-13-    Authorizing appropriations                                    NCM
          2022
Res. 97-  5-23-    Removal from Environmental Advisory Council                   Ch. A613
2022      2022
97-2022   9-13-    Authorizing appropriations                                    NCM
          2022
Res. 98-  5-23-    Approving conditional use application                         NCM
2022      2022
98-2022   9-13-    Authorizing appropriations                                    NCM
          2022
Res. 99-  6-13-    Recyclable materials collection agreement                     Ch. A613
2022      2022
99-2022   9-13-    Authorizing appropriations                                    NCM
          2022
Res. 100- 6-13-    Scrapping old equipment                                       NCM
2022      2022
100-2022  9-13-    Authorizing appropriations                                    NCM
          2022
Res. 101- 6-13-    Approving bids                                                NCM
2022      2022
101-2022  9-13-    Authorizing appropriations                                    NCM
          2022
Res. 102- 6-13-    Appointment to the Youth Commission                           Ch. A613
2022      2022
102-2022  9-13-    Authorizing appropriations                                    NCM
          2022
Res. 103- 6-13-    Authorizing appointments to the American Rescue Plan Act      Ch. A613
2022      2022     (ARPA) Grant Review Committee
103-2022  9-13-    Authorizing appropriations                                    NCM
          2022
Res. 104- 6-27-    Approving bids                                                NCM
2022      2022
104-2022  9-26-    Budget amendment                                              NCM
          2022
Res. 105- 6-27-    Appointment to HVAC Board                                     Ch. A613
2022      2022
105-2022  9-26-    Authorizing appropriations                                    NCM
          2022
Res. 106- 6-27-    Appointment to Fire/Building Code Board of Appeals            Ch. A613
2022      2022
106-2022  9-26-    Authorizing appropriations                                    NCM
          2022
Res. 107- 6-27-    Appointment to HVAC Board                                     Ch. A613
2022      2022
107-2022  9-26-    Authorizing appropriations                                    NCM
          2022
Res. 108- 6-27-    Appointment to Council President position                     Ch. A613
2022      2022
108-2022  9-26-    Authorizing appropriations                                    NCM
          2022
Res. 109- 7-11-    Authorizing promotion of Patrol Officer to Sergeant           Ch. A613
2022      2022
109-2022  9-26-    Sewer and storm fund budget appropriations                    NCM
          2022
Res. 110- 7-11-    Accepting resignation from District 6 Council seat            Ch. A613
2022      2022
Res. 111- 7-11-    Authorizing conditional offers of employment to probationary  Ch. A613
2022      2022     patrol officers
111-2022  9-26-    Sewer fund budget appropriations                              NCM
          2022
112-2022  9-26-    Amending fee schedule for fire protection, fire prevention    Ch. 212,
          2022     and unnecessary alarms                                        Part 1
Res. 113- 7-11-    Authorizing application for RACP funds                        NCM
2022      2022
113-2022  9-26-    Amending required distance for parking near a fire hydrant    Ch. 576,
          2022                                                                   Part 4
Res. 114- 7-18-    Appointments to Reading Redevelopment Authority               Ch. A613
2022      2022
114-2022  9-26-    Setting forth Pension Coordinator salary                      Ch. A613
          2022
Res. 115- 7-25-    Disposition of records                                        NCM
2022      2022
115-2022  10-10-   International Property Maintenance Code                       Ch. 180,
          2022                                                                   Part 13
Res. 116- 7-25-    Purchase agreement to obtain electricity generation           NCM
2022      2022
116-2022  10-10-   Budget amendment                                              NCM
          2022
Res. 117- 7-25-    Confirming Zoning Administrator                               Ch. A613
2022      2022
117-2022  10-10-   Memorandum of understanding to control erosion                Ch. A613
          2022
Res. 118- 7-25-    Reappointment to Berks County Convention Center Authority     Ch. A613
2022      2022
118-2022  10-10-   Removal of Planning Commission members                        Ch. 23,
          2022                                                                   Part 1
Res. 119- 7-25-    Reappointment to Blighted Property Review Committee           Ch. A613
2022      2022
119-2022  10-10-   Parking prohibitions and penalty                              Ch. 576,
          2022                                                                   Part 4
Res. 120- 7-25-    Appointment to vacant District 6 Council seat                 Ch. A613
2022      2022
120-2022  10-24-   Curbside waste collection                                     Ch. 212,
          2022                                                                   Part 1
Res. 121- 7-25-    Appointments to the Council Staff Oversight Committee         Ch. A613
2022      2022
121-2022  10-24-   Accepting conveyance                                          Ch. A615
          2022
Res. 122- 7-25-    Appointment to the Reading Redevelopment Authority            Ch. A613
2022      2022
122-2022  10-24-   Sewer budget appropriations                                   NCM
          2022
Res. 123- 7-25-    Appointments to the RAWA Lease Agreement Work Group           Ch. A613
2022      2022
123-2022  11-14-   Budget amendment                                              NCM
          2022
124-2022  11-14-   Budget amendment                                              NCM
          2022
125-2022  11-28-   Fire prevention fees and requirements                         Ch. 212,
          2022                                                                   Part 1
Res. 126- 8-8-2022 Confirming Managing Director                                  Ch. A613
2022
126-2022  11-28-   Budget amendment                                              NCM
          2022
Res. 127- 8-8-2022 Approving conditional use application                         NCM
2022
127-2022  11-28-   Budget amendment                                              NCM
          2022
Res. 128- 8-22-    Appointment of Council representative to Berks Community      Ch. A613
2022      2022     Action Program (BCAP)
Res. 129- 8-22-    Appointment of Council representative to the Downtown         Ch. A613
2022      2022     Revitalization Public Private Partnership (P3)
129-2022  12-18-   Budget amendment                                              NCM
          2022
Res. 130- 8-22-    Appointment of Council representative to the Reading Area     Ch. A613
2022      2022     Transportation Study (RATS)
130-2022  12-12-   Vacating and removing street                                  Ch. A617
          2022
Res. 131- 8-22-    Appointment of Council representative to the Blighted         Ch. A613
2022      2022     Property Review Committee
131-2022  12-12-   Budget appropriation                                          NCM
          2022
Res. 132- 8-22-    Appointment of Council representative to the School District  Ch. A613
2022      2022     Work Group
132-2022  12-12-   Budget appropriation                                          NCM
          2022
Res. 133- 8-22-    Appointment of Council representative to the Aulenbach        Ch. A613
2022      2022     Cemetery Board
133-2022  12-12-   Budget appropriation                                          NCM
          2022
Res. 134- 8-22-    Extending appointment of Acting Human Resources Director      Ch. A613
2022      2022
134-2022  12-12-   Real estate taxes for FY 2023                                 NCM
          2022
Res. 135- 8-22-    Extending appointment of Acting Public Works Director         Ch. A613
2022      2022
135-2022  12-19-   Establishing employee positions for 2022                      Ch. A613
          2022
Res. 136- 8-22-    Appointment of Council Vice-President                         Ch. A613
2022      2022
136-2022  12-12-   Budget established                                            NCM
          2022
Res.      9-12-    Approving bids                                                NCM
136A-2022 2022
Res. 137- 9-12-    Authorizing installation on Penn Street Bridge by Berks Art   NCM
2022      2022     Fast Lane Art juried contest
137-2022  12-12-   Capital improvement plan budget                               NCM
          2022
Res. 138- 9-12-    Authorizing replacement of the mural at City owned parklet    NCM
2022      2022
Res. 139- 9-12-    Sewage module review                                          Ch. A616
2022      2022
139-2022  12-19-   Budget amendment                                              NCM
          2022
Res. 140- 9-12-    Approving the 2023 minimum municipal obligation for police,   NCM
2022      2022     fire, officers and employees pension funds
140-2022  12-19-   Salary of Human Resources Director                            Ch. A613
          2022
Res. 141- 9-12-    Disposition of records                                        NCM
2022      2022
141-2022  12-19-   Compensation of elected officials                             Ch. 91,
          2022                                                                   Part 1
Res. 142- 9-12-    Amending cooperation agreement                                Ch. A613
2022      2022
142-2022  12-19-   Compensation of elected officials                             Ch. 91,
          2022                                                                   Part 1
Res. 143- 9-12-    Reappointment to Historical Architectural Review Board        Ch. A613
2022      2022
143-2022  12-19-   Purchasing policy relating to solicitation and award of       Ch. 5, Part
          2022     public contracts                                              8
Res. 144- 9-12-    Reappointment to Historical Architectural Review Board        Ch. A613
2022      2022
144-2022  12-19-   Budget appropriation                                          NCM
          2022
Res. 145- 9-26-    Grant application                                             NCM
2022      2022
145-2022  12-19-   Compensation of elected officials                             Ch. 91,
          2022                                                                   Part 1
Res. 146- 9-26-    Authorizing installation of additional banners for the Berks  NCM
2022      2022     Art Fast Lane Art juried contest
Res. 147- 9-26-    Appointment to the Youth Commission                           Ch. A613
2022      2022
Res. 148- 9-26-    Appointment to the Youth Commission                           Ch. A613
2022      2022
Res. 152- 10-10-   Ratifying Collective Bargaining Agreement                     Ch. A613
2022      2022
Res. 153- 10-24-   Approving certificate of insufficiency                        NCM
2022      2022
Res. 154- 10-24-   Authorizing donation of steel deck staging panels             NCM
2022      2022
Res. 155- 10-24-   Authorizing purchase of equipment for Police Department       NCM
2022      2022
Res. 156- 10-24-   Disposition of records                                        NCM
2022      2022
Res. 157- 10-24-   Authorizing purchase of office furniture                      NCM
2022      2022
Res. 159- 10-24-   Reappointment to Environmental Advisory Council               Ch. A613
2022      2022
Res. 160- 10-24-   Appointment to Environmental Advisory Council                 Ch. A613
2022      2022
Res. 161- 11-14-   Approving bids                                                NCM
2022      2022
Res. 162- 11-14-   Transfer of funds                                             NCM
2022      2022
Res. 163- 11-14-   Disposition of records                                        NCM
2022      2022
Res. 164- 11-14-   Accepting resignations from Planning Commission               Ch. A613
2022      2022
Res. 165- 11-14-   Authorizing submission of Action Plan                         Ch. A613
2022      2022
Res. 166- 11-14-   Appointment to Planning Commission                            Ch. A613
2022      2022
Res. 167- 11-14-   Appointment to Planning Commission                            Ch. A613
2022      2022
Res. 168- 11-28-   Accepting resignation from Reading Human Relations Commission Ch. A613
2022      2022     member
Res. 169- 11-28-   Extending appointment of Acting Public Works Director         Ch. A613
2022      2022
Res. 170- 11-28-   Extending appointment of Acting Human Resources Director      Ch. A613
2022      2022
Res. 171- 11-28-   Sewage module review                                          Ch. A616
2022      2022
Res. 172- 11-28-   Sewage module review                                          Ch. A616
2022      2022
Res. 173- 11-28-   Reappointment to Shade Tree Commission                        Ch. A613
2022      2022
Res. 174- 11-28-   Reappointment to Environmental Advisory Council               Ch. A613
2022      2022
Res. 175- 11-28-   Appointment to Environmental Advisory Council                 Ch. A613
2022      2022
Res. 176- 12-5-    Accepting resignation from Reading Public Library Board       Ch. A613
2022      2022     member
Res. 177- 12-5-    Approving bids                                                NCM
2022      2022
Res. 178- 12-19-   Disposition of records                                        NCM
2022      2022
Res. 179- 12-19-   Accepting resignation from Electricians Examination Board     Ch. A613
2022      2022     member
Res. 180- 12-19-   Authorizing conditional employment offers to probationary     Ch. A613
2022      2022     patrol officers
Res. 181- 12-19-   Amendment to City Solicitor employment contract               Ch. A613
2022      2022
Res. 182- 12-19-   Donation of used portable radio microphones                   NCM
2022      2022
Res. 183- 12-19-   Reappointment to HVAC Board                                   Ch. A613
2022      2022
Res. 184- 12-19-   Reappointment to the Reading Public Library Board             Ch. A613
2022      2022
Res. 185- 12-19-   Reappointment to the Audit Committee                          Ch. A613
2022      2022
Res. 186- 12-19-   Ratifying collective bargaining agreement                     Ch. A613
2022      2022
Res. 187- 12-19-   Rescinding Res. 171-2022                                      Ch. A616
2022      2022
Res. 188- 12-19-   Sewage module review                                          Ch. A616
2022      2022
Res. 189- 12-19-   Ratifying collective bargaining agreement                     Ch. A613
2022      2022
Res. 190- 12-19-   Confirming appointment of Human Resources Director            Ch. A613
2022      2022
1-2023    1-9-2023 Budget transfer                                               NCM
Res. 1-   1-9-2023 Disposition of records                                        NCM
2023
2-2023    1-9-2023 Budget transfer                                               NCM
Res. 3-   1-9-2023 Authorizing bank accounts                                     Ch. A613
2023
3-2023    1-9-2023 Budget amendment                                              NCM
Res. 4-   1-9-2023 Appointments to the Nominations and Appointments Committee    Ch. A613
2023
Res. 5-   1-9-2023 Grant program application                                     NCM
2023
5-2023    2-13-    Authorizing residential permit parking                        NCM
          2023
Res. 6-   1-9-2023 Appointment of Council President                              Ch. A613
2023
6-2023    1-9-2023 Revising curb locations                                       Ch. A617
Res. 7-   1-23-    Authorizing grant application                                 NCM
2023      2023
7-2023    1-23-    Amending Charter Board                                        Ch. 23,
          2023                                                                   Part 6
Res. 8-   1-23-    Authorizing exoneration of property taxes                     NCM
2023      2023
8-2023    1-23-    Amending salary of Public Works Director                      Ch. 70,
          2023                                                                   Part 7
Res. 9-   1-23-    Appointments to RAWA work group                               Ch. A613
2023      2023
9-2023    1-23-    Amendment to 2023 position ordinance                          Ch. A613
          2023
Res. 10-  1-23-    Promotion to Sergeant                                         Ch. A613
2023      2023
10-2023   1-23-    Agreement of lease                                            Ch. A615
          2023
Res. 11-  1-23-    Promotion to Lieutenant                                       Ch. A613
2023      2023
11-2023   2-13-    Budget amendment                                              NCM
          2023
Res. 12-  1-23-    Authorizing installation of jazz fest banners                 NCM
2023      2023
12-2023   2-13-    Personnel code salary ranges                                  Ch. 70,
          2023                                                                   Part 7
Res. 13-  1-23-    Authorizing conditional offers of employment to probationary  Ch. A613
2023      2023     firefighters and paramedic/firefighters
Res. 14-  1-23-    Memorandum of understanding for animal control services       Ch. A613
2023      2023
14-2023   2-13-    Amending residential tax abatement                            Ch. 543,
          2023                                                                   Part 1
Res. 15-  1-23-    Reappointment to the Reading Area Water Authority             Ch. A613
2023      2023
15A-2023  3-13-    Budget appropriation                                          NCM
          2023
Res. 16-  1-23-    Reappointment to the Reading Redevelopment Authority          Ch. A613
2023      2023
16-2023   2-27-    Revising curb locations                                       Ch. A617
          2023
Res. 17-  2-6-2023 Leaving District 5 Council seat open                          Ch. A613
2023
17-2023   2-27-    Construction code fees; application for appeal                Ch. 212,
          2023                                                                   Part 1
Res. 18-  2-13-    Accepting resignation from Library Board member               Ch. A613
2023      2023
18-2023   2-27-    Permanent dumpster fees                                       Ch. 496,
          2023                                                                   Part 1
Res. 19-  2-13-    Authorizing purchase                                          NCM
2023      2023
19-2023   2-27-    Budget amendment                                              NCM
          2023
Res. 20-  2-13-    Authorizing installation of a mural                           NCM
2023      2023
20-2023   2-27-    Budget appropriation                                          NCM
          2023
Res. 21-  2-13-    Sewage module review                                          Ch. A616
2023      2023
21-2023   2-27-    Vacant Council seat provisions                                Ch. 5, Part
          2023                                                                   2
Res. 22-  2-13-    Sewage module review                                          Ch. A616
2023      2023
          2-27-                                                                  Ch. 5,
22-2023   2023     Mayor general provisions                                      Parts 3 and
                                                                                 4
Res. 23-  2-13-    Sewage module review                                          Ch. A616
2023      2023
23-2023   2-27-    City Auditor general provisions                               Ch. 5, Part
          2023                                                                   5
Res. 24-  2-13-    Authorizing disposal of antiquated server racks               NCM
2023      2023
24-2023   2-27-    Budget amendment                                              NCM
          2023
Res. 25-  2-13-    Petition to fill vacant District 5 Council seat               Ch. A613
2023      2023
25-2023   2-27-    Budget amendment                                              NCM
          2023
Res. 26-  2-13-    Reappointment to Board of Health                              Ch. A613
2023      2023
26-2023   3-13-    Model food code adopted                                       Ch. 251
          2023
Res. 27-  2-13-    Appointment to Youth Commission                               Ch. A613
2023      2023
27-2023   4-24-    No parking zone on Lackawanna Street                          Ch. 576,
          2023                                                                   Part 4
Res. 28-  2-27-    Authorizing PY2021 Annual Action Plan                         Ch. A613
2023      2023
28-2023   3-13-    No parking zone at 1250 Clarion Street                        Ch. 576,
          2023                                                                   Part 4
Res. 29-  2-27-    Authorizing mural installation                                NCM
2023      2023
                                                                                 Ch. 387,
          3-13-                                                                  Part 1; Ch.
29-2023   2023     Impounding and immobilization of vehicles                     396, Part
                                                                                 3; Ch. 576,
                                                                                 Part 8
Res. 30-  2-27-    Authorizing purchase                                          NCM
2023      2023
Res. 31-  2-27-    Authorizing amendment to Mt. Penn Preserve Partnership        Ch. A613
2023      2023     agreement
31-2023   3-27-    Budget amendment                                              NCM
          2023
Res. 32-  2-27-    Appointment to Board of Health                                Ch. A613
2023      2023
32-2023   3-27-    Budget appropriation                                          NCM
          2023
Res. 33-  2-27-    Appointment to Planning Commission                            Ch. A613
2023      2023
33-2023   3-27-    Duties of Health Officer                                      Ch. 5, Part
          2023                                                                   7
Res. 34-  2-27-    Reappointment to Zoning Hearing Board                         Ch. A613
2023      2023
34-2023   3-27-    Budget appropriation                                          NCM
          2023
Res. 35-  2-27-    Appointment to Electrician s Examining Board                  Ch. A613
2023      2023
35-2023   4-24-    Budget amendment                                              NCM
          2023
36-2023   4-10-    Daily parking permit fee                                      Ch. 212,
          2023                                                                   Part 1
Res. 37-  3-13-    Authorizing purchase                                          NCM
2023      2023
37-2023   4-10-    Amending 2023 position ordinance                              Ch. A613
          2023
Res. 38-  3-13-    Ratifying collective bargaining agreement                     Ch. A613
2023      2023
38-2023   4-24-    Public participation                                          Ch. 5, Part
          2023                                                                   2
Res. 39-  3-27-    Appointment to Public Library Board                           Ch. A613
2023      2023
39-2023   4-24-    Purchasing policy relating to sale and lease of city owned    Ch. 5, Part
          2023     land and property                                             8
Res. 40-  3-27-    Moratorium on appropriation                                   NCM
2023      2023
40-2023   4-24-    Budget amendment                                              NCM
          2023
Res. 41-  3-27-    Appointment of Acting Public Works Director and Acting Deputy Ch. A613
2023      2023     Public Works Director and Operations Manager
          4-24-                                                                  Ch. 600,
41-2023   2023     Wireless communications facilities standards                  Parts, 8,
                                                                                 21, 22
Res. 42-  4-10-    Resignation from Reading Housing Authority                    Ch. A613
2023      2023
42-2023   5-8-2023 Vacating and removing street                                  Ch. A617
Res. 43-  4-10-    Reappointment to Plumbing Board                               Ch. A613
2023      2023
43-2023   5-8-2023 Sale of real property                                         Ch. A615
Res. 44-  4-10-    Appointment to Reading Area Water Authority                   Ch. A613
2023      2023
44-2023   5-8-2023 No parking zones downtown                                     Ch. 576,
                                                                                 Part 4
45-2023   5-8-2023 Budget appropriation                                          NCM
Res. 46-  4-10-    Demolition of hotel damaged by fire                           NCM
2023      2023
46-2023   5-8-2023 Interim electrical permit fees                                Ch. 212,
                                                                                 Part 1
Res. 47-  4-24-    Promotion to 1st Deputy Fire Chief                            Ch. A613
2023      2023
47-2023   5-22-    Budget amendment                                              NCM
          2023
Res. 48-  4-24-    Promotion to 2nd Deputy Fire Chief                            Ch. A613
2023      2023
48-2023   5-23-    Amendment to lease agreement with Reading Area Water          Ch. A615
          2023     Authority
Res. 49-  4-24-    Promotion to Fire Suppression Lieutenant                      Ch. A613
2023      2023
49-2023   5-22-    Miscellaneous permitted parking                               Ch. 576,
          2023                                                                   Part 4
Res. 50-  4-24-    Letter of agreement for VSU Surveillance System               Ch. A613
2023      2023
50-2023   5-22-    Pay increase for Video Services Unit and Telecommunicator     Ch. A613
          2023     positions
Res. 51-  4-24-    Authorizing purchase of ammunition                            NCM
2023      2023
51-2023   6-26-    Dumpster and trash receptacle placement                       Ch. 496,
          2023                                                                   Part 1
Res. 52-  4-24-    Appointment to Youth Commission                               Ch. A613
2023      2023
52-2023   6-12-    Budget amendment                                              NCM
          2023
Res. 53-  4-24-    Reappointment to Charter Board                                Ch. A613
2023      2023
53-2023   6-26-    Stopping and parking regulations                              Ch. 576,
          2023                                                                   Part 4
Res. 54-  4-24-    Appointment to Plumbing Board                                 Ch. A613
2023      2023
54-2023   6-12-    Purchase of real property                                     Ch. A615
          2023
Res. 55-  4-24-    Appointment to Plumbing Board                                 Ch. A613
2023      2023
Res. 55A- 4-24-                                                                  Ch. 600,
2023      2023     Small Wireless Communications Facility Design Manual          Part 21,
                                                                                 Appendix A
55-2023   6-26-    Budget appropriation                                          NCM
          2023
          6-26-                                                                  Ch. 576,
56-2023   2023     River Road extension project                                  Part 2, Ch.
                                                                                 A617
57-2023   6-26-    Youth Commission                                              Ch. 23,
          2023                                                                   Part 15
Res. 58-  5-8-2023 Amended cooperation agreement                                 Ch. A613
2023
Res. 59-  5-8-2023 PY2023 Action Plan Amendment                                  Ch. A613
2023
Res. 60-  5-22-    Resignation from Reading Human Relations Commission           Ch. A613
2023      2023
60-2023   6-26-    Budget amendment                                              NCM
          2023
Res. 61-  5-22-    Resignation from Reading Board of Ethics                      Ch. A613
2023      2023
61-2023   6-26-    Budget amendment                                              NCM
          2023
Res. 62-  5-22-    Reappointment to Plumbing Board                               Ch. A613
2023      2023
Res. 62A- 5-22-    Disposition of records                                        NCM
2023      2023
Res. 63-  5-22-    Appointment to Reading Redevelopment Authority                Ch. A613
2023      2023
64-2023   6-26-    Referendum question on the 2023 general election ballot       Ch. A613;
          2023                                                                   Charter 606
Res. 65-  6-12-    Intergovernmental Cooperation Agreement renewal               Ch. A613
2023      2023
65-2023   8-14-    Approving sale agreement                                      Ch. A615
          2023
66-2023   6-26-    Amending the 2023 position ordinance                          Ch. A613
          2023
Res. 67-  6-12-    Approving conditional use application                         NCM
2023      2023
67-2023   7-10-    Approving lease agreement                                     Ch. A615
          2023
Res. 68-  6-26-    Authorizing grant application                                 NCM
2023      2023
68-2023   7-10-    Budget amendment                                              NCM
          2023
Res. 69-  6-26-    Conditional employment offers for probationary patrol         Ch. A613
2023      2023     officers
69-2023   7-10-    Budget appropriation                                          NCM
          2023
Res. 70-  6-26-    Authorizing purchase of vehicle                               NCM
2023      2023
70-2023   7-24-    Budget amendment                                              NCM
          2023
Res. 71-  6-26-    Adopting City Council Handbook policy                         NCM
2023      2023
71-2023   8-14-    Code of Ethics                                                Ch. 5, Part
          2023                                                                   10
72-2023   8-14-    Traffic and stopping and parking regulations                  Ch. 576,
          2023                                                                   Parts 2, 4
73-2023   8-28-    Budget transfer                                               NCM
          2023
Res. 73A- 8-14-    Authorizing installation of film fest banners                 NCM
2023      2023
74-2023   8-28-    Creation of Officers and Employees Deferred Compensation Plan NCM
          2023     Fund
Res. 74A- 8-14-    Approving bids                                                NCM
2023      2023
Res. 75-  7-10-    Authorizing engagement agreement                              Ch. A613
2023      2023
75-2023   8-28-    Budget amendment                                              NCM
          2023
Res. 75A- 8-14-    Modifying LFT Road Project engineering agreement              Ch. A613
2023      2023
76-2023   9-11-    Amending 2023 position ordinance                              Ch. A613
          2023
Res. 76A- 8-14-    Donation of nine out-of-service police bicycles               NCM
2023      2023
77-2023   8-28-    Budget amendment                                              NCM
          2023
Res. 77-  8-14-    PY2019 action plan amendment                                  Ch. A613
2023      2023
Res. 77A- 8-14-    Approving transfer of restaurant liquor license               NCM
2023      2023
Res. 78-  8-14-    Approving affiliation with Keep Pennsylvania Beautiful        NCM
2023      2023
78-2023   9-11-    Authorizing agreement of sale of property                     Ch. A615
          2023
Res. 79-  8-14-    Appointment to Youth Commission                               Ch. A613
2023      2023
79-2023   9-11-    No parking zone                                               Ch. 576,
          2023                                                                   Part 4
Res. 80-  8-14-    Appointment to Youth Commission                               Ch. A613
2023      2023
80-2023   9-11-    Budget appropriations                                         NCM
          2023
Res. 81-  8-14-    Appointment to Board of Health                                Ch. A613
2023      2023
81-2023   9-11-    Budget amendment                                              NCM
          2023
Res. 82-  8-14-    Appointment to HVAC Board                                     Ch. A613
2023      2023
82-2023   9-11-    Parking violation penalties                                   Ch. 576,
          2023                                                                   Part 4
Res. 83-  8-14-    Appointment to HVAC Board                                     Ch. A613
2023      2023
83-2023   9-25-    Amended agreement of lease                                    Ch. A615
          2023
Res. 84-  8-28-    Reappointment to Animal Control Board                         Ch. A613
2023      2023
84-2023   9-11-    Budget amendment                                              NCM
          2023
Res. 85-  8-28-    Reappointment to the Berks County Convention Center Authority Ch. A613
2023      2023
85-2023   9-25-    Budget appropriations                                         NCM
          2023
Res. 86-  9-11-    Approving the 2024 minimum municipal obligation for the City  NCM
2023      2023     of Reading pension funds
86-2023   9-25-    Budget amendment                                              NCM
          2023
Res. 87-  9-11-    Resignation from Reading Board of Health                      Ch. A613
2023      2023
87-2023   9-25-    Budget transfer                                               NCM
          2023
Res. 88-  9-11-    Appointment to HVAC Board                                     Ch. A613
2023      2023
88-2023   10-9-    Eliminating permit parking zone                               NCM
          2023
Res. 89-  9-11-    Appointment to Police Civil Service Board                     Ch. A613
2023      2023
89-2023   10-9-    Blighted Property Review Committee members                    Ch. 23,
          2023                                                                   Part 9
Res. 90-  9-11-    Reappointment to Zoning Hearing Board                         Ch. A613
2023      2023
90-2023   10-9-    Budget amendment                                              NCM
          2023
Res. 91-  9-11-    Denying conditional use application                           NCM
2023      2023
91-2023   10-9-    Budget amendment                                              NCM
          2023
Res. 92-  9-11-    Approving conditional use application                         NCM
2023      2023
92-2023   10-9-    Budget amendment                                              NCM
          2023
Res. 93-  9-25-    Authorizing purchase of new systems office furniture          NCM
2023      2023
93-2023   10-9-    Budget amendment                                              NCM
          2023
Res. 94-  9-25-    Reappointment to Police Civil Service Board                   Ch. A613
2023      2023
94-2023   10-9-    Budget amendment                                              NCM
          2023
Res. 95-  9-25-    Authorizing City Council member(s) to attend Special Zoning   NCM
2023      2023     Hearing Board meeting
95-2023   10-9-    Revitalization and Improvement Zone Authority members         Ch. 14,
          2023                                                                   Part 7
Res. 96-  10-12-   Extending exemptions, deductions, abatements and credits for  NCM
2023      2023     real property
96-2023   10-9-    Budget amendment                                              NCM
          2023
Res. 97-  10-9-    Authorizing installation of mural                             NCM
2023      2023
97-2023   10-23-   Curbside waste collection rates                               Ch. 212,
          2023                                                                   Part 1
Res. 98-  10-9-    Reappointment to Charter Board                                Ch. A613
2023      2023
98-2023   10-23-   Revising curb alignment                                       Ch. A617
          2023
Res. 99-  10-9-    Reappointment to Animal Control Board                         Ch. A613
2023      2023
99-2023   11-13-   Liquidating investments and transferring funds                NCM
          2023
Res. 100- 10-23-   Approving bids                                                NCM
2023      2023
100-2023  11-13-   Miscellaneous parking zones                                   Ch. 576,
          2023                                                                   Part 4
Res. 101- 10-23-   Permitting contract for lease of fire apparatus               Ch. A613
2023      2023
101-2023  11-13-   Budget amendment                                              NCM
          2023
Res. 102- 10-23-   Disposition of records                                        NCM
2023      2023
102-2023  11-27-   Agreement for the Reading Police Department to provide police Ch. A613
          2023     services within the Borough of Kenhorst
Res. 103- 10-23-   Reappointment to Blighted Property Review Committee           Ch. A613
2023      2023
103-2023  11-27-   Budget amendment                                              NCM
          2023
Res. 104- 11-13-   Appointment to Equal Business Opportunity Advisory Board      Ch. A613
2023      2023
104-2023  12-4-    Lead poisoning prevention                                     Ch. 328
          2023
Res. 105- 11-13-   Promotion of Sergeant to Lieutenant                           Ch. A613
2023      2023
Res. 106- 11-13-   Promotion of Officer to Sergeant                              Ch. A613
2023      2023
106-2023  11-27-   Budget transfer                                               NCM
          2023
Res. 107- 11-13-   Promotion of Sergeant to Lieutenant                           Ch. A613
2023      2023
107-2023  11-27-   Commitment of remaining ARPA funding                          NCM
          2023
Res. 108- 11-13-   Conditional offer of employment to probationary paramedic     Ch. A613
2023      2023
108-2023  11-27-   Amending 2023 position ordinance                              Ch. A613
          2023
Res. 109- 11-13-   Adopting the Hazard Vulnerability Assessment and Mitigation   NCM
2023      2023     Plan update
109-2023  12-4-    Real estate taxes for 2024                                    NCM
          2023
Res. 110- 11-13-   Authorizing lease agreement for fire apparatus                NCM
2023      2023
110-2023  12-4-    Employee positions for 2024                                   Ch. A613
          2023
Res. 111- 11-13-   Removal from BRPC                                             Ch. A613
2023      2023
111-2023  12-4-    Budget established                                            NCM
          2023
Res. 112- 11-13-   Requesting grant                                              NCM
2023      2023
112-2023  12-4-    Budget established                                            NCM
          2023
Res. 113- 11-13-   Appointment to Reading Public Library Board                   Ch. A613
2023      2023
113-2023  12-18-   Budget amendment                                              NCM
          2023
Res. 114- 11-13-   Submission of PY2024 to PY2028 Consolidated Plan and the      Ch. A613
2023      2023     PY2024 Action Plan
114-2023  12-18-   Budget appropriation                                          NCM
          2023
Res. 115- 11-27-   Accepting resignation from O&E Pension Board                  Ch. A613
2023      2023
115-2023  12-27-   Budget appropriation                                          NCM
          2023
Res. 116- 11-27-   Requesting Local Share Account Fund grant                     NCM
2023      2023
116-2023  12-18-   Short-term loan and transfer of funds                         NCM
          2023
117-2023  12-18-   Budget transfer                                               NCM
          2023
Res. 118- 11-27-   Temporary limited no-parking zone                             NCM
2023      2023
118-2023  12-18-   Budget amendment                                              NCM
          2023
Res. 119- 11-27-   Dedicating the Schuylkill Avenue Bridge for fallen officer    NCM
2023      2023     Michael Wise
119-2023  12-18-   Budget amendment                                              NCM
          2023
Res. 120- 11-27-   Appointing Council Vice President                             Ch. A613
2023      2023
Res. 121- 12-4-    Agreement with Berks Community Television to provide          Ch. A612
2023      2023     community access channel services
Res. 122- 12-18-   Memorandum of understanding execution                         NCM
2023      2023
Res. 123- 12-18-   Appointments to Berks Couty Tax Collection Committee (TCC)    Ch. A613
2023      2023
Res. 124- 12-18-   Authorizing purchase of e-ticketing solution software         NCM
2023      2023
Res. 125- 12-18-   Disposition of records                                        NCM
2023      2023
Res. 126- 12-18-   Temporary limited no-parking zone                             NCM
2023      2023
Res. 127- 12-18-   Disbursement of grant funds                                   NCM
2023      2023
Res. 128- 12-18-   Submission of the PY2024 to PY2028 Equity Plan                Ch. A613
2023      2023
Res. 129- 12-18-   Requesting City Auditor to perform an audit on City issued    NCM
2023      2023     credit cards
Res. 130- 12-18-   Appointment to the Reading Historic Architectural Review      Ch. A613
2023      2023     Board
Res. 131- 12-18-   Amendment to memorandum of understanding between the City and NCM
2023      2023     the Foundation for the Reading Pagoda
Res. 132- 12-27-   Appointing Police Chief                                       Ch. A613
2023      2023
1-2024    1-8-2024 Budget amendment                                              NCM
Res. 1-   1-8-2024 Disposition of records                                        NCM
2024
Res. 2-   1-8-2024 Authorizing conditional offers of employment as probationary  Ch. A613
2024               patrol officers
          1-22-                                                                  Repealed by
2-2024    2024     Parks and recreation fees                                     Ord. No.
                                                                                 57-2024
Res. 3-   1-8-2024 Authorizing purchase of night vision equipment                NCM
2024
3-2024    1-8-2024 Amending 2024 position ordinance                              Ch. A613
Res. 4-   1-8-2024 Approving transfer of restaurant liquor license               NCM
2024
4-2024    1-22-    Personnel code salary ranges                                  Ch. 70,
          2024                                                                   Part 7
Res. 5-   1-8-2024 Appointment of Public Works Director                          Ch. A613
2024
5-2024    1-8-2024 Setting salary of Chief of Police                             Ch. A613
Res. 6-   1-8-2024 Appointing Council Vice President                             Ch. A613
2024
6-2024    1-22-    Historical and conservation districts; required permits and   Ch. 295
          2024     certificates
Res. 7-   1-22-    Authorizing execution of memorandum of understanding          NCM
2024      2024
Res. 8-   1-22-    Ratifying Resolution to appoint Council Vice President        Ch. A613
2024      2024
8-2024    1-22-    Setting salary of Public Works Director                       Ch. A613
          2024
Res. 9-   1-22-    Appointing Nominations & Appointments Committee               Ch. A613
2024      2024
9-2024    2-26-    Amending the 2024 position ordinance                          Ch. A613
          2024
Res. 10-  1-22-    Appointing Council representative and alternate to            Ch. A613
2024      2024     Environmental Advisory Council
10-2024   2-26-    Amending the 2024 position ordinance                          Ch. A613
          2024
Res. 11-  1-22-    Appointing Council representative and alternate to Diversity  Ch. A613
2024      2024     Board
11-2024   2-26-    Appropriating funds                                           NCM
          2024
Res. 12-  1-22-    Appointing Council representative and alternate to Blighted   Ch. A613
2024      2024     Property Review Committee
12-2024   2-26-    Blighted Property Review Committee definitions                Ch. 23,
          2024                                                                   Part 9
Res. 13-  1-22-    Appointing Council liaison and alternate to reading Area      Ch. A613
2024      2024     Transportation Study (RATS)
13-2024   2-26-24  Allocation of funds                                           NCM
Res. 14-  1-22-    Appointing Council representative and alternate to Mt. Penn   Ch. A613
2024      2024     Preserve Council of Governments Executive Committee
14-2024   3-11-    Redirecting funds                                             NCM
          2024
Res. 15-  1-22-    Appointing Council representative and alternate to Recreation Ch. A613
2024      2024     Commission
15-2024   3-11-    Fees                                                          Ch. 212
          2024
Res. 16-  1-22-    Appointments to Audit Committee                               Ch. A613
2024      2024
16-2024   3-11-    Budget appropriation                                          NCM
          2024
Res. 17-  1-22-    Appointments to Capital Planning Committee                    Ch. A613
2024      2024
17-2024   3-25-    Budget transfer                                               NCM
          2024
Res. 18-  1-22-    Appointments to Revenue Committee                             Ch. A613
2024      2024
18-2024   3-25-    Vehicles and traffic                                          Ch. 576,
          2024                                                                   Part 13
Res. 19-  1-22-    Appointing Council representative and alternate to Berks      Ch. A613
2024      2024     Community Action Program (BCAP)
19-2024   3-25-    Deed of dedication conveying a portion of property            Ch. A615
          2024
Res. 20-  1-22-    Appointing Council representative and alternates to Downtown  Ch. A613
2024      2024     Revitalization Public Private Partnership (P3)
Res. 21-  1-22-    Appointing Council representative and alternate to School     Ch. A613
2024      2024     District Work Group
Res. 22-  1-22-    Appointing Council liaisons and alternate to First Energy     Ch. A613
2024      2024     Stadium Commission
22-2024   3-25-    Condemning easement rights to install and maintain a sewer    Ch. A616
          2024     force main
Res. 23-  1-22-    Appointing Council liaison and alternate to Shade Tree        Ch. A613
2024      2024     Commission
23-2024   3-25-    Budget appropriation                                          NCM
          2024
Res. 24-  1-22-    Appointing Council liaison and alternate to Human Relations   Ch. A613
2024      2024     Commission
24-2024   3-25-    Amending the 2024 position ordinance                          Ch. A613
          2024
Res. 25-  1-22-    Appointing Council liaison and alternate to Planning          Ch. A613
2024      2024     Commission
25-2024   4-8-2024 Setting Accounting Manager salary                             Ch. A613
Res. 26-  1-22-    Appointing Council liaison and alternate to BCTV Board        Ch. A613
2024      2024
Res. 27-  1-22-    Appointing Council representative and alternate to Conversion Ch. A613
2024      2024     Therapy Board
Res. 28-  1-22-    Appointing Council representative and alternate to Other Post Ch. A613
2024      2024     Employment Benefits (OPEB) Board
28-2024   4-22-    Amending the 2024 position ordinance                          Ch. A613
          2024
Res. 29-  1-22-    Appointing Council liaison and alternate to Youth Commission  Ch. A613
2024      2024
Res. 29-  5-13-    Increase in compensation for police academy instructors       Ch. A613
2024      2024
Res. 30-  1-22-    Authorizing purchase of a security system                     NCM
2024      2024
30-2024   5-13-    Purchasing Policy amendment                                   Ch. 5, Part
          2024                                                                   8
Res. 31-  1-22-    Reappointing City Clerk                                       Ch. A613
2024      2024
31-2024   5-13-204 Amending the 2024 position ordinance                          Ch. A613
Res. 32-  1-22-    Authorizing purchase of vehicles                              NCM
2024      2024
32-2024   5-13-    Opening road                                                  Ch. A617
          2024
Res. 32A- 2-12-    Authorizing sale of 2012 TYMCO Sweeper                        NCM
2024      2024
Res. 33-  1-22-    Reappointment to Electrical Examining Board                   Ch. A613
2024      2024
33-2024   5-28-    Miscellaneous parking zones                                   Ch. 576,
          2024                                                                   Part 4
Res. 33A- 2-12-    Authorizing banner installation                               NCM
2024      2024
Res. 34-  1-22-    Rescinding Resolution 40-2023 which imposed a moratorium on   NCM
2024      2024     spending
34-2024   6-24-    Budget amendment                                              NCM
          2024
Res. 34A- 2-12-    Authorizing conditional offer of employment to probationary   Ch. A613
2024      2024     paramedic
34A-2024  7-8-2024 Citizens Initiative Commission removal of members             Ch. 23,
                                                                                 Part 3
Res. 35-  2-12-    Authorizing purchase of ventilation system                    NCM
2024      2024
35-2024   6-24-    Removal of youth commission members                           Ch. 23,
          2024                                                                   Part 15
Res. 36-  2-12-    Authorizing purchase of forklift                              NCM
2024      2024
36-2024   6-24-    Cooperative purchasing agreement                              Ch. A613
          2024
Res. 37-  2-12-    Appointment to Reading Redevelopment Authority and liaison to Ch. A613
2024      2024     Reading Redevelopment Authority
37-2024   6-24-    Personnel code salary range                                   Ch. A613
          2024
Res. 38-  2-12-    Reappointment to Reading Housing Authority                    Ch. A613
2024      2024
38-2024   6-24-    Amending 2024 position ordinance                              Ch. A613
          2024
Res. 39-  2-12-    Reappointment to Reading Housing Authority                    Ch. A613
2024      2024
39-2024   6-24-    Renaming Cathedral Street to R-Phils Street                   Ch. A617
          2024
Res. 40-  2-12-    Reappointment to HVAC Board                                   Ch. A613
2024      2024
40-2024   6-24-    Funding allocation                                            NCM
          2024
Res. 41-  2-12-    Reappointment to First Energy Stadium Commission              Ch. A613
2024      2024
Res. 42-  2-12-    Reappointment to Plumbing Board                               Ch. A613
2024      2024
43-2024   7-22-    Amending 2024 position ordinance                              Ch. A613
          2024
44-2024   7-22-    Amending 2024 position ordinance                              Ch. A613
          2024
45-2024   8-12-    Budget amendment                                              NCM
          2024
Res. 46-  2-26-    Disposition of records                                        NCM
2024      2024
46-2024   8-26-    Employment in the Police Department                           Ch. 77,
          2024                                                                   Part 1
Res. 47-  2-26-    Authorizing promotion to Sergeant                             Ch. A613
2024      2024
47-2024   8-12-    Motorized devices and all-terrain vehicles                    Ch. 576,
          2024                                                                   Part 13
Res. 48-  2-26-    Authorizing promotion to Sergeant                             Ch. A613
2024      2024
48-2024   8-12-    Amending 2024 position ordinance                              Ch. A613
          2024
Res. 49-  2-26-    Adopting Debt Policy                                          Ch. A613
2024      2024
49-2024   8-26-    Budget appropriation                                          NCM
          2024
Res. 50-  2-26-    Reappointment to Plumbing Board                               Ch. A613
2024      2024
50-2024   8-26-    Budget amendment                                              NCM
          2024
Res. 51-  2-26-    Appointment to Reading Public Library Board                   Ch. A613
2024      2024
51-2024   8-26-    Amending position ordinance to include Administrative         Ch. A613
          2024     Assistant in Human Resources
Res. 52-  3-11-    Promotion to 1st Deputy Fire Chief                            Ch. A613
2024      2024
52-2024   8-26-    Budget amendment                                              NCM
          2024
Res. 53-  3-11-    Authorizing conditional offers of employment to probationary  Ch. A613
2024      2024     firefighters
53-2024   8-26-    Amending position code to create Second Deputy Chief Position Ch. A613
          2024     in Police Department
Res. 54-  3-11-    Purchase for elevator renovations                             NCM
2024      2024
54-2024   8-26-    Unlawful manufacture of firearms                              Ch. 219,
          2024                                                                   Part 2
Res. 55-  3-11-    Reappointment to Board of Health                              Ch. A613
2024      2024
55-2024   8-26-    Budgetary transfer                                            NCM
          2024
Res. 56-  3-11-    Reappointment to Board of Health                              Ch. A613
2024      2024
Res. 57-  3-11-    Appointment to Blighted Property Review Committee             Ch. A613
2024      2024
57-2024   8-26-    Parks and recreation fees                                     Ch. 212,
          2024                                                                   Part 1
58-2024   8-26-    Retail and regional sewer fund budgets amended                NCM
          2024
Res. 59-  3-11-    Appointment to Blighted Property Review Committee             Ch. A613
2024      2024
59-2024   9-9-2024 Budget appropriation                                          NCM
Res. 60-  3-25-    Contract with Stryker Sales Corp                              Ch. A613
2024      2024
60-2024   9-9-2024 Amending 2024 position ordinance                              Ch. A613
Res. 61-  3-25-    Fire Department Chiefs authorized to make necessary run card  Ch. A613
2024      2024     changes
61-2024   9-9-2024 Motorized devices and all-terrain vehicles                    Ch. 576,
                                                                                 Part 13
Res. 62-  3-25-    Sale of vehicles                                              NCM
2024      2024
62-2024   9-9-2024 Approving contract for leadership program                     Ch. A613
Res. 63-  3-25-    Participation in 2024 Cohort of the Pennsylvania Blueprint    Ch. A613
2024      2024     Communities program
Res. 64-  3-25-    Requesting grant                                              NCM
2024      2024
64-2024   10-14-   Council staff evaluations                                     Ch. 5, Part
          2024                                                                   2
Res. 65-  3-25-    Approving appeal and issuance of certificate of               NCM
2024      2024     appropriateness
65-2024   10-14-   Budget transfer                                               NCM
          2024
Res. 66-  3-25-    Settlement agreement                                          Ch. A613
2024      2024
66-2024   10-14-   Budget transfer                                               NCM
          2024
Res. 67-  3-25-    Reappointment to Zoning Hearing Board                         Ch. A613
2024      2024
67-2024   10-14-   General fund loan to local CRIZ authority                     NCM
          2024
Res. 68-  3-25-    Reappointment to Zoning Hearing Board                         Ch. A613
2024      2024
68-2024   10-28-   Amending curbside collection fees                             Ch. 212,
          2024                                                                   Part 1
Res. 69-  3-25-    Appointment to Board of Health                                Ch. A613
2024      2024
69-2024   10-28-   Budget transfer                                               NCM
          2024
Res. 70-  3-25-    Rescinding Res. No. 58-2024, and alternate appointment to     Ch. A613
2024      2024     Blighted Property Review Committee
70-2024   11-12-   Intent to issue bonds                                         Ch. A611
          2024
Res. 71-  3-25-    Purchase of vehicles                                          NCM
2024      2024
71-2024   11-12-   Budget transfer                                               NCM
          2024
72-2024   11-12-   Budget transfer                                               NCM
          2024
Res. 73-  4-8-2024 Accepting a Department of Energy Efficiency community block   NCM
2024               grant allocation
73-2024   11-25-   Amending the 2024 position ordinance                          Ch. A613
          2024
Res. 74-  4-8-2024 Authorizing signing and payment of letter of agreement        Ch. A613
2024
Res. 75-  4-8-2024 Amending contracts to increase total amount for engineering   Ch. A613
2024               services
75-2024   12-9-    Real estate taxes for 2024                                    NCM
          2024
Res. 76-  4-8-2024 Authorizing purchase engineering services contract            Ch. A613
2024
76-2024   12-9-    Establishing employee positions for 2025                      Ch. A613
          2024
Res. 77-  4-8-2024 Appointment to Shade Tree Commission                          Ch. A613
2024
77-2024   12-9-    Establishing budget                                           NCM
          2024
Res. 78-  4-8-2024 Appointment to Animal Control Board                           Ch. A613
2024
78-2024   12-9-    Establishing budget                                           NCM
          2024
Res. 79-  4-22-    Approving contract for design engineering and construction    Ch. A613
2024      2024     management services
79-2024   12-9-    Budget transfer                                               NCM
          2024
Res. 80-  5-13-    Purchase of two vehicles                                      NCM
2024      2024
80-2024   12-9-    Reallocation of ARPA project funding                          NCM
          2024
Res. 81-  5-13-    Authorizing promotion of Sergeant to Lieutenant               Ch. A613
2024      2024
81-2024   12-9-    Revising curb alignments                                      Ch. A617
          2024
Res. 82-  5-13-    Disposition of records                                        NCM
2024      2024
82-2024   12-9-    Budget amendment                                              NCM
          2024
Res. 83-  5-13-    Sewage module review                                          Ch. A616
2024      2024
83-2024   12-9-    Budget transfer                                               NCM
          2024
Res. 84-  5-13-    Authorizing conditional offer of employment to probationary   Ch. A613
2024      2024     paramedic
84-2024   12-30-   Reallocation of ARPA project funding                          NCM
          2024
Res. 85-  5-13-    Appointment to Police Civil Service Board                     Ch. A613
2024      2024
Res. 86-  5-28-    Authorizing mural installation                                NCM
2024      2024
Res. 87-  5-28-    Costars contract for security improvements                    Ch. A613
2024      2024
Res. 88-  5-28-    Costars contract for Code required improvements               Ch. A613
2024      2024
Res. 89-  5-28-    Requesting grant                                              NCM
2024      2024
Res. 90-  5-28-    Requesting grant                                              NCM
2024      2024
Res. 91-  5-28-    Reappointment to Planning Commission                          Ch. A613
2024      2024
Res. 92-  5-28-    Appointment to Planning Commission                            Ch. A613
2024      2024
Res. 93-  5-28-    Appointment to committee                                      Ch. A613
2024      2024
Res. 94-  5-28-    Purchase of one-year NALEO memberships                        Ch. A613
2024      2024
Res. 95-  6-10-    Authorizing promotion of Officer to Sergeant                  Ch. A613
2024      2024
Res. 96-  6-10-    PY2024 action plan amendment                                  Ch. A613
2024      2024
Res. 96A- 6-24-    Costars contract for garage and shop office floor             Ch. A613
2024      2024     rehabilitation
Res. 97-  6-10-    Costars contract for concrete floor repairs                   Ch. A613
2024      2024
Res. 97A- 6-24-    Offers of employment for probationary patrol officers         Ch. A613
2024      2024
Res. 98-  6-10-    Intergovernmental Cooperation Agreement renewal               Ch. A613
2024      2024
Res. 98A- 6-24-    Promotion to Sergeant                                         Ch. A613
2024      2024
Res. 99-  6-10-    Sewage module review                                          Ch. A616
2024      2024
Res. 99A- 6-24-    Contract amendment                                            Ch. A613
2024      2024
Res. 100- 6-10-    Costars contract for two security gates                       Ch. A613
2024      2024
Res.      6-24-    Sale of vehicle                                               NCM
100A-2024 2024
Res. 101- 6-10-    Reappointment to Animal Control Board                         Ch. A613
2024      2024
Res. 102- 6-10-    Appointment to Animal Control Board                           Ch. A613
2024      2024
Res.      7-8-2024 Adopting the Council Policy and Procedure Handbook            NCM
102A-2024
Res. 103- 7-8-2024 Costars contract for heating system upgrade                   Ch. A613
2024
Res. 104- 7-8-2024 Appointment to Reading Redevelopment Authority                Ch. A613
2024
Res. 105- 7-8-2024 Reappointment to Planning Commission                          Ch. A613
2024
Res. 106- 7-8-2024 Removal from Youth Commission                                 Ch. A613
2024
Res. 107- 7-22-    Authorizing installation of a mural                           NCM
2024      2024
Res. 108- 7-22-    Approving bids                                                NCM
2024      2024
Res. 109- 7-22-    Authorizing promotion of Fire Suppression Lieutenant to 2nd   Ch. A613
2024      2024     Deputy Fire Chief
Res. 110- 7-22-    Authorizing promotion of Firefighter to Fire Suppression      Ch. A613
2024      2024     Lieutenant
Res. 111- 7-22-    Reappointment to First Energy Stadium Commission              Ch. A613
2024      2024
Res. 112- 7-22-    Reappointment to First Energy Stadium Commission              Ch. A613
2024      2024
Res. 113- 7-22-    Authorizing the filing of an application for funds            NCM
2024      2024
Res.      8-12-    Engagement agreement for Resilient Communities Initiative     Ch. A613
113A-2024 2024
Res. 114- 8-12-    Engagement agreement for management of City of Reading        Ch. A613
2024      2024     Climate Corps
Res. 115- 8-12-    United States Geological Survey to install a groundwater      Ch. A613
2024      2024     monitoring well and station
Res. 116- 8-12-    Authorizing purchase of utility body forestry unit            NCM
2024      2024
Res. 117- 8-12-    Authorizing purchase of three transit vehicles                NCM
2024      2024
Res. 118- 8-12-    Calling for an immediate increase in Pennsylvania s minimum   NCM
2024      2024     wage
Res.      8-12-    Reappointment to Environmental Advisory Council               Ch. A613
118A-2024 2024
Res. 119- 8-12-    Authorizing approval of continued use of financial reporting  NCM
2024      2024     software
Res. 121- 8-26-    Costars contract for landscaping services                     Ch. A613
2024      2024
Res. 122- 8-26-    Costars contract for purchase of trucks                       Ch. A613
2024      2024
Res. 123- 8-26-    Costars contract for purchase of vehicles                     Ch. A613
2024      2024
Res. 124- 8-26-    Disposition of records                                        NCM
2024      2024
Res. 125- 8-26-    Engineering contract                                          Ch. A613
2024      2024
Res. 127- 9-9-2024 Authorizing mural installation                                NCM
2024
Res. 128- 9-9-2024 Authorizing banner installation                               NCM
2024
Res. 129- 9-9-2024 Requesting grant                                              NCM
2024
Res. 131- 9-9-2024 Approving waiver of responsible contractor ordinance          NCM
2024               requirements
Res. 132- 9-9-2024 Appointment to City Revitalization and Improvement Zone       Ch. A613
2024               Authority
Res. 133- 9-9-2024 Appointment to City Revitalization and Improvement Zone       Ch. A613
2024               Authority
Res. 134- 9-9-2024 Appointment to City Revitalization and Improvement Zone       Ch. A613
2024               Authority
Res. 137- 9-23-    Authorizing banner installation                               NCM
2024      2024
Res. 138- 9-23-    Requesting grant                                              NCM
2024      2024
Res. 139- 9-23-    Approving the 2025 minimum municipal obligation for the City  NCM
2024      2024     of Reading pension funds
Res. 140- 9-23-    GESA Energy Efficiency and Energy Transition Project awarded  Ch. A613
2024      2024
Res. 141- 10-14-   Adopting PennDOT Traffic Calming Handbook                     Ch. A613
2024      2024
Res. 142- 9-23-    Adopting Reading Downtown Strategic Plan                      Ch. A613
2024      2024
Res. 143- 9-30-    Appointment to City Revitalization and Improvement Zone       Ch. A613
2024      2024     Authority
Res. 144- 9-30-    Appointment to City Revitalization and Improvement Zone       Ch. A613
2024      2024     Authority
Res. 145- 9-23-    Appointments to Charter Review Commission                     Ch. A613
2024      2024
Res.      10-7-    Appointment of Human Resources Director                       Ch. A613
145A-2024 2024
Res. 148- 10-14-   Authorizing purchase of tablet charging cabinets              NCM
2024      2024
Res. 149- 10-14-   Promotion of 2nd Deputy Fire Chief                            Ch. A613
2024      2024
Res. 150- 10-14-   Promotion of Fire Suppression Lieutenant                      Ch. A613
2024      2024
Res. 151- 10-14-   Reappointment to Berks County Convention Center Authority     Ch. A613
2024      2024
Res. 152- 10-28-   Authorizing promotion of Sergeant to Lieutenant               Ch. A613
2024      2024
Res. 153- 10-28-   Authorizing promotion fo C.I. to Sergeant                     Ch. A613
2024      2024
Res. 154- 10-28-   Authorizing mural installation                                NCM
2024      2024
Res. 155- 10-28-   Authorizing promotion of Firefighter/EMT to Suppression       Ch. A613
2024      2024     Lieutenant
Res. 156- 10-28-   Authorizing purchase of Ford interceptor utility vehicle      NCM
2024      2024
Res. 157- 10-28-   Authorizing purchase of Ford interceptor utility vehicle      NCM
2024      2024
Res. 158- 10-28-   Extending the contract with McNees Strategic Solutions Group  Ch. A613
2024      2024
Res. 159- 10-28-   Requesting grant                                              NCM
2024      2024
Res. 160- 10-28-   Requesting grant                                              NCM
2024      2024
Res. 161- 10-28-   Requesting grant                                              NCM
2024      2024
Res. 162- 10-28-   Requesting grant                                              NCM
2024      2024
Res. 163- 10-28-   Requesting grant                                              NCM
2024      2024
Res. 164- 11-12-   Sewage module review                                          Ch. A616
2024      2024
Res. 165- 11-12-   Sewage module review                                          Ch. A616
2024      2024
Res. 166- 11-12-   Sewage module review                                          Ch. A616
2024      2024
Res. 167- 11-12-   Extending School Crossing Guard Services Contract             Ch. A613
2024      2024
Res. 168- 11-12-   Authorization of application for financial assistance         NCM
2024      2024
Res. 169- 11-12-   Adopting Council Policy and Procedure Handbook                NCM
2024      2024
Res. 170- 11-12-   Reappointment to Berks County Convention Center Authority     Ch. A613
2024      2024
Res. 171- 11-12-   Appointment to Electrical Examining Board                     Ch. A613
2024      2024
Res. 172- 11-12-   Reappointment to Electrical Examining Board                   Ch. A613
2024      2024
Res. 173- 11-25-   Appointment to Animal Control Board                           Ch. A613
2024      2024
Res. 174- 11-25-   Appointment to Charter Review Commission                      Ch. A613
2024      2024
Res. 175- 12-2-    Requesting grant                                              NCM
2024      2024
Res. 176- 12-9-    Endorsing use of municipal taxes for approved projects        NCM
2024      2024
Res. 177- 12-16-   Second amendment to City Council Solicitor employment         Ch. A613
2024      2024     contract
Res. 178- 12-16-   Disposition of records                                        NCM
2024      2024
Res. 179- 12-16-   Authorizing promotion of Lieutenant to Captain                Ch. A613
2024      2024
Res. 180- 12-16-   Authorizing promotion of Sergeant to Lieutenant               Ch. A613
2024      2024
Res. 181- 12-16-   Authorizing promotion of Officer to Sergeant                  Ch. A613
2024      2024
Res. 182- 12-16-   Authorizing conditional offers of employment to probationary  Ch. A613
2024      2024     patrol officers
Res. 183- 12-16-   Adopting an unofficial Spanish version of the City Charter    NCM
2024      2024
Res. 1-   1-13-    Disposition of records                                        NCM
2025      2025
1-2025    1-13-    Budget appropriations                                         NCM
          2025
Res. 2-   1-13-    Disposition of records                                        NCM
2025      2025
2-2025    1-13-    Budget transfer                                               NCM
          2025
Res. 3-   1-13-    Conditional offers of employment to probationary firefighters Ch. A613
2025      2025
3-2025    1-13-    Budget transfer                                               NCM
          2025
Res. 4-   1-13-    Requesting approval for grant application                     NCM
2025      2025
4-2025    1-13-    Budget transfer                                               NCM
          2025
Res. 5-   1-13-    Memorandum of understanding for animal control services       Ch. A613
2025      2025
5-2025    1-13-    Budget amendments                                             NCM
          2025
Res. 6-   1-13-    PY2024 CDBG Action Plan amendment                             Ch. A613
2025      2025
6-2025    1-13-    Budget amendments                                             NCM
          2025
Res. 7-   1-13-    Extending program year for Reading Climate Corps              Ch. A613
2025      2025
7-2025    1-13-    Budget transfer                                               NCM
          2025
Res. 8-   1-13-    Waiving delinquent taxes and charges for specific property    NCM
2025      2025
8-2025    1-27-    Budget amendment                                              NCM
          2025
Res. 9-   1-13-    Payment acceptance to retain exempt status from real estate   Ch. A613
2025      2025     taxes
Res. 10-  1-13-    Reappointment to Code and Licenses Appeals Board              Ch. A613
2025      2025
10-2025   2-10-    Motorized devices and all-terrain vehicles                    Ch. 576,
          2025                                                                   Part 13
Res. 11-  1-13-    Intention to retain SRGA for professional services            NCM
2025      2025
11-2025   2-24-    Reallocation of ARPA funding                                  NCM
          2025
Res. 11-  1-27-    Endorsing use of taxes for improvements                       NCM
A-2025    2025
Res. 12-  1-27-    Disposition of records                                        NCM
2025      2025
12-2025   2-24-    Budget transfer                                               NCM
          2025
Res. 13-  1-27-    Authorizing mural installation                                NCM
2025      2025
13-2025   2-24-    Budget transfer                                               NCM
          2025
Res. 14-  1-27-    Calling for state legislation for rent control                NCM
2025      2025
14-2025   2-24-    Fire prevention fees and requirements                         Ch. 212,
          2025                                                                   Part 1
Res. 15-  2-10-    Disposal of antiquated server racks                           NCM
2025      2025
15-2025   2-24-    Fire prevention fees and requirements                         Ch. 212,
          2025                                                                   Part 1
                                                                                 Ch. 600,
15A-2025  3-10-    Zoning amendment                                              Parts 3, 4,
          2025                                                                   8, 10 - 13,
                                                                                 15, 16, 22
Res. 16-  2-10-    Sewage module review                                          Ch. A616
2025      2025
          2-24-                                                                  Ch. 36 and
16-2025   2025     Fire and rescue services; fees                                Ch. 212,
                                                                                 Part 1
          3-10-                                                                  Ch. 600,
16A-2025  2025     Zoning amendment                                              Parts 8,
                                                                                 12, 22
Res. 17-  2-10-    Sewage module review                                          Ch. A616
2025      2025
Res. 18-  2-10-    Promotion of Officer to Sergeant                              Ch. A613
2025      2025
Res. 19-  2-10-    Authorizing banner installation                               NCM
2025      2025
19-2025   3-10-25  Budget transfer                                               NCM
Res. 20-  2-10-    Requesting grant                                              NCM
2025      2025
20-2025   3-10-    Amending the 2025 position ordinance                          Ch. A613
          2025
Res. 21-  2-10-    Reading Climate Corps renamed to Reading Conservation Corps   Ch. A613
2025      2025
22-2025   3-24-    Budget and Capital Program amendment                          Ch. 5, Part
          2025                                                                   8
Res. 23-  2-24-    Promotion of Lieutenant to Captain                            Ch. A613
2025      2025
23-2025   3-24-    Budget transfer                                               NCM
          2025
Res. 24-  2-24-    Promotion of Sergeant to Lieutenant                           Ch. A613
2025      2025
24-2025   3-24-    Prohibited parking zones                                      NCM
          2025
Res. 25-  2-24-    Resignation from Planning Commission                          Ch. A613
2025      2025
25-2025   4-14-    Budget transfer                                               NCM
          2025
Res. 26-  2-24-    Adopting Housing and Blight Strategy                          Ch. A613
2025      2025
26-2025   4-28-    Amending Mt. Penn Preserve Partnership Council                Ch. A613
          2025
Res. 27-  2-24-    Approving appeal of JAFT LLC                                  NCM
2025      2025
27-2025   4-28-    Solid waste fees                                              Ch. 212,
          2025                                                                   Part 1
Res. 28-  2-24-    Approving and denying appeal of Michelle Betances             NCM
2025      2025
28-2025   4-28-    Dumpster and trash receptacle placement                       Ch. 496,
          2025                                                                   Part 1
Res. 29-  2-24-    Reappointment to Reading Area Water Authority                 Ch. A613
2025      2025
29-2025   4-28-    Demolition of structures                                      Ch. 195
          2025
Res. 30-  3-10-    Donation of iPads                                             NCM
2025      2025
30-2025   4-28-    Budget transfer                                               NCM
          2025
Res. 31-  3-10-    Disposition of records                                        NCM
2025      2025
31-2025   4-28-    Budget transfer                                               NCM
          2025
Res. 32-  3-10-    Resignation from Charter Board                                Ch. A613
2025      2025
32-2025   4-28-    Residential permit parking                                    Ch. 576,
          2025                                                                   Part 4
Res. 33-  3-10-    Adoption of Citywide Traffic Calming Policy                   Ch. A613
2025      2025
33-2025   4-28-    Amending the 2025 position ordinance                          Ch. A613
          2025
Res. 34-  3-10-    Appointment to Blighted Property Review Committee             Ch. A613
2025      2025
34-2025   5-12-    Blighted Property Review Committee definitions                Ch. 23,
          2025                                                                   Part 9
35-2025   5-12-    Budget appropriations                                         NCM
          2025
Res. 36-  3-10-    Supporting elected City Auditor’s stance to retain office   NCM
2025      2025     space
36-2025   5-12-    Parking limitation in designated area                         Ch. 576,
          2025                                                                   Part 4
Res. 36A- 3-24-    Authorizing Rain Poetry installation                          NCM
2025      2025
Res. 37-  3-10-    Appointment to Youth Commission                               Ch. A613
2025      2025
37-2025   5-27-    Budget transfer                                               NCM
          2025
Res. 37A- 3-24-    Resignation from Animal Control Board                         Ch. A613
2025      2025
Res. 38-  3-10-    Appointment to Youth Commission                               Ch. A613
2025      2025
Res. 38A- 3-24-    Sewage module review                                          Ch. A616
2025      2025
Res. 39-  3-24-    Requesting grant                                              NCM
2025      2025
39-2025   6-23-    Authorizing construction easements                            Ch. A615
          2025
Res. 40-  3-24-    Repayment of funding assistance                               NCM
2025      2025
40-2025   6-23-    Budget transfer                                               NCM
          2025
Res. 41-  3-24-    Emergency purchase of repair services                         NCM
2025      2025
41-2025   6-23-    Budget transfer                                               NCM
          2025
Res. 41A- 3-24-    Approving Parking Authority’s Parking Stall Plan            Ch. A613
2025      2025
42-2025   6-23-    Personnel code salary ranges                                  Ch. 70,
          2025                                                                   Part 7
Res. 42-  3-24-    Appointment to Youth Commission                               Ch. A613
2025      2025
Res. 43-  3-24-    Appointment to Youth Commission                               Ch. A613
2025      2025
43-2025   7-28-    Residential permit parking amendment                          NCM
          2025
Res. 44-  4-14-    Resignation from Charter Board                                Ch. A613
2025      2025
Res. 45-  4-14-    Resignation from Charter Board                                Ch. A613
2025      2025
45-2025   7-28-    Marijuana use and possession                                  Ch. 360
          2025
Res. 46-  4-14-    Authorizing purchase of starting/diving blocks                NCM
2025      2025
46-2025   7-28-    Amending the 2025 position ordinance                          Ch. A613
          2025
Res. 47-  4-14-    Authorizing bank accounts                                     Ch. A613
2025      2025
47-2025   8-11-    Budget transfer                                               NCM
          2025
Res. 48-  4-14-    Authorizing purchase of proprietary critical spare pump parts NCM
2025      2025
48-2025   8-11-    Budget transfer                                               NCM
          2025
Res. 49-  4-14-    Authorizing purchase of a digester mixer and proprietary      NCM
2025      2025     critical spare parts
49-2025   8-11-    Budget transfer                                               NCM
          2025
Res. 50-  4-14-    Authorizing purchase of air scrubber media and related        NCM
2025      2025     service
50-2025   8-25-    Budget transfer                                               NCM
          2025
Res. 51-  4-28-    Authorizing mural                                             NCM
2025      2025
51-2025   8-25-    Authorizing the filing of a declaration of taking             NCM
          2025
Res. 52-  4-28-    Sewage module review                                          Ch. A616
2025      2025
52-2025   8-25-    Budget transfer                                               NCM
          2025
Res. 53-  4-28-    Sewage module review                                          Ch. A616
2025      2025
53-2025   8-25-    Budget transfer                                               NCM
          2025
Res. 54-  4-28-    Sewage module review                                          Ch. A616
2025      2025
54-2025   9-8-2025 Amending the 2025 position ordinance                          Ch. A613
Res. 55-  4-28-    Sewage module review                                          Ch. A616
2025      2025
55-2025   9-8-2025 Animal control                                                Ch. 141,
                                                                                 Part 2
Res. 56-  4-28-    Authorizing purchase of subscription renewals                 NCM
2025      2025
56-2025   9-8-2025 Budget transfer                                               NCM
Res. 57-  4-28-    Authorizing purchase of a laserfiche project comprehensive    NCM
2025      2025     document
57-2025   9-8-2025 Budget transfer                                               NCM
Res. 58-  5-12-    Approving banner installation                                 NCM
2025      2025
          10-13-                                                                 Ch. 600,
58-2025   2025     Short-term rentals                                            Parts 8,
                                                                                 11, 22
Res. 59-  5-12-    Requesting grant                                              NCM
2025      2025
59-2025   10-13-   Parking zones                                                 Ch. 576,
          2025                                                                   Part 5
60-2025   10-13-   Budget transfer                                               NCM
          2025
Res. 61-  5-12-    Reappointment to Historical Architectural Review Board        Ch. A613
2025      2025
61-2025   10-13-   Noise                                                         Ch. 387
          2025
Res. 62-  5-27-    Authorizing installation of marker                            NCM
2025      2025
62-2025   10-13-   Budget amendment                                              NCM
          2025
Res. 63-  5-27-    Authorizing Public Works proposed plan                        Ch. A613
2025      2025
63-2025   10-27-   Budget transfer                                               NCM
          2025
Res. 64-  5-27-    Disposition of records                                        NCM
2025      2025
64-2025   10-27-   10-27-2025                                                    NCM
          2025
Res. 64A- 6-9-2025 Authorizing exoneration of property taxes                     NCM
2025
Res. 65-  5-27-    Intergovernmental Cooperation Agreement renewal               Ch. A613
2025      2025
65-2025   10-27-   Welcoming City                                                Ch. 586,
          2025                                                                   Part 1
Res. 65A- 6-9-2025 Contract renewal of HPE server support and maintenance        Ch. A613
2025
Res. 66-  5-27-    Disposition of records                                        NCM
2025      2025
66-2025   10-27-   10-27-2025                                                    NCM
          2025
Res. 67-  5-27-    Approving conditional use application                         NCM
2025      2025
67-2025   10-27-   Amending the 2025 position ordinance                          Ch. A613
          2025
Res. 68-  5-27-    Calling for an immediate increase in Pennsylvania’s minimum NCM
2025      2025     wage
68-2025   10-27-   Requesting creation of Outreach and Education Coordinator     Ch. A613
          2025
Res. 69-  6-23-    Conditional offers of employment for probationary patrol      Ch. A613
2025      2025     officers
69-2025   11-10-   Budget amendment                                              NCM
          2025
Res. 70-  6-23-    Purchase of public service announcements for bus shelter      NCM
2025      2025     poster
70-2025   11-10-   Budget amendment                                              NCM
          2025
Res. 71-  6-23-    Requesting grant                                              NCM
2025      2025
71-2025   11-10-   Budget amendment                                              NCM
          2025
Res. 72-  6-23-    Purchase of emergency response vehicle                        NCM
2025      2025
72-2025   11-10-   International Property Maintenance Code amendments            Ch. 180,
          2025                                                                   Part 13
Res. 73-  6-23-    Sewage module review                                          Ch. A616
2025      2025
73-2025   11-10-   Blighted Property Review Committee restrictions               Ch. 23,
          2025                                                                   Part 9
Res. 74-  6-23-    Appointment to Reading Redevelopment Authority                Ch. A613
2025      2025
Res. 75-  6-23-    Termination of Captain from Reading Police Department         Ch. A613
2025      2025
75-2025   11-10-   Budget transfer                                               NCM
          2025
Res. 76-  6-23-    Adopting the Vision Zero Action Plan                          Ch. A613
2025      2025
76-2025   11-24-   Budget transfer                                               NCM
          2025
Res. 77-  6-27-    Appointment of Reading Community Development Director         Ch. A613
2025      2025
77-2025   11-24-   Amending shade tree regulations                               Ch. 555
          2025
Res. 78-  7-14-    Conditional offer of employment to probationary paramedic     Ch. A613
2025      2025
Res. 79-  7-14-    Resignation from Reading Redevelopment Authority              Ch. A613
2025      2025
Res. 80-  7-14-    Sewage module review                                          Ch. A616
2025      2025
Res. 81-  7-14-    Increasing the amount allowed to be spent with consultants    NCM
2025      2025     for plan review and inspection services
Res. 82-  7-14-    Appointment to Board of Ethics                                Ch. A613
2025      2025
Res. 83-  7-14-    Appointment to Environmental Advisory Council                 Ch. A613
2025      2025
Res. 84-  7-14-    Calling for legislation to decriminalize and legalize adult-  NCM
2025      2025     use marijuana
Res. 85-  7-28-    Disposition of records                                        NCM
2025      2025
Res. 86-  7-28-    Sewage module review                                          Ch. A616
2025      2025
Res. 87-  7-28-    Sewage module review                                          Ch. A616
2025      2025
Res. 88-  7-28-    Requesting economic development grant                         NCM
2025      2025
Res. 89-  7-28-    Promotion to 2nd Deputy Fire Chief                            Ch. A613
2025      2025
Res. 90-  7-28-    Approving conditional use application                         NCM
2025      2025
Res. 91-  8-11-    CDBG Action Plan Amendment                                    Ch. A613
2025      2025
Res. 92-  8-11-    Promotion to Sergeant                                         Ch. A613
2025      2025
Res. 93-  8-11-    Lease of three vehicles                                       NCM
2025      2025
Res. 94-  8-11-    Conditional offers of employment to EMT/Paramedics            Ch. A613
2025      2025
Res. 95-  8-11-    Sewage module review                                          Ch. A616
2025      2025
Res. 96-  8-11-    Disposition of records                                        NCM
2025      2025
Res. 97-  8-11-    Reappointment to Board of Ethics                              Ch. A613
2025      2025
Res. 98-  8-11-    Reappointment to Planning Commission                          Ch. A613
2025      2025
Res. 99-  8-11-    Reappointment to Youth Commission                             Ch. A613
2025      2025
Res. 100- 8-25-    Requesting grant                                              NCM
2025      2025
Res. 101- 8-25-    Approving and denying in part appeal and issuance of          NCM
2025      2025     certificate of appropriateness
Res. 102- 9-8-2025 Conditional offers of employment to probationary patrol       Ch. A613
2025               officers
Res. 103- 9-8-2025 PennDOT Municipal Winter Traffic Services Agreement           Ch. A613
2025
Res. 104- 9-8-2025 Disposition of records                                        NCM
2025
Res. 105- 9-8-2025 Resignation from Reading Redevelopment Authority              Ch. A613
2025
Res. 106- 9-22-    Disposition of records                                        NCM
2025      2025
Res. 107- 9-22-    Disposition of records                                        NCM
2025      2025
Res. 108- 9-22-    Banner installation                                           NCM
2025      2025
Res. 109- 9-22-    Approving the 2025 minimum municipal obligation for the City  NCM
2025      2025     of Reading pension funds
Res. 110- 9-22-    Requesting grant                                              NCM
2025      2025
Res. 111- 9-22-    Requesting grant                                              NCM
2025      2025
Res. 112- 9-22-    Appointment to Charter Board                                  Ch. A613
2025      2025
Res. 113- 9-22-    Appointment to Charter Board                                  Ch. A613
2025      2025
Res. 114- 9-22-    Reappointment to First Energy Stadium Commission              Ch. A613
2025      2025
Res. 115- 10-6-    Confirmation of Chief of Police                               Ch. A613
2025      2025
Res. 116- 10-13-   Promotion to Lieutenant                                       Ch. A613
2025      2025
Res. 117- 10-13-   Promotion to Sergeant                                         Ch. A613
2025      2025
Res. 118- 10-13-   Resignation from Reading Redevelopment Authority              Ch. A613
2025      2025
Res. 119- 10-13-   Sewage module review                                          Ch. A613
2025      2025
Res. 120- 10-13-   Resignation from Charter Review Commission                    Ch. A613
2025      2025
Res. 122- 10-27-   Purchase of vehicle under Costars Contract                    Ch. A613
2025      2025
Res. 123- 10-27-   Removal from Environmental Advisory Council                   Ch. A613
2025      2025
Res. 124- 11-10-   Submission of PY2026 action plan                              Ch. A613
2025      2025
Res. 125- 11-10-   Promotion of Lieutenant to Captain                            Ch. A613
2025      2025
Res. 126- 11-10-   Authorizing purchase from Costars vendor                      NCM
2025      2025
Res. 127- 11-10-   Authorizing City to utilize US Bank P- Card Program           NCM
2025      2025
Res. 128- 11-10-   Reappointment to Electricians Examining Board                 Ch. A613
2025      2025
Res. 129- 11-10-   Reappointment to Environmental Advisory Council               Ch. A613
2025      2025
Res. 130- 11-10-   Appointments to Reading Redevelopment Authority               Ch. A613
2025      2025
Res. 131- 11-24-   Requesting grant                                              NCM
2025      2025
Res. 132- 11-24-   Resignation from Charter Review Commission                    Ch. A613
2025      2025
Res. 133- 11-24-   Authorizing sale of vehicles                                  NCM
2025      2025
Res. 134- 11-24-   PY 2018 and PY 2019 Action Plan Amendment                     Ch. A613
2025      2025
Res. 135- 11-24-   Sewage module review                                          Ch. A616
2025      2025
Res. 136- 11-24-   Sewage module review                                          Ch. A616
2025      2025
Res. 138- 11-24-   Appointment to Charter Review Commission                      Ch. A613
2025      2025
Res. 139- 11-24-   Approving conditional use application                         NCM
2025      2025
Res. 140- 11-24-   Approving conditional use application                         NCM
2025      2025
Res. 141- 11-24-   Approving conditional use application                         NCM
2025      2025
Res. 142- 11-24-   Setting term for Reading Redevelopment Authority member       Ch. A613
2025      2025
Res. 143- 11-24-   Setting term for Reading Redevelopment Authority member       Ch. A613
2025      2025
Res. 144- 11-24-   Setting term for Reading Redevelopment Authority member       Ch. A613
2025      2025
Res. 145- 11-24-   Setting term for Reading Redevelopment Authority member       Ch. A613
2025      2025
                                                                               
 
 
