Code of the Township of Upper Dublin
COUNTY OF MONTGOMERY
COMMONWEALTH OF PENNSYLVANIA
Code originally published by:
(1) GENERAL CODE PUBLISHERS CORP.
Rochester, NY 14624
(2) KEYSTATE PUBLISHERS INC.
Shippensburg, PA 17257
Code supplemented and revised
through January 13, 2026 by:
AMERICAN LEGAL PUBLISHING
525 Vine Street, Suite 310
Cincinnati, Ohio 45202
Tel: (800) 445-5588
Internet: http://www.amlegal.com
Code of the Township of Upper Dublin adopted by the Board of Commissioners by
Ord. 879 on January 10, 1995, and originally published by General Code
Publishers Corp.
Supplemented and revised by Keystate Publishers, Inc., through:
January 8, 2008
October 14, 2008
September 8, 2009
April 13, 2010
February 8, 2011
June 14, 2011
April 10, 2012
February 12, 2013
December 10, 2013
December 9, 2014
July 14, 2015
Supplemented and revised by American Legal Publishing Corp., through:
July 12, 2016
May 9, 2017
April 10, 2018
May 14, 2019
August 25, 2020
July 13, 2021
February 14, 2023
April 11, 2023
May 13, 2025
January 13, 2026
OFFICIALS OF THE
TOWNSHIP OF UPPER DUBLIN
Township Offices
801 Loch Alsh Avenue
Fort Washington, Pennsylvania 19034
Telephone: (215) 643-1600
FAX: (215) 542-0797
June 1, 2025
Board of Commissioners
WARD 1 – HARM J. SCHERPBIER
WARD 2 – MEREDITH L. FERLEGER
WARD 3 – GARY V. SCARPELLO
WARD 4 – IRA S. TACKEL
WARD 5 – CHERYL KNIGHT
WARD 6 – ALYSON J. FRITZGES
WARD 7 – JOSEPH A. RUDOLPH
Manager
KURT M. FERGUSON
Solicitor
GILBERT P. HIGH, JR., ESQUIRE
 
PART I
ADMINISTRATIVE LEGISLATION
Chapter 1
GENERAL PROVISIONS
ARTICLE I
Adoption of Code
§
1-1.   Approval, adoption and enactment of Code.
§
1-2.   Effect of Code on previous provisions.
§
1-3.   Repeal of legislation not contained in Code.
§
1-4.   Legislation saved from repeal; matters not affected by repeal.
§
1-5.   Inclusion of new legislation prior to adoption of Code.
§
1-6.   Changes and revisions in previously adopted legislation; new provisions.
§
1-7.   Interpretation of provisions.
§
1-8.   Titles and headings; editor's notes.
§
1-9.   Filing of copies of Code.
§
1-10.   Amendments to Code.
§
1-11.   Code books to be kept up-to-date.
§
1-12.   Publication of notices.
§
1-13.   Altering or tampering with Code; penalties for violation.
§
1-14.   Severability.
§
1-15.   Effective date.
ARTICLE II
Ordinances Adopted During Codification
ARTICLE III
Terminology
§
1-16.   Construal of provisions.
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Board of Commissioners of the Township of Upper
Dublin: Art. I, 1-10-1995 as Ord. No. 879; Art. III, at time of adoption of
Code (see
Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I). Amendments noted where applicable.]
ARTICLE I
Adoption of Code
[Adopted 1-10-1995 as Ord. No. 879]
Be it enacted and ordained by the Board of Commissioners of the Township of
Upper Dublin, County of Montgomery, Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, and it is
enacted and ordained as follows:
§ 1-1.   Approval, adoption and enactment of Code.
Pursuant to Section 1502, Clause I, II (53 P.S. § 56502) of the First Class
Township Code, the codification of a complete body of legislation for the
Township of Upper Dublin, County of Montgomery, Commonwealth of Pennsylvania,
as revised, codified and consolidated into titles, chapters and sections by
General Code Publishers Corp., and consisting of the Charter and Chapters 1
through 255, together with an Appendix, are hereby approved, adopted, ordained
and enacted as a single ordinance of the Township of Upper Dublin, which shall
be known and is hereby designated as the "Code of the Township of Upper
Dublin," hereinafter referred to as the "Code."
§ 1-2.   Effect of Code on previous provisions.
The provisions of this Code, insofar as they are substantively the same as the
those of ordinances and resolutions in force immediately prior to the enactment
of this ordinance, are intended as a continuation of such ordinances and
resolutions and not as new enactments, and the effectiveness of such provisions
shall date from the date of adoption of the prior ordinance or resolution. All
such provisions are hereby continued in full force and effect and are hereby
reaffirmed as to their adoption by the Board of Commissioners of the Township
of Upper Dublin, and it is the intention of said Board of Commissioners that
each such provision contained within the Code is hereby reenacted and
reaffirmed as it appears in said Code. Only such provisions of former
ordinances as are omitted from this Code shall be deemed repealed or abrogated
by the provisions of §
1-3 below, and only new or changed provisions, as described in §
1-6 below, shall be deemed to be enacted from the effective date of this Code,
as provided in §
1-15 below.
§ 1-3.   Repeal of legislation not contained in Code.
All ordinances or parts of ordinances of a general and permanent nature adopted
by the Township of Upper Dublin and in force on the date of the adoption of
this Code and not contained in the Code are hereby repealed as of the effective
date given in §
1-15 below, except as hereinafter provided.
§ 1-4.   Legislation saved from repeal; matters not affected by repeal.
The adoption of this Code and the repeal of ordinances provided for in §
1-3 of this ordinance shall not affect the following ordinances, rights and
obligations, which are hereby expressly saved from repeal; provided, however,
that the repeal of ordinances pursuant to §
1-3 or the saving from repeal of ordinances pursuant to this section-shall not-
be construed so as to revive any ordinance previously repealed, superseded or
no longer of any effect:
   A.   Any ordinance adopted subsequent to January 15, 1994.
   B.   Any right or liability established, accrued or incurred under any
legislative provision of the township prior to the effective date of this
ordinance or any action or proceeding brought for the enforcement of such right
or liability or any cause of action acquired or existing.
   C.   Any offense or act committed or done before the effective date of this
ordinance in violation of any legislative provision of the township or any
penalty, punishment or forfeiture which may result therefrom.
   D.   Any prosecution, indictment, action, suit or other proceeding pending
or any judgment rendered prior to the effective date of this ordinance, brought
pursuant to any legislative provision of the township.
   E.   Any franchise, license, right, easement or privilege heretofore granted
or conferred by the township or any lawful contract, obligation or agreement.
   F.   Any ordinance appropriating money or transferring funds, promising or
guaranteeing the payment of money or authorizing the issuance and delivery of
any bond of the township or other instruments or evidence of the township's
indebtedness.
   G.   Any ordinance adopting an annual budget or establishing an annual tax
rate.
   H.   Any ordinance providing for the levy, imposition or collection of
special taxes, assessments or charges.
   I.   Any ordinance authorizing the purchase, sale, lease or transfer of
property or acquiring property by acceptance of deed, condemnation or exercise
of eminent domain.
   J.   Any ordinance annexing land to the township.
   K.   Any ordinance providing for requiring the construction or
reconstruction or opening of sidewalks, curbs and gutters.
   L.   Any ordinance or part of an ordinance providing for laying out,
opening, altering, widening, relocating, straightening, establishing grade,
changing name, improvement, acceptance or vacation of any right-of-way,
easement, street, road, highway, sidewalk, park or other public place or
property or designating various streets as public highways.
   M.   Any ordinance establishing water, sewer or other special purpose
districts and designating the boundaries thereof; providing for a system of
sewers or water supply lines; or providing for the construction, extension,
dedication, acceptance or abandonment of any part of a system of sewers or
water supply lines.
   N.   Any ordinance providing for the making of public improvements.
   O.   Any ordinance providing for the salaries and compensation of officers
and employees of the township or setting the bond of any officer or employee.
   P.   Any ordinance concerning changes and amendments to the Zoning Map.
   Q.   Any ordinance concerning vehicles and traffic.
§ 1-5.   Inclusion of new legislation prior to adoption of Code.
All ordinances and resolutions of a general and permanent nature adopted
subsequent to the date given in §
1-4A and/or prior to the date of adoption of this ordinance are hereby deemed
to be a part of the Code and shall, upon being printed, be included therein.
Attested copies of all such ordinances and resolutions shall be temporarily
placed in the Code until printed supplements are included.
§ 1-6.   Changes and revisions in previously adopted legislation; new
provisions.
   A.   Nonsubstantive grammatical changes. In compiling and preparing the
ordinances and resolutions of the township for adoption and revision as part of
the Code, certain nonsubstantive grammatical and style changes were made in one
(1) or more of said ordinances and resolutions. It is the intention of the
Board of Commissioners that all such changes be adopted as part of the Code as
if the ordinances and resolutions so changed had been previously formally
amended to read as such.
   B.   Substantive changes and revisions. In addition to the changes and
revisions described above, the following changes and revisions of a substantive
nature are hereby made to various ordinances and resolutions included in the
Code. These changes are made to bring provisions into conformity with the
desired policies of the Board of Commissioners, and it is the intent of the
Board of Commissioners that all such changes be adopted as part of the Code as
if the legislation so changed have been previously formally amended to read as
such. All such changes and revisions shall be deemed to be in effect as of the
effective date of the Code specified in §
1-15. 1
1 Editor's Note: Pursuant to § 1-6B the following chapters, Articles and
sections were added, amended or adopted: Ch. 1, Art. ER; §§ 11-2B, 25-5 and 32-
2; Ch. 39; §§ 61-5B, 61-14B, 64-3W and X, 64-6B, 64-7, 64-9, 64-10 and 64-11;
Ch. 64, Art. IV; §§ 69-2A, 69-3, 69-9, 76-3, 79-2, 86-2D, 86-3, 91-3, 99-3, 99-
11E; Ch. 110; § 125-22; Ch. 125, Part 3; §§ 129-4, 135-1C, 135-5, 142-6A, 142-
7, 145-14, 158-21, 158-9A, 158-10, 168-2C, I, K, L, M, P, Q, R, S, U and V,
168-7, 171-4, 177-2C, 177-10, 192-1B, 192-2B(2), 192-2B(3), 192-9C, 192-10,
198-5C, 203-1511, 203-28, 207-2, 207-3A, 207-10A, 207-13A, 207-24, 207-30A,
207-33, 207-35A, 207-37A, 207-37B, 207-38, 207-41C, 212-5, 212-9, 212-13, 212-
14H and J, 212-15B, 212-16A(5), 212-18C, 212-21G, 212-24A, 212-26B(8), 212-37,
212-38, 212-39, 212-44A(5), D(1)(b), E(2) and F, 212-45C(4)(e), 212-47A, C, E,
G(1)(a) and (b)[1], H and J, 212-49, 212-50, 212-52B, 212-53, 212-56, 212-58,
218-6, 218-9, 218-10G, 218-13, 224-9, 224-1411, 224-16, 224-22, 230-6, 244-11A,
255-2, 255-3, 255-4, 255-7, 255-14, 255-15C, 255-17B, 255-18, 255-26D(2), 255-
27E, 255-29A and 255-29E; Ch. 255, Art. VI; §§ 255-39A, 255-39.1, 255-42B(3)
(I), 255-45A, 255-46, 255-53A, 255-56, 255-57, 255-58A, 255-63A, 255-80, 255-
81D(4), 255-82A, 255-91A(1), 255-91C(1), 255-94C, 255-98K, 255-99, 225-111C,
255-117D(1), 255-121G, 255-127A, 255-1321, 255-136A, 255-156A, 255-156D, 255-
159, 255-160, 255-172, 255-174A, 255-179A(1), 255-179C and 255-182.
In addition, the following terms were changed throughout the following
chapters: In Ch. 32, "Board" was changed to "Advisory Board;" in Ch. 64
"Secretary" was changed to "Health Officer" and "Health Officer" was changed to
"Health Enforcement Officer;" in Ch. 192 "the Authority" was changed to "the
township;" in Ch. 218, Art. II, "club or public pools" was changed to "camp,
club or public pools." Throughout the Code "Board of Adjustment" was changed to
"Zoning Hearing Board."
The following provisions or parts of provisions were deleted: Secs. 2.02 and
2.03 of Title 7, Ch. 2; Sec. 1.03, third unnumbered paragraph, of Title 5, Ch.
3; Sec. 1.03(b) of Title 3, Ch. 3; Sec. 3.10 of Art. 3 of Title 5, Ch. 2; Sec.
1.03, third unnumbered paragraph, of Title 8, Ch. 1; Sec. 1.07, third
unnumbered paragraph, of Title 8, Ch. 3; Sec. 1.03, third unnumbered paragraph,
and Sec. 1.03(b) of Title 8, Ch. 4; Sec. 3.10 of Title 5, Ch. 2; Secs. 1.02(c)
and 1.04 of Title 2, Ch. 10; Sec. 1.10, second unnumbered paragraph, of Title
8, Ch. 5; Sec. 1.06, third unnumbered paragraph, of Title 8, Ch. 6; the
definitions of "comprehensive plan" and "official street map" of Title 9; Secs.
3.00, Subsection 6, 4.11, 4.12, Subsection 5(b), 5.04, 5.05, 7.04, Subsections
4 and 6 of Sec. 10, and Arts. 8 and 9 of Title 9; the definitions of
"comprehensive plan," "topsoil" and "ultimate right-of-way" of Title 10, Ch. 1;
Secs. 4.13, 4.08, final paragraph, 6.03, 12.09D, 9.06, 13.09, 13.10, 13.11,
Subsection 6 of 14.03, Subsections A, B and C of 14.06, 16.06 of Title 10,
Ch. 1.
§ 1-7.   Interpretation of provisions.
In interpreting and applying the provisions of the Code, they shall be held to
be the minimum requirements for the promotion of the public health, safety,
comfort, convenience and general welfare. Where the provisions of the Code
impose greater restrictions or requirements than those of any statute, other
ordinance, resolution or regulation, the provisions of the Code shall control.
Where the provisions of any statute, other ordinance, resolution or regulation
impose greater restrictions or requirements, the provisions of such statute,
other ordinance, resolution or regulation shall control.
§ 1-8.   Titles and headings; editor's notes.
   A.   Chapter and Article titles, headings and titles of sections and other
divisions in the Code or in supplements made to the Code are inserted in the
Code and may be inserted in supplements to the Code for the convenience of
persons using the Code and are not part of the legislation.
   B.   Editor's notes indicating sources of sections, giving other information
or referring to the statutes or to other parts of the Code are inserted in the
Code and may be inserted in supplements to the Code for the convenience of
persons using the Code and are not part of the legislation.
§ 1-9.   Filing of copies of Code.
Three (3) copies of the Code in a post-bound volume shall be filed with the
Ordinance Book in the office of the Township Secretary and shall remain there
for use and examination by the public. Upon adoption, such copies shall be
certified to by the Township Secretary, as provided by law, and such certified
copies shall remain on file in the office of the Township Secretary, available
to persons desiring to examine the same during all times while said Code is in
effect.
§ 1-10.   Amendments to Code.
Any and all additions, deletions, amendments or supplements to the Code, when
passed and adopted in such form as to indicate the intention of the Board of
Commissioners to be a part thereof, shall be deemed to be incorporated into
such Code so that reference to the Code shall be understood and intended to
include such changes. Whenever such additions, deletions, amendments or
supplements to the Code shall be adopted, they shall thereafter be printed and,
as provided hereunder, inserted in the post-bound book containing said Code as
amendments and supplements thereto.
§ 1-11.   Code books to be kept up-to-date.
It shall be the duty of the Township Secretary or someone authorized and
directed by him or her to keep up-to-date the certified copies of the book
containing the Code required to be filed in the office of the Township
Secretary for the use of the public. All changes in said Code and all
legislation adopted by the Board of Commissioners subsequent to the effective
date of this codification which the Board of Commissioners shall adopt
specifically as part of the Code shall, when finally adopted, be included
therein by reference until such changes or new legislation are printed as
supplements to said Code books, at which time such supplements shall be
inserted therein.
§ 1-12.   Publication of notices.
The Township Secretary, pursuant to law, shall cause to be published in the
manner required a notice of the introduction and of the adoption of the Code in
a newspaper of general circulation in the township. The enactment and
application of this ordinance, coupled with the publication of the notices of
introduction and adoption, as required by law, and the availability of copies
of the Code for inspection by the public, shall be deemed, held and considered
to be due and legal publication of all provisions of the Code for all purposes.
§ 1-13.   Altering or tampering with Code; penalties for violation.
It shall be unlawful for anyone to improperly change or amend, by additions or
deletions, or to alter or tamper with the Code or any part or portion thereof,
in any manner whatsoever, which will cause the law of the township to be
misrepresented thereby. Anyone violating this section of this ordinance shall,
upon conviction thereof, be punished by a fine not exceeding six hundred
dollars ($600.), plus costs of prosecution, and, in default of payment thereof,
by imprisonment for a term not exceeding thirty (30) days.
§ 1-14.   Severability.
The provisions of this ordinance and of the Code adopted hereby are severable,
and if any clause, sentence, subsection, section, Article, chapter or part
thereof shall be adjudged by any court of competent jurisdiction to be illegal,
invalid or unconstitutional, such judgment or decision shall not affect, impair
or invalidate the remainder thereof but shall be confined in its operation and
application to the clause, sentence, subsection, section, Article, chapter or
part thereof rendered. It is hereby declared to be the intent of the Board of
Commissioners that this ordinance and the Code would have been adopted if such
illegal, invalid or unconstitutional clause, sentence, subsection, section,
Article, chapter or part thereof had not been included therein.
§ 1-15.   Effective date.
All provisions of this ordinance and of the Code shall be in force and effect
on and after January 11, 1995.
ARTICLE II
Ordinances Adopted During Codification
[During the process of codification, certain complete new ordinances were
approved by the Board of Commissioners for inclusion in the Code of the
Township of Upper Dublin. Such new ordinances are noted in the histories of
individual chapters as "Adopted .. . during codification; see
Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II." The listing below sets forth each chapter
affected by any such legislation adopted during codification.]
Chapter   Adoption Date   Legislation
Ch. 73, Art. I   1-10-1995   Ord. No. 880
Ch. 73, Art. II   1-10-1995   Ord. No. 881
Ch. 117   1-10-1995   Ord. No. 882
Ch. 152   1-10-1995   Ord. No. 884
Ch. 174   1-10-1995   Ord. No. 883
Ch. 180   1-10-1995   Ord. No. 885
ARTICLE III
Terminology
[Adopted at time of adoption of Code 2 ]
2 Editor's Note: See
Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
§ 1-16.   Construal of provisions.
As used in this Code, the masculine shall include the feminine and the feminine
shall include the masculine
Chapter 6
(Reserved)
[HISTORY: “Educational Service Agency,” adopted by the Board of Commissioners
of the Township of Upper Dublin 5-13-1986 as Title 2, Ch. 11, of the 1986 Code.
Repealed 1-14-2025 by Ord. No. 25-1402.]
Chapter 9
ELECTORAL DISTRICTS
§
9-1.   Reapportionment of wards.
§
9-2.   Retention in office and new elections.
§
9-3.   Boundaries of the First Ward, Ward One.
§
9-4.   Boundaries of the Second Ward, Ward Two.
§
9-5.   Boundaries of the Third Ward, Ward Three.
§
9-6.   Boundaries of the Fourth Ward, Ward Four.
§
9-7.   Boundaries of the Fifth Ward, Ward Five.
§
9-8.   Boundaries of the Sixth Ward, Ward Six.
§
9-9.   Boundaries of the Seventh Ward, Ward Seven.
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Board of Commissioners of the Township of Upper Dublin
11-10-1992 by Ord. No. 829; amended in its entirety 8-13-2002 by Ord. No. 1091;
and 2-10-2015 by Ord. No. 15-1299; and 6-11-2024 by Ord. 24-1390.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
 
Zoning — See
Ch. 255.
 
§ 9-1.   Reapportionment of wards.
There shall continue to be seven wards in Upper Dublin Township, which wards
are hereby reapportioned to be as nearly equal in population as practicable
based on the official statistics of the 2020 Federal Census conducted by the
United States Census Bureau.
§ 9-2.   Retention in office and new elections.
The commissioners in office at the time of this reapportionment shall retain
their offices and continue to represent their respective wards until the end of
their respective terms. The election of commissioners under the reapportionment
shall be held in accordance with the First Class Township Code, 53 P.S. § 55101
et seq., and the Pennsylvania Election Code, 25 P.S. § 2600 et seq.
§ 9-3.   Boundaries of the First Ward, Ward One.
The boundaries of the First Ward shall be as shown on the Electoral District
Ward Map, dated May 10, 2024 and prepared by Katherine Stein, which is on file
and is available for public inspection in the office of the Township Secretary,
the legal description thereof being as follows:
   ALL THAT CERTAIN political block or voting district known as Ward One,
situate in the political subdivision known as Upper Dublin Township, Montgomery
County, Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, said Ward being located in the southwest
corner of the Township, being bordered to the north by the Borough of Ambler
and Lower Gwynedd Township; to the west by Whitpain Township; and to the south
by Whitemarsh Township, and being bound and described as follows, to wit:
   BEGINNING at point in the centerline of Cedar Road and Loch Alsh Avenue;
THENCE from said point of beginning extending southeasterly along the
centerline of Loch Alsh Avenue, crossing the beds of Hoffman Road, Lake Drive,
Honey Run Creek and Farm Lane to the centerline of the Route 309 Expressway;
THENCE extending southerly along the centerline of the Route 309 Expressway to
the centerline of Highland Avenue; THENCE extending southeasterly along the
centerline of Highland Avenue, crossing the beds of Fort Washington Avenue,
Summit Avenue, Madison Avenue, Hartranft Avenue, Pinetown Road and the Sandy
Run Creek to the centerline of Camp Hill Road; THENCE extending southerly along
the centerline of Camp Hill Road, crossing the beds of the Virginia Drive,
Pennsylvania Turnpike, the Norfolk Southern Trenton Cutoff Railroad and
Dreshertown Road to a point, said point being the common Upper Dublin Township
and Whitemarsh Township line; THENCE extending northwesterly along said common
township line, crossing the beds of the Norfolk Southern Trenton Cutoff
Railroad, the Pennsylvania Turnpike and the Route 309 Expressway, then entering
the bed of Pennsylvania Avenue, crossing the beds of Commerce Drive, Summit
Avenue, Fort Washington Avenue and North Bethlehem Pike, leaving the bed of
Pennsylvania Avenue and continuing along the common township line, crossing the
beds of the Wissahickon Creek and entering the bed of Morris Road, crossing the
beds of Mill Spring Drive and Fir Road, leaving the bed of Morris Road and
continuing along the common township line, crossing the beds of Beech Road,
Carey Drive and Butler Pike to a point, said point being a point on the common
Upper Dublin Township and Whitpain Township line, said point also being on a
point of the common property line between Tax Block 35, Units 23 and 41; THENCE
extending northeasterly along the said common township line, crossing the beds
of Morris Road, the Wissahickon Creek and West Maple Street to a point, said
point being a point on the common Upper Dublin Township, Whitpain Township and
Borough of Ambler line; THENCE extending along the Borough of Ambler line, in a
counter-clockwise manner, in the following 12 courses:
      (1)   Southeasterly, crossing West Maple Street,
      (2)   Southwesterly, to an angled point,
      (3)   Southerly, crossing Butler Pike to an angled point,
      (4)   Southeasterly, paralleling the Wissahickon Creek and Morris Road to
an angled point within the extended centerline of West Church Street,
      (5)   Northeasterly, crossing the SEPTA Railroad to the center of the
Church Street and Main Street intersection,
      (6)   Southerly, along the centerline of Main Street to the centerline of
Randolph Avenue,
      (7)   Easterly, along the centerline of Randolph Avenue to a point,
      (8)   Northerly, leaving Randolph Avenue to an angled point,
      (9)   Northeasterly, paralleling Church Street to the centerline of
Ambler Road,
      (10)   Northwesterly, along centerline of Ambler Road to the centerline
of Church Street,
      (11)   Northeasterly, along the centerline of Church Street, crossing the
beds of Southern Avenue, Highland Avenue, Trinity Avenue and Rosemary Avenue to
the centerline of South Bethlehem Pike,
      (12)   Northerly, along the centerline of South Bethlehem Pike, crossing
the beds of Mattison Avenue and Lindenwold Terrace to the centerline of Ardross
Avenue;
   THENCE extending easterly along the centerline of Ardross Avenue, crossing
the bed of Douglas Street to the centerline of Cedar Road; THENCE extending
northeasterly along the centerline of Cedar Road to the centerline of Loch Alsh
Avenue, the point and place of beginning.
   Intending to describe the perimeter of a political block or voting district
in Upper Dublin Township known as the First Ward.
§ 9-4.   Boundaries of the Second Ward, Ward Two.
The boundaries of Ward Two shall be as shown on the Electoral District Ward
Map, dated May 10, 2024 and prepared by Katherine Stein, which is on file and
is available for public inspection in the office of the Township Secretary, the
legal description thereof being as follows:
   ALL THAT CERTAIN political block or voting district known as Ward Two,
situate in the political subdivision known as Upper Dublin Township, County of
Montgomery, Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, said Ward being located in the
southwest corner of the Township, being bordered to the southwest by Whitemarsh
Township, and being bound and described as follows, to wit:
   BEGINNING at a point in the centerline of the Route 309 Expressway and the
bed of Tannery Run Creek; THENCE from said point of beginning extending
easterly along the bed of the Tannery Run Creek, crossing the bed of Lincoln
Drive to the centerline of Meetinghouse Road; THENCE, extending southeasterly
along the centerline of Meetinghouse Road, crossing the beds of Joel Drive,
Fort Washington Avenue and Schirra Drive to the centerline of Limekiln Pike;
THENCE extending southeasterly along the centerline of Limekiln Pike, crossing
the beds of Broad Street and the Sandy Run Creek to the centerline of Mundock
Road; THENCE extending southwesterly along the centerline of Mundock Road to
the centerline of Susquehanna Road; THENCE extending northwesterly along the
centerline of Susquehanna Road, crossing the bed of the Sandy Run Creek to the
centerline of Pinetown Road; THENCE extending southwesterly along the
centerline of Pinetown Road, crossing the beds of Crosby Drive, Wentz Drive and
Wynnemoor Way to the centerline of Barton Drive; THENCE extending northwesterly
along the centerline of Barton Drive, crossing the bed of Cory Drive to the
centerline of Hartranft Avenue; THENCE extending southwesterly along the
centerline of Hartranft Avenue crossing the bed of Cory Drive to the centerline
of Highland Avenue; THENCE extending northwesterly along the centerline of
Highland Avenue crossing the beds of Stevens Drive, Madison Avenue, Summit
Avenue and Fort Washington Avenue to the centerline of the Route 309
Expressway; THENCE extending northerly along the centerline of the Route 309
Expressway to the centerline of Loch Alsh Avenue; THENCE extending
northwesterly along the centerline of Loch Alsh Avenue, crossing the beds of
Farm Lane and Lake Drive to the centerline of Cedar Road; THENCE extending
southwesterly along the centerline of Cedar Road to the centerline of Ardross
Avenue; THENCE extending westerly along the centerline of Ardross Avenue,
crossing the bed of Douglas Street to the centerline of South Bethlehem Pike;
THENCE extending northerly along the centerline of South Bethlehem Pike,
crossing the beds of Loch Alsh Avenue, Argyle Avenue and the Wissahickon Creek
to the centerline of East Butler Pike; THENCE extending northeasterly along the
centerline of East Butler Pike, crossing the beds of Meadowbrook Avenue, Hagues
Mill Road and Susquehanna Road to the centerline of the Route 309 Expressway;
THENCE extending southerly along the centerline of the Route 309 Expressway to
the bed of Tannery Run Creek, the point and place of beginning.
   Intending to describe the perimeter of a political block or voting district
in Upper Dublin Township known as the Second Ward.
§ 9-5.   Boundaries of the Third Ward, Ward Three.
The boundaries of the Third Ward shall be as shown on the Electoral District
Ward Map, dated May 10, 2024 and prepared by Katherine Stein, which is on file
and is available for public inspection in the office of the Township Secretary,
the legal description thereof being as follows:
   ALL THAT CERTAIN political block or voting district known as Ward Three,
situate in the political subdivision known as Upper Dublin Township, County of
Montgomery, Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, said Ward being located in the
northeast corner of the Township, being bordered to the north by Horsham
Township and Upper Moreland Township; to the east by Abington Township; and
being bound and described as follows, to wit:
   BEGINNING at a point in the centerline of Welsh Road, said point being the
point of intersection of the centerline of Jarrettown Road with the centerline
of Welsh Road; THENCE from said point of beginning extending southeasterly
along the centerline of Welsh Road, following the common line between Upper
Dublin, Horsham, and Upper Moreland Townships, crossing the beds of Dreshertown
Road, Dryden Road, the Pennsylvania Turnpike, the Norfolk Southern Trenton
cutoff and Kimball Avenue to a point, said point being the extended centerline
of North Hills Avenue, said point also being the common Upper Dublin Township
and Abington Township line; THENCE extending southwesterly along said extended
centerline of North Hills Avenue and common township line, crossing the beds of
Sunnycrest Road, Goenter Road, Kimball Avenue, Woodlyn Avenue, Brentwood Drive
and School Lane to a point, said point being the center intersection of North
Hills Avenue, Woodland Road and Fitzwatertown Road; THENCE extending
southwesterly along the centerline of Fitzwatertown Road to a point, said point
being the extended centerline of Paul Avenue; THENCE extending northwesterly
along said extended centerline of Paul Avenue, entering the bed of Paul Avenue,
crossing the beds of Bernard Avenue and Henry Avenue to the centerline of
Dundee Drive; THENCE extending northeasterly along the centerline of Dundee
Drive to the centerline of Woodland Road; THENCE extending northwesterly along
the centerline of Woodland Road to a point, said point being the intersection
of the centerline of Woodland Road, centerline of Malcolm Drive and the
southeastern corner of Tax Block 14, Unit 1; THENCE extending northwesterly
along the southwestern property line of Tax Block 14, Unit 1 and through Tax
Block 13, Unit 9 to the centerline of Twining Road; THENCE extending
southwesterly along the centerline of Twining Road to a point, said point being
the extension of the common parcel line of the southwestern property line of
Tax Block 12, Unit 14 and the northeastern property line of Tax Block 12, Unit
16, said point also intersects with the northwestern property line of Tax Block
13, Unit 66; THENCE extending northwesterly along said extended common parcel
line, following the southwestern property line of Twining Valley Park and along
the northeastern property lines of Tax Block 12C, Units 24, 25, 26, 27, 28 and
29 to a point in the centerline of the Norfolk Southern Trenton cutoff; THENCE
extending northeasterly along the centerline of the Norfolk Southern Trenton
cutoff to a point, said point being the extension of the southwestern property
line of Tax Block 12A, Unit 163 (Dublin Hunt Open Space parcel); THENCE
extending northwesterly along said extended property line, crossing the beds of
the Pennsylvania Turnpike and the Sandy Run Creek to the centerline of
Dreshertown Road; THENCE extending northeasterly along the centerline of
Dreshertown Road to the centerline of Kirks Lane; THENCE extending
northwesterly along the centerline of Kirks Lane, crossing the beds of Glen
Echo Lane and Harris Road to a point, said point being the center intersection
of Kirks Lane and Aiman Circle; THENCE extending southwesterly along the
centerline of Kirks Lane to the centerline of Limekiln Pike; THENCE extending
northerly along the centerline of Limekiln Pike crossing the beds of Harris
Road, Candlebrook Drive and Mundock Road to the centerline of Jarrettown Road;
THENCE extending easterly along the centerline of Jarrettown Road, crossing the
beds of Aidenn Lair Road, Dublin Road, Heard Drive, Tuckerstown Road and Holly
Hill Lane to the centerline of Welsh Road, the point and place of beginning.
   Intending to describe the perimeter of a political block or voting district
in Upper Dublin Township known as the Third Ward.
§ 9-6.   Boundaries of the Fourth Ward, Ward Four.
The boundaries of the Fourth Ward shall be as shown on the Electoral District
Ward Map, dated May 10, 2024 and prepared by Katherine Stein, which is on file
and is available for public inspection in the office of the Township Secretary,
the legal description thereof being as follows:
   ALL THAT CERTAIN political block or voting district known as Ward Four,
situate in the political subdivision known as Upper Dublin Township, County of
Montgomery, Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, said Ward being located in the
southeast corner of the Township, being bordered on the northeast by Abington
Township and on the southwest by Springfield Township, and being bound and
described as follows, to wit:
   BEGINNING at a point in the centerline of Susquehanna Road, said point being
the point of intersection of the centerline of Susquehanna Road with the
centerline of Pinetown Road; THENCE from said point of beginning extending
southeasterly along the centerline of Susquehanna Road, crossing the beds of
Crosby Drive and Cinnamon Drive to the centerline of Mundock Road, THENCE
extending northeasterly along the centerline of Mundock Road to the centerline
of Limekiln Pike; THENCE extending southerly along the centerline of Limekiln
Pike, crossing the beds of Candlebrook Drive, Kirks Lane, Golden Drive and
Virginia Drive to the centerline of Susquehanna Road; THENCE extending
southeasterly along the centerline of Susquehanna Road, crossing the
Pennsylvania Turnpike to the centerline of the Norfolk Southern Trenton Cutoff;
THENCE extending southwesterly along the centerline of the Trenton Cutoff to a
point, said point being the extension of the northern property line of Tax
Block 53, Unit 1; THENCE extending southeasterly along said extended northern
property line to a point, said point being the common property line between Tax
Block 53, Unit 1 and Tax Block 53A, Units 26 and 1; THENCE extending
southeasterly along said common property line to the centerline of Dreshertown
Road; THENCE extending southwesterly along the centerline of Dreshertown Road,
crossing the beds of Applewood Drive and Bluebird Lane to a point, said point
being the northern property line of Tax Block 54, Unit 13 (Manufacturers
Country Club); THENCE extending southeasterly along said northern property
line, crossing the bed of Martin Lane to the centerline of Sandy Run Creek;
THENCE extending easterly along the centerline of Sandy Run Creek to the
centerline of Twining Road; THENCE extending southwesterly along the centerline
of Twining Road to a point, said point being the extension of the centerline of
Beechwood Avenue; THENCE extending southeasterly said extended centerline,
entering the bed of Beechwood Avenue, crossing the beds of Girard Avenue, Logan
Avenue, Linden Avenue and Limekiln Pike to a point on the common Upper Dublin
Township and Abington Township line; THENCE extending southwesterly along said
common township line to an angled point; THENCE extending easterly along said
common township line, crossing the bed of Limekiln Pike to a point, said point
being the intersection of said common township line, Summit Avenue and Chelsea
Avenue; THENCE extending southwesterly along Chelsea Avenue, crossing Walnut
Avenue, Chestnut Avenue and Mount Carmel Avenue to a point on the northwest
line of the SEPTA Railroad; THENCE extending southeasterly along the northwest
line of the SEPTA Railroad to the centerline of North Hills Avenue; THENCE
extending southerly along the centerline of North Hills Avenue to a point on
the common Upper Dublin Township and Springfield Township line; THENCE
extending northwesterly along said common township line, crossing the bed of
the northwest line of the SEPTA Railroad to the centerline of Pennsylvania
Avenue; THENCE extending northwesterly along the centerline of Pennsylvania
Avenue, crossing the beds of Mill Road, Twining Road, Apel Avenue, Bala Avenue,
Lafayette Avenue, Rech Avenue and Heritage Drive to a point, said point being
where the centerline of Pennsylvania Avenue veers westward from the common
Upper Dublin Township and Springfield Township line; THENCE continuing to
extend northwesterly along said common township line, crossing the beds of
Sandy Run Creek and Elmen Way to the centerline of Camp Hill Road; THENCE
extending northeasterly along the centerline of Camp Hill Road, crossing the
beds of Dreshertown Road, Scott Lane, Heller Way, the Pennsylvania Turnpike and
Virginia Drive to the centerline of Highland Avenue; THENCE extending
northwesterly along the centerline of Highland Avenue, crossing the beds of
Sandy Run Creek and Pinetown Road to the centerline of Hartranft Avenue; THENCE
extending northeasterly along the centerline of Hartranft Avenue, crossing the
bed of Cory Drive to the centerline of Barton Drive; THENCE extending
southeasterly along the centerline of Barton Drive, crossing the bed of Cory
Drive to the centerline of Pinetown Road; THENCE extending northeasterly along
the centerline of Pinetown Road, crossing the beds of Wynnemoor Way, Wentz
Drive and Crosby Drive to the centerline of Susquehanna Road, the point and
place of beginning.
   Intending to describe the perimeter of a political block or voting district
in Upper Dublin Township known as the Fourth Ward.
§ 9-7.   Boundaries of the Fifth Ward, Ward Five.
The boundaries of Ward Five shall be as shown on the Electoral District Ward
Map, dated May 10, 2024 and prepared by Katherine Stein, which is on file and
is available for public inspection in the office of the Township Secretary, the
legal description thereof being as follows:
   ALL THAT CERTAIN political block or voting district known as Ward Five,
situate in the political subdivision known as Upper Dublin Township, County of
Montgomery, Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, said Ward being located between the
center of the Township and the southeast line of the Township being border by
Abington Township, and being bound and described as follows, to wit:
   BEGINNING at a point in the centerline of Kirks Lane, said point being the
point of intersection of the centerline of Kirks Lane and the centerline of
Aiman Circle; THENCE from said point of beginning extending southeasterly along
the centerline of Kirks Lane, crossing the beds of Harris Road and Glen Echo
Lane to the centerline of Dreshertown Road; THENCE extending southwesterly
along the centerline of Dreshertown Road to a point, said point being the
extension of the southwestern property line of Tax Block 12A, Unit 163 (Dublin
Hunt Open Space parcel); THENCE extending southeasterly along said extended
southwestern property line, crossing the beds of Sandy Run Creek and the
Pennsylvania Turnpike to the centerline of the Norfolk Southern Trenton cutoff;
THENCE extending southwesterly along the centerline of the Norfolk Southern
Trenton cutoff to a point, said point being the northwestern corner of the
property line of Tax Block 12C, Unit 29; THENCE extending along the
northeastern property lines of Tax Block 12C, Units 29, 28, 27, 26, 25 and 24
and following the southwestern property line of Twining Valley Park to the
centerline of Twining Road; THENCE extending northeasterly along the centerline
of Twining Road to a point, said point being the extension of the southwestern
property line of Tax Block 14, Unit 1; THENCE extending southeasterly through
Tax Block 13, Unit 9 along the southwestern property line of Tax Block 14, Unit
1 to a point, said point being the point of intersection of the extended
southeastern property line of Tax Block 14, Unit 1, the centerline of Woodland
Road and the centerline of Malcolm Drive; THENCE extending southeasterly along
the centerline of Woodland Road to the centerline of Dundee Drive; THENCE
extending southwesterly along the centerline of Dundee Drive to the centerline
of Paul Avenue; THENCE extending southeasterly along the centerline of Paul
Avenue to a point, said point the point of intersection between the extended
centerline of Paul Avenue and the centerline of Fitzwatertown Road, said point
also being a point in the common Upper Dublin Township and Abington Township
line; THENCE extending southwesterly along the centerline of Fitzwatertown Road
and said common township line, crossing the beds of Burn Brae Drive, Turner
Avenue and Raymond Avenue to the centerline of Anzac Avenue; THENCE extending
southeasterly along the centerline Anzac Avenue and said common township line
to the centerline of Clemens Avenue; THENCE extending southwesterly along the
centerline of Clemens Avenue and said common township line to the centerline of
Susquehanna Road; THENCE extending southeasterly along the centerline of
Susquehanna Road and said common township line to a point, said point being the
point of intersection of the northeastern corner of Tax Block 78, Unit 19
extended, said point also continuing to be a point in the common Upper Dublin
Township and Abington Township line; THENCE extending southwesterly along said
common township line, following the southeastern property lines of Tax Block
78, Units 19, 20, 21, 22, 23 and 24 then continuing along said common township
line, crossing the beds of Madison Avenue, Jefferson Avenue, Lincoln Avenue,
Spear Avenue and Woodrow Avenue to the centerline of Jenkintown Road; THENCE
extending northwesterly along the centerline of Jenkintown Road to the
centerline of North Hills Avenue; THENCE extending southwesterly along the
centerline of North Hills Avenue to a point, said point being the point of
intersection of the extension of the Beechwood Avenue centerline; THENCE
extending northwesterly along said extended centerline, entering the bed of
Beechwood Avenue, crossing the beds of Limekiln Pike, Linden Avenue, Logan
Avenue and Girard Avenue to the centerline of Twining Road; THENCE extending
northeasterly along the centerline of Twining Road, crossing over the bed of
the Sandy Run Middle School entrance to a point, said point being the
intersection of the centerline of Twining Road and the centerline of Sandy Run
Creek; THENCE extending westerly along the centerline of Sandy Run Creek to a
point, said point being the intersection of the centerline of Sandy Run Creek
and the southwestern property line of Tax Block 54, Unit 42; THENCE extending
northwesterly along the southwestern property lines of Tax Block 54, Unit 42
and Tax Block 54A, Unit 1 to a point, said point being the center southern edge
of the Martin Lane cul-de-sac which sits between Tax Block 54A, Units 1 and 25;
THENCE continuing to extend in a northwesterly direction along the southwestern
property lines of Tax Block 54A, Units 25, 71, 70, and 69 and Tax Block 54,
Units 10 and 11 to a point, said point being the centerline of Dreshertown
Road; THENCE extending northeasterly along the centerline of Dreshertown Road,
crossing the beds of Bluebird Lane and Applewood Drive to a point, said point
being the intersection of the extended common property line of Tax Block 53A,
Units 1 and 26 and Tax Block 53, Unit 1; THENCE extending northwesterly along
said common property line to a point, said point being at the northeastern
corner of Tax Block 53A, Unit 26 and the southwestern corner of Tax Block 53,
Unit 1; THENCE extending northeasterly along the northwestern property line of
Tax Block 53, Unit 1 to the centerline of the Norfolk Southern Trenton Cutoff;
THENCE extending northeasterly along the Norfolk Southern Trenton Cutoff to the
centerline of Susquehanna Road; THENCE extending northwesterly along
Susquehanna Road, crossing the Pennsylvania Turnpike to the centerline of
Limekiln Pike; THENCE extending northerly along Limekiln Pike, crossing the
beds of Peg Street, Dreshertown Road and Golden Drive to the centerline of
Kirks Lane; THENCE extending northeasterly along the centerline of Kirks Lane
to the centerline of Aiman Circle, the point and place of beginning.
   Intending to describe the perimeter of a political block or voting district
in Upper Dublin Township known as the Fifth Ward.
§ 9-8.   Boundaries of the Sixth Ward, Ward Six.
The boundaries of Ward Six shall be as shown on the Electoral District Ward
Map, dated May 10, 2024 and prepared by Katherine Stein, which is on file and
is available for public inspection in the office of the Township Secretary, the
legal description thereof being as follows:
   ALL THAT CERTAIN political block or voting district known as Ward Six,
situate in the political subdivision known as Upper Dublin Township, County of
Montgomery, Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, said Ward being located along the
northwest line of the Township, being bordered by Horsham Township, and being
bound and described as follows, to wit:
   BEGINNING at a point in the centerline of Welsh Road, said point being the
point of intersection of the centerline of Welsh Road and the centerline of
East Butler Pike, said point also being a point in the common line between the
Township of Upper Dublin and the Township of Horsham; THENCE from said point of
beginning extending southeasterly along the centerline of Welsh Road, crossing
the beds of Limekiln Pike, Norristown Road, Howe Lane, Terrace Drive, Farmview
Road, Fort Washington Avenue, Dillon Road, Purdie Lane, Spring Hill Drive, and
Brittany Drive to the centerline of Jarrettown Road; THENCE extending
southwesterly along the centerline of Jarrettown Road, crossing the beds of
Holly Hill Lane, Tuckerstown Road, Heard Drive, Dublin Road, Aidenn Lair Road,
Lexington Drive, Kenmare Drive and the Sandy Run Creek to the centerline of
Limekiln Pike; THENCE extending northwesterly along the centerline of Limekiln
Pike, crossing the beds of Broad Street and Dillon Road to the centerline of
Meetinghouse Road; THENCE extending northwesterly along the centerline of
Meetinghouse Road, crossing the beds of Schirra Drive and Anna Marie Circle to
the centerline of Fort Washington Avenue; THENCE extending northeasterly along
the centerline of Fort Washington Avenue to the centerline of Limekiln Pike;
THENCE extending northerly along the centerline of Limekiln Pike, crossing the
beds of Bell Lane, Howe Lane, Wright Drive and Thornbury Drive to the
centerline of Norristown Road; THENCE extending westerly along the centerline
of Norristown Road, crossing the beds of Chaucer Drive and Hood Lane to the
centerline of East Butler Pike; THENCE extending northeasterly along the
centerline of East Butler Pike, crossing the beds of Harner Drive and Dogwood
Drive to the centerline of Welsh Road, the point and place of beginning.
   Intending to describe the perimeter of a political block or voting district
in Upper Dublin Township known as the Sixth Ward.
§ 9-9.   Boundaries of the Seventh Ward, Ward Seven.
The boundaries of Ward Seven shall be as shown on the Electoral District Ward
Map, dated May 10, 2024 and prepared by Katherine Stein, which is on file and
is available for public inspection in the office of the Township Secretary, the
legal description thereof being as follows:
   ALL THAT CERTAIN political block or voting district known as Ward Seven,
situate in the political subdivision known as Upper Dublin Township, County of
Montgomery, Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, said Ward being located in the
northwest corner of the Township, being bordered by Lower Gwynedd Township and
Horsham Township, and being bound and described as follows, to wit:
   BEGINNING at a point, said point being located at the intersection of the
centerlines of Welsh Road and Tennis Avenue, said point also being a common
corner of Upper Dublin Township and Lower Gwynedd Township and also a point in
the southeast line of Horsham Township; THENCE from said point of beginning
extending southeasterly along the centerline of Welsh Road, crossing the beds
of Webster Lane and Daisy Lane to the centerline of East Butler Pike; THENCE
extending southwesterly along the centerline of East Butler Pike, crossing the
beds of Dogwood Drive and Harner Drive to the centerline of Norristown Road;
THENCE extending easterly along the centerline of Norristown Road, crossing the
beds of Hood Lane and Chaucer Drive to the centerline of Limekiln Pike; THENCE
extending southerly along the centerline of Limekiln Pike, crossing the beds of
Thornbury Drive, Anna Rose Court, Howe Lane and Bell Lane to the centerline of
Fort Washington Avenue; THENCE extending southwesterly along the centerline of
Fort Washington Avenue to the centerline of Meetinghouse Road; THENCE extending
northwesterly along the centerline of Meetinghouse Road, crossing the bed of
Joel Drive to a point, said point being the intersection of the centerline of
Meetinghouse Road and the centerline of the Tannery Run Creek; THENCE extending
westerly along the centerline of the Tannery Run Creek, crossing the bed of
Lincoln Drive to the centerline of the Route 309 Expressway; THENCE extending
northwesterly along the Route 309 Expressway to the centerline of East Butler
Pike; THENCE extending southwesterly along the centerline of East Butler Pike,
crossing the beds of Susquehanna Road, Hagues Mill Road, Cavendish Drive and
Meadowbrook Avenue to the centerline of North Bethlehem Pike; THENCE extending
northwesterly along the centerline of North Bethlehem Pike, crossing the beds
of Fairview Avenue, Hagues Mill Road and Willow Avenue to the centerline of
Tennis Avenue; THENCE extending northeasterly along the centerline of Tennis
Avenue, crossing the beds of Gwyn Maple Drive, Susquehanna Road, Arrowhead
Trail, the Route 309 Expressway, Cheston Lane, Stout Road, Norristown Road,
Executive Drive and Annasmead Road to the centerline of Welsh Road, the point
and place of beginning.
   Intending to describe the perimeter of a political block or voting district
in Upper Dublin Township known as the Seventh Ward.
Chapter 11
EMERGENCY SERVICES BOARD
§
11-1.   Creation.
§
11-2.   Composition.
§
11-3.   Powers and duties.
§
11-4.   Meetings.
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Board of Commissioners of the Township of Upper Dublin
5-13-1986 as Title 2, Ch. 12, of the 1986 Code. Amendments noted where
applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
 
Fire Board and Department — See
Ch. 18.
 
§ 11-1.   Creation.
Pursuant to the "Emergency Management Services Code," 35 Pa.C.S.A. § 7101 et
seq., there is hereby established the Upper Dublin Township Emergency Services
Board.
§ 11-2.   Composition.
   A.   [Amended 12-9-1997 by Ord. No. 962] The Emergency Services Board shall
consist of representatives of the following agencies or bodies, who shall serve
for an indefinite term at the pleasure of the agency, except in the case of
elected or appointed township officials, who shall serve until such time as
their successors shall qualify:
Agency Representative
Agency                       Representative
Board of Commissioners       Members of the Public Safety, Works and Services
                             Committee
Upper Dublin School District 1 representative
Police Department            Chief of Police
Fire Department              The Fire Board
Ambulance Services           1 representative from each ambulance service
                             serving the township
Medical doctor               To be appointed by the Board of Commissioners
Public Health                1 representative
 
   B.   The Police Chief or his designee shall be the Emergency Management
Coordinator. [Added 1-10-1995 by Ord. No. 879]
   C.   Additional members or agencies may be added to the Board from time to
time on the resolution of the Board of Commissioners.
§ 11-3.   Powers and duties.
The Emergency Services Board shall be responsible for and authorized to develop
a Disaster Emergency Management Plan for the township and to coordinate such
Plan with those of other political subdivisions. The Board shall serve in an
advisory capacity to the Board of Commissioners by recommending rules and
regulations to the Board of Commissioners for the purpose of implementing such
Emergency Management Plan.
§ 11-4.   Meetings.
The Emergency Services Board shall hold meetings on a regular basis at the
Township Building from time to time as the Board or its Chairman shall
determine.
Chapter 14
ETHICS, CODE OF
§
14-1.   Establishment; purpose.
§
14-2.   Definitions.
§
14-3.   Responsibilities.
§
14-4.   Conduct.
§
14-5.   Discrimination prohibited.
§
14-6.   Conflict of interest.
§
14-7.   Political activity.
§
14-8.   Construal of provisions.
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Board of Commissioners of the Township of Upper Dublin
9-14-1993 as Ord. No. 848. Amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
 
Educational Service Agency — See  Manager— See
Ch. 6.                              Ch. 25.
Emergency Services Board — See    Parks and Recreation Advisory Board — See
Ch. 11.                             Ch. 32.
Fire Board and Department — See   Planning Agency — See
Ch. 18.                             Ch. 39.
 
§ 14-1.   Establishment; purpose.
   A.   A Code of Ethics is hereby established for all officials and employees
of Upper Dublin Township, whether elected or appointed, compensated or
uncompensated, including all members of advisory and administrative boards and
commissions of the township or those in which the township participates with
other political subdivisions of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
   B.   The proper operation of a representative government requires that
public officials and employees be independent, impartial and responsible to the
people, and that government decisions and policies be made in the best
interests of the people and the township.
   C.   The purpose of this Code is to establish certain ethical standards of
conduct for all such officials and employees by setting forth those acts or
actions that are incompatible with the best interests of the township, by
directing disclosure by such officials and employees of financial or other
interests in matters affecting the township and by establishing certain
responsibilities.
§ 14-2.   Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
   FINANCIAL INTEREST — An interest of an official, employee, immediate family
member of an official or employee or any person residing in the official's or
employee's household which exceeds five percent (5%) of the total assets or
gross income of such official, employee, family member or person residing in
the official or employee's household.
   GIFT — Any item of more than nominal value.
   OFFICIAL or EMPLOYEE — All elected and appointed officials, citizen
appointees and all administrative and operational personnel.
§ 14-3.   Responsibilities.
Public officials and employees are agents of public purpose and hold office for
the benefit of the public. They are bound to uphold the Constitution of the
United States and the Constitution of this commonwealth and to carry out
impartially the laws of the nation, state and township.
§ 14-4.   Conduct.
Officials and employees shall act within the scope of their authority and
within the law and shall work in full cooperation with other public officials
and employees unless prohibited from so doing by law.
§ 14-5.   Discrimination prohibited.
No person shall, in his or her employment by the township in any capacity or
appointment to any board, authority, commission or agency or removal therefrom,
be favored or discriminated against because of age, race, gender, political or
religious opinions or affiliations.
§ 14-6.   Conflict of interest.
   A.   No Commissioner or other official or employee of the township shall
engage in any business or transaction or shall have any interest which would
impair his independence of judgment or action in the performance of his
official duties.
   B.   Specific conflicts of interest, which activities are prohibited in the
operation of the township, are enumerated below for the guidance of officials
and employees.
      (1)   Disclosure of confidential information. No Commissioner or other
official or employee shall, without proper authorization, disclose confidential
information concerning the property, government or affairs of the township
which shall advance the financial or other interests of himself or others.
      (2)   Gifts and favors.
         (a)   No Commissioner or other official or employee shall solicit or
accept any valuable gift, whether in the form of service, loan, thing or
promise, from any person who to his knowledge is interested directly or
indirectly in any manner whatsoever in business dealings with the township; nor
shall any such official or employee solicit or accept any gift, favor or thing
of value that may tend to influence him in the discharge of his duties or grant
in the discharge of his duties any improper favor, service or thing of value.
The receipt of casual business meals or refreshments shall not be held to be
within the meaning of this provision.
         (b)   No official or employee of the township or person who seeks
appointment on any township board, authority, commission or agency or
employment by the township in any capacity shall directly or indirectly give or
pay any money, service or other consideration to any person in connection with
such position, employment or appointment; nor shall any such official or
employee or person who seeks appointment to a township position give or
promise, directly or indirectly, to any person, any office, position,
employment, benefit or anything of value for the purpose of influencing or
obtaining the political support and/or vote of any person, except where such
benefit is generally realized by the citizens of the township.
      (3)   Private gain. No Commissioner or other official or employee of the
township shall engage in or accept private employment or render services for
private interests when such employment or service is in conflict with or
prevents the proper discharge of his or her official duties; nor shall any such
official or employee engage in any activity or take any action by virtue of an
official position from which activity or action the official or employee or any
other person or entity in whose welfare the official or employee is interested
realize a gain or advantage or receive anything which could be regarded as a
gain or advantage, except such gain or advantage generally realized by the
citizens of the township as the purposeful result of such activity or action.
      (4)   Representing private interests before township agencies or courts.
No Commissioner or other official or employee shall represent private interests
in any action or proceeding against the interests of the township or in any
court litigation to which the township is a party. A Commissioner may appear
before the township agencies on behalf of constituents in the course of his
duties as a representative of the electorate or the performance of public or
civic obligations, provided that a Commissioner may not appear before the
Zoning Hearing Board until he has made a good-faith effort to consult with the
Township Solicitor. However, no Commissioner or other official or employee
shall accept a retainer or compensation in respect to any matter pending before
a township agency.
      (5)   Contracts with the township. Any Commissioner or other official or
employee who has a financial interest in any business entity, transaction or
contract with the township or in the sale of real estate, materials, supplies
or services to the township shall make known to the Township Secretary such
interest in any matter. This provision shall not be applicable to stocks,
bonds, mutual funds or other holdings wherein the investment in relation to the
entire entity is insignificant. He shall refrain from voting upon or otherwise
participating in the transaction or the making of such contract or sale.
      (6)   Disclosure of interest in legislation.
         (a)   A Commissioner who has any interest in any pending township
motion, resolution or ordinance which would impair his independence of judgment
or action in the performance of his official duties shall disclose such
interest to the Township Secretary and shall abstain from the consideration of
or voting upon such matter.
         (b)   Any other official or employee who has a financial interest and
who participates in discussion with or gives an official opinion to the Board
of Commissioners shall disclose the same.
      (7)   Use of public property. No Commissioner or other official or
employee of the township shall use any public property for personal benefit or
profit, except as may be authorized by the Commissioners in the Township Code
or other ordinance.
§ 14-7.   Political activity.
   A.   Appointed, officials and employees shall not use their office or
employment in political campaigns for township candidates.
   B.   No appointed official or employee shall promise an appointment to any
municipal position as a reward for any political activity.
   C.   Supervisory personnel and appointed officials of the township shall not
campaign directly or indirectly for any candidate seeking a township office,
shall not participate directly or indirectly in fundraising activities for
candidates for township office or elected township officials and shall not
participate directly or indirectly in any other political activity of the
township.
§ 14-8.   Construal of provisions.
   A.   When a Commissioner or other official or employee has doubt as to the
applicability or interpretation of any provision of this code, he or she may
apply to the Board of Commissioners for an advisory opinion. The Commissioner
or other official or employee may submit in writing the question raised and the
language to be interpreted without necessarily making reference to a particular
set of facts.
   B.   Nothing in this code shall be deemed to amend, modify, alter or
supersede any statutory enactment regarding the privileges, duties or
obligations of Township Commissioners or other officials or employees.
Chapter 18
FIRE DEPARTMENT
ARTICLE I
(Reserved)
§
18-1.   (Reserved)
§
18-2.   (Reserved)
§
18-3.   (Reserved)
§
18-4.   (Reserved)
§
18-5.   (Reserved)
§
18-6.   (Reserved)
ARTICLE II
Fire Department
§
18-7.   Fire Department established; Fire Company recognized.
§
18-8.   (Reserved)
§
18-9.   Authorized activities of Fire Company.
§
18-10.   Finances.
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Board of Commissioners of the Township of Upper Dublin
5-13-1986 as Title 2, Ch. 2, of the 1986 Code. Amendments noted where
applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
 
Emergency Services Board — See
Ch. 11.
 
ARTICLE I
(Reserved) 1
1. Editor's Note: Former Art. I, Fire Board, consisting of &sect ;18-1 through
18-6, was repealed 12-9-1997 by Ord. No. 962.
§ 18-1.   (Reserved)
§ 18-2.   (Reserved)
§ 18-3.   (Reserved)
§ 18-4.   (Reserved)
§ 18-5.   (Reserved)
§ 18-6.   (Reserved)
ARTICLE II
Fire Department
[Amended 11-11-1997 by Ord. No. 959; 2-14-2006 by Ord. No. 1165]
§ 18-7.   Fire Department established; Fire Company recognized.
   A.   The Fire Department of Upper Dublin Township is hereby established for
the purpose of carrying out the powers given by law to the Township relative to
the cause and management of fires and the prevention thereof. The personnel of
the Fire Department shall consist of a Fire Marshal, a Fire Services
Administrator, and such other personnel as the Board of Commissioners shall
authorize, all such personnel to serve under the supervision of the Township
Manager.
   B.   The Ft. Washington Fire Company No. 1, and any additional companies as
the Board of Commissioners may from time to time recognize, are hereby
designated as the officially recognized Fire Company for Upper Dublin Township.
   C.   The Fire Department shall be managed in the same manner as all other
existing Township departments.
   D.   The administrative head of the Fire Department shall be the Fire
Services Administrator. The Fire Services Administrator shall be a full-time
paid employee of the Township.
   E.   The Fire Marshal shall report directly to the Fire Services
Administrator concerning Fire Department related administrative issues. The
Fire Services Administrator shall also receive reports from appropriate members
of the Fire Company concerning the activities of the Fire Department which have
been assigned to the Fire Company. The Fire Services Administrator shall,
annually, render a report to the Board of Commissioners concerning the
activities of the Fire Department.
   F.   The Fire Company shall operate under its own bylaws, which shall be in
accordance with generally accepted standards for similar organizations. Nothing
in this chapter is intended to regulate the internal organization of the Fire
Company.
   G.   The Fire Chief and subordinate officers of the Fire Company shall be in
command of the Fire Company.
§ 18-8.   (Reserved)
§ 18-9.   Authorized activities of Fire Company.
The Fire Company shall provide such services to the Township as may be
necessary for the protection of persons and property situated therein, to
include the following:
   A.   Emergency activities.
      (1)   The extinguishment of fires and the prevention of loss of life and
property from fire, subject to good and accepted fire-fighting practices which
shall be applicable to the Fire Company and its members.
      (2)   Assistance at the scene of automobile accidents, medical
emergencies, hazardous materials incidents, natural or man-made phenomena and
other dangerous situations.
      (3)   Any and all public safety activities undertaken by the responding
members of the Fire Company to render care to the injured, prevent loss of
life, provide comfort and security to victims and limit or prevent damage to or
loss of property as circumstances may indicate.
      (4)   The Fire Company may respond to emergency calls and provide
services to municipalities outside of the Township in furtherance of mutual aid
agreements entered into by the Township.
   B.   Nonemergency activities. The Fire Company may also provide the
following nonemergency and public service functions:
      (1)   Removing water from property after storms.
      (2)   Assisting in the abatement and prevention of damage or injury to
persons or property whether through natural or man-made causes.
      (3)   Recovery of animals.
      (4)   Participation in the prevention activities, post-fire
investigations, bomb searches and evacuation drills.
      (5)   Assisting police by rendering assistance to police officers where
such aid is specifically requested or done without request to protect the
public welfare from imminent danger, including fire police duties.
      (6)   Maintenance and repair work performed safely and responsibly on a
Township vehicle, building, grounds, or equipment.
      (7)   Participation in drills, practices, training sessions and pre-fire
planning activities as may be deemed necessary by the officers of the Fire
Company to maintain proficiency in required services. Participation in these
training activities shall be deemed necessary by the officers of the Fire
Company and supervised by a qualified instructor.
      (8)   Preparation of the firehouses for community activities such as use
as a temporary shelter or a polling place for the primary and general
elections.
      (9)   Any use of Township property other than as permitted herein must be
specifically authorized by the Board of Commissioners.
§ 18-10.   Finances.
The Fire Company shall receive financial support from the Township on an annual
basis. This support will be based upon an annual budget request prepared by the
Fire Company which will be submitted to the Fire Services Administrator,
discussed, and authorized in the same manner established for all Township
departments.
Chapter 25
MANAGER
§
25-1.   Creation.
§
25-2.   Appointment; removal.
§
25-3.   Qualifications; residency.
§
25-4.   Bond.
§
25-5.   Salary.
§
25-6.   Powers and duties.
§
25-7.   Disability or absence.
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Board of Commissioners of the Township of Upper Dublin
5-13-1986 as Title 3, Ch. 3, of the 1986 Code. Amendments noted where
applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
 
Code of Ethics — See  Social security — See
Ch. 14.                 Ch. 47.
Pensions — See
Ch. 35.
 
§ 25-1.   Creation.
The Office of Township Manager is hereby created by the Township of Upper
Dublin.
§ 25-2.   Appointment; removal.
[Amended 2-10-1987 by Ord. No. 726]
The Manager shall be appointed by a majority of all the members of the Board of
Commissioners, and such person shall serve at the will of the Board; provided,
nevertheless, that upon termination of employment initiated by the
Commissioners, the Manager shall be given a lump sum cash payment equal to
three months aggregate salary.
§ 25-3.   Qualifications; residency.
The Manager shall be chosen solely on the basis of his executive and
administrative abilities, with special emphasis on the duties of his office as
herein outlined. The Manager need not be a resident of the township or of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania at the time of his appointment, but during the
tenure of his office he may reside outside the township only with the approval
of the Board of Commissioners. If the Board of Commissioners fails within a
reasonable time, not to exceed 60 days after the appointment, to approve the
Manager's residence outside the township, he must immediately become, and
during his tenure remain, a resident of the township.
§ 25-4.   Bond.
[Amended 5-13-1997 by Ord. No. 944]
Before entering upon his duties, the Manager shall not be required to give a
bond to the township.
§ 25-5.   Salary.
[Amended 2-10-1987 by Ord. No. 726; 1-10-1995 by Ord. No. 879]
The salary of the Township Manager shall be fixed from time to time by
ordinance.
§ 25-6.   Powers and duties.
The Manager shall be the Chief Administrative Officer of the township and shall
be responsible to the Board of Commissioners as a whole for the proper and
efficient administration of all township business, which shall be vested in the
Manager, unless expressly imposed or conferred by statute upon other township
officers. Subject to recall by ordinance of the Board of Commissioners, the
powers and duties of the Township Manager shall include the following:
   A.   He shall supervise and be responsible for the activities of all
municipal departments.
   B.   He shall hire and, when necessary for the good of the service, shall
suspend or discharge any employee under his supervision. Provided, further,
that with respect to other township employees, the hiring and firing thereof
shall be subject to the controls set forth in the personnel manual promulgated
from time to time by the Commissioners and any action taken by the authority of
this subsection.
   C.   He shall make recommendation of the amount of wages and salaries of all
personnel under his supervision to the Board of Commissioners.
   D.   He shall prepare and submit to the Board of Commissioners, before the
close of each fiscal year, a budget for the next fiscal year and an explanatory
budget message. In preparing the budget, the Manager, or an officer designated
by him, shall obtain from the head of each department, agency or board, or any
qualified officer thereof, estimates of revenues and expenditures and such
other supporting data as he requires. The Manager shall review such estimates
and may revise them before submitting the budget to the Board of Commissioners.
   E.   He shall be responsible for the administration of the budget after its
adoption by the Board of Commissioners.
   F.   He shall, in conjunction with the preparation of the yearly budget,
develop long-range fiscal plans for the municipality, such plans to be
presented annually to the Board of Commissioners for its review and adoption.
   G.   He shall hold such other municipal offices and head such municipal
departments as the Board of Commissioners may from time to time direct.
   H.   He shall attend all meetings of the Board of Commissioners and its
committees with the right to take part in the discussions, and he shall receive
notice of all special meetings of the Board of Commissioners and its
committees.
   I.   He shall prepare the agenda for each meeting of the Board of
Commissioners and supply facts pertinent thereto.
   J.   He shall keep the Board of Commissioners informed as to the conduct of
township affairs; submit periodic reports on the condition of the township
finances and such other reports as the Board of Commissioners requests; and
make such recommendations to the Board of Commissioners as he deems advisable.
   K.   He shall submit to the Board of Commissioners, as soon as possible
after the close of the fiscal year, a complete report on the finances and the
administrative activities of the township for the preceding year.
   L.   He shall see that the provisions of all franchises, leases, permits and
privileges granted by the township are observed.
   M.   He may employ, by and with the approval of the Board of Commissioners,
experts and consultants to perform work and to advise in connection with any of
the functions of the township.
   N.   He shall attend to the letting of contracts in due form of law, and he
shall supervise the performance and faithful execution of the same except
insofar as such duties are expressly imposed by statute upon some other
township officer.
   O.   He shall see that all money owed the township is promptly paid and the
proper proceedings are taken for the security and collection of all the
township's claims.
   P.   He, or an officer designated by him, shall be the purchasing officer of
the township, and he shall purchase, in accordance with provisions of the
Township Code, all supplies and equipment for the agencies, boards, department
and other offices of the township. He shall keep an account of all purchases
and shall, from time to time or when directed by the Board of Commissioners,
make a full written report thereof. He shall also 'issue rules and regulations,
subject to the approval of the Board of Commissioners, governing the
procurement of all municipal supplies and equipment.
   Q.   All complaints regarding township services shall be referred to the
office of the Manager. He, or an officer designated by him, shall investigate
and dispose of such complaints, and the Manager shall report thereon to the
Board of Commissioners.
   R.   He shall, on behalf of the township, sign pleadings and verifications
for documents related to litigation commenced against the township and to
litigation commenced by the township under the authority of the Board of
Commissioners. [Added 10-8-1996 by Ord. No. 921]
§ 25-7.   Disability or absence.
If the Manager becomes ill or needs to be absent from the township, he shall
designate one qualified member of his staff to perform the duties of the the
Manager during his absence or disability. The person so designated shall not
perform these duties for a period longer than two weeks without the approval of
the Board of Commissioners.
Chapter 27
MUNICIPAL AUTHORITY
§
27-1.   Organization of Municipal Authority.
§
27-2.   Name.
§
27-3.   Articles of incorporation.
§
27-4.   First members of the Board.
§
27-5.   Authorizing articles of incorporation; seal.
§
27-6.   Purposes and projects.
§
27-7.   Management, administrative, insurance, accounting, auditing, operations
and maintenance requirements and services.
§
27-8.   Amendments to by laws.
§
27-9.   Authority to meet with Board of Commissioners semi-annually.
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Board of Commissioners of the Township of Upper Dublin
9-13-2016, by Ord. No. 16-1322.Amendments noted where applicable.]
§ 27-1.   Organization of Municipal Authority.
The Board of Commissioners of this Township hereby signifies its intention to
organize a Municipal Authority (the “Authority”) under the provisions of the
Municipal Authorities Act of 1945, as amended and supplemented (the “Act”).
§ 27-2.   Name.
The name of the proposed Authority is the Upper Dublin Township Municipal
Authority.
§ 27-3.   Articles of incorporation.
[Amended 7-10-2018 by Ord. No. 18-1343]
Pursuant to said intention, the Articles of Incorporation of the Authority are
hereby approved and adopted in the following form:
ARTICLES OF INCORPORATION
TO THE SECRETARY OF THE COMMONWEALTH OF PENNSYLVANIA:
   In compliance with the Municipal Authorities Act of 1945, as amended and
supplemented, 53 PA C.S.A. 5601 et seq., the Township of Upper Dublin,
Montgomery County, Pennsylvania (the “Township”), pursuant to an Ordinance duly
enacted by the Board of Commissioners of said Township, authorizing and
directing the formation of the Authority under said Act, does hereby certify:
   A.   The name of the Authority shall be the “Upper Dublin Township Municipal
Authority.”
   B.   The Authority is formed under the Municipal Authorities Act of 1945, as
amended and supplemented, 53 PA. C.S.A. Section 5601 et seq.
   C.   No other Authority has been organized and is in existence under the
Municipal Authorities Act 1945 as amended or supplemented or under the former
Act of June 28, 1935 (P.L.463 No.191), or any other Act, in and for the said
Township of Upper Dublin.
   D.   The name of the incorporating municipality is Upper Dublin Township,
Montgomery County, Pennsylvania and the names and addresses of the Board of
Commissioners of the Township of Upper Dublin are as set forth specifically in
Ordinance No. 16-1322.
   E.   The names, addresses and terms of office of the first members of the
Board of the Upper Dublin Township Municipal Authority are as set forth
specifically in Ordinance No. 16-1322. The terms of office of the first members
of the Board of the Authority shall commence on the date of appointment and
shall be computed from the first Monday of January 2017.
   F.   The term of the existence of the Authority is 50 years and for such
further period or as may be provided in the Articles of Amendment approved
under section 5605(e) relating to amendment of articles. Notwithstanding said
term of existence, the Township has the right to dissolve the Authority at any
time so long as it assumes the debt obligation(s) of the Authority and
ownership and operational responsibility of its properties and projects.
   G.   The designated service areas of the Authority shall be bounded as
depicted on the map attached at Exhibit “A” to Res. No. MA-18-0003 and shall
include all those properties set forth in the list at Exhibit “B” to Res. No.
MA-18-0003, as of the date of adoption. [Amended 7-10-2018 by Ord. No. 18-1343]
IN WITNESS THEREOF, the Board of Commissioners of the Township of Upper Dublin,
Montgomery County, Pennsylvania, has caused these Articles of Incorporation to
be duly executed on behalf of said Township, by its duly authorized officers
and with its seal to be duly affixed and attested this 13th day of September,
2016, as restated and revised July 10, 2018 (Ordinance No. 18-1343).
   THE TOWNSHIP OF UPPER DUBLIN
(SEAL)   BY:                                                              
   Ira S. Tackel
   President, Board of Commissioners
Attest:
/S/
Upper Dublin Township Secretary
§ 27-4.   First members of the Board.
The first members of the Board of said Authority, named in the aforesaid
Articles of Incorporation, are hereby specifically appointed members of said
Board for the term set after their respective names, commencing on the date of
appointment and computed from the first Monday in January 2017.
§ 27-5.   Authorizing articles of incorporation; seal.
The President of the Board of Commissioners of Upper Dublin Township is hereby
authorized and directed to execute said Articles of Incorporation on behalf of
the Authority, and the Secretary of the Township of Upper Dublin is hereby
authorized and directed to affix thereto and attest the seal of the Township of
Upper Dublin. Said officers are further authorized and directed to cause a
notice of intention to file said Articles of Incorporation to be published as
required by law, and to file said Articles of Incorporation, together with a
certified copy of this chapter and required proofs of publication, with the
Secretary of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania and to take all such action as
they may deem necessary or appropriate to organize said Authority.
§ 27-6.   Purposes and projects.
The purposes and projects of said Authority are as follows:
   A.   Purpose. Obtaining and financing working capital, acquiring, holding,
constructing, improving maintaining and operating, owning or leasing, either in
the capacity of lessor or lessee, projects within the defined boundary of the
Authority, of the following kind and character:
      (1)   Transportation for all defined modes, marketing, transit service
and safety improvement utilizing all resources necessary to construct and
maintain roadway improvements, bridges, traffic regulation devices, bicycle/
pedestrian trails and amenities including but not limited to landscaping/trees,
special signage, street/area lighting, etc.
      (2)   Storm water and flood control planning, management and
implementation.
      (3)   General economic development and marketing for the Fort Washington
Office Center Park.
   B.   Specific projects authorized.
      (1)   Roadway improvements and maintenance for all modes of
transportation located within the District, as defined in Exhibit “A” attached
to Ordinance No. 16-1322.
      (2)   Storm water management and flood control projects within and/or
providing services to the District as defined in Exhibit “A” attached to
Ordinance No. 16-1322.
      (3)   New and/or improved access between the District and the
Pennsylvania Turnpike.
      (4)   Bicycle/pedestrian facilities.
      (5)   Signage and lighting for the District.
   C.   Upper Dublin shall retain the right which exists under the Municipality
Authorities Act to approve any plan of the Authority for the foregoing purpose
and projects.
§ 27-7.   Management, administrative, insurance, accounting, auditing,
operations and maintenance requirements and services.
Upper Dublin Township will provide for all management, administrative,
insurance, accounting, auditing, operations and maintenance requirements and
services through contracted services arrangements with the Authority, subject
to the following:
   A.   The Township Manager shall be the Authority's appointed Executive
Director.
   B.   The Township's Finance Director shall be the Authority's appointed
Finance Director.
   C.   Upper Dublin Township staff will calculate and collect any fees.
   D.   Upper Dublin Township will operate and maintain any facilities or
programs retained by the Authority or contract out for same.
   E.   The Township shall audit the Authority on an annual basis.
   F.   The Authority's fiscal year shall be defined to be consistent with that
of the Township.
§ 27-8.   Amendments to by laws.
Amendments to the Authority's By Laws shall require the approval of the Board
of Commissioners of Upper Dublin Township.
§ 27-9.   Authority to meet with Board of Commissioners semi-annually.
The Authority will meet with the Upper Dublin Township Board of Commissioners
on a semi-annual basis to review all plans, services and to provide updates on
the status and progress of all Authority projects. The Authority will provide a
written report to the Board of Commissioners in advance of the semi-annual
meetings.
Chapter 28
MUNICIPAL CLAIMS
§
28-1.   Penalty and interest on municipal claims.
§
28-2.   Attorney's fee schedule.
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Board of Commissioners of the Township of Upper Dublin
1-10-1995 by Ord. No. 887. Amendments noted where applicable.]
§ 28-1.   Penalty and interest on municipal claims.
Municipal claims filed upon the assessment for amounts remaining unpaid for
improvements to real estate shall upon filing have added thereto a penalty of
five percent (5%) of the amount of the claim. Municipal claims filed upon the
failure to pay for services rendered or provided shall upon filing have added
thereto a penalty of ten percent (10%) of the amount of the claim. In addition,
upon collection of any municipal claim, there shall have added thereto interest
on the claim and penalty at the rate of ten percent (10%) per annum from the
date of the filing of the lien or the completion of the work, whichever shall
last occur; except where a municipal claim is filed arising out of a project
financed by the issuance of township bonds, interest shall be collectible at
the rate of interest paid on the bonds, or at the rate of twelve percent (12%)
per annum, whichever is less.
§ 28-2.   Attorney's fee schedule.
[Added 2-11-1997 by Ord. No. 931]
   A.   When authorized by statute, the attorney's fees collected by the
township in conjunction with the litigation or the collection of delinquent
accounts shall be charged at the hourly rate approved by the Board of
Commissioners from time to time for litigation services rendered by such
attorney or his or her law firm.
   B.   Municipal claim. For purposes of this chapter, the term "municipal
claim" shall mean any claim identified, defined, prescribed or provided for in
the Municipal Claim and Tax Lien Law, as amended. 1
   C.   Procedure for collection.
      (1)   At least 30 days prior to assessing or imposing attorney's fees in
connection with the collection of a delinquent account, the township shall, by
United States certified mail, return receipt requested, postage prepaid, mail
to the property owner the notice required by this subsection.
      (2)   If within 30 days of mailing the notice in accordance with
Subsection C(1), the certified mail is refused or unclaimed or the return
receipt is not received, then at least 10 days prior to assessing or imposing
attorney's fees in connection with the collection of a delinquent account, the
township shall, by United States first class mail, mail to the property owner
the notice required by this subsection.
      (3)   The notice required by this subsection shall be mailed to the
property owner's last known post office address by virtue of the knowledge and
information possessed by the township and by the office in Montgomery County
responsible for assessments and revisions of taxes. It shall be the duty of the
township to determine the owner's last post office address known to said
Collector and County Assessment Office.
      (4)   The notice to the property owner shall include the following:
         (a)   A statement of the township's intent to impose or assess
attorney's fees within 30 days of mailing the notice pursuant to Subsection C
(1), or within 10 days of mailing the notice pursuant to Subsection C(2).
         (b)   The manner in which the imposition or assessment of attorney's
fees may be avoided by payment of the delinquent account.
      (5)   If the municipal claim is not paid in full within 30 days of
mailing the notice (or within 30 days after mailing the second notice if
required as outlined above), the township shall proceed to collect the
municipal claim by judicial proceedings as provided by law.
1 Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 7101 et seq.
Chapter 32
RESERVED
Editor's Note: Former
Ch. 32, Parks and Recreation Advisory Board, adopted 5-13-1986 as Title 6,
Ch. 1, of the 1986 Code, as amended, was repealed 12-9-1997 by Ord. No. 962
Chapter 35
PENSIONS
ARTICLE I
(Reserved)
§§ 35-1 through 35-24. (Reserved)
ARTICLE II
Nonuniformed Employees Pension Plan
§
35-25.   Continuation of plan.
§
35-26.   Membership.
§
35-27.   Establishment of Nonuniformed Commissioners.
§
35-28.   Powers and duties of the Nonuniformed Pension Board.
§
35-29.   Determinations by Pension Board.
§
35-30.   Payments to be free from all claims.
§
35-31.   Administration expenses.
§
35-32.   Appropriations from township funds.
§
35-33.   Reservation of rights by Board of Pension Board of Trustees.
§
35-34.   Construal of provisions.
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Board of Commissioners of the Township of Upper Dublin
as indicated in article histories. Amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
 
Manager — See  Social security — See
Ch. 25.          Ch. 47.
 
ARTICLE I
(Reserved) 1
1 Editor's Note: Former Article I, Police Pension Plan and Pension Fund,
adopted 3-14-1995 by Ord. No. 891, was repealed 7-14-1998 by Ord. No. 971.
§§ 35-1 through 35-24. (Reserved)
ARTICLE II
Nonuniformed Employees Pension Plan
[Adopted 4-8-1997 by Ord. No. 939]
§ 35-25.   Continuation of plan.
The Township of Upper Dublin hereby continues a nonuniformed employees pension
plan first established on June 1, 1968, for the benefit of eligible employees
of Upper Dublin Township. The nonuniformed pension plan shall be known as the
"Upper Dublin Township Nonuniformed Employees Pension Plan and Pension Fund"
(hereinafter "nonuniformed pension plan").
§ 35-26.   Membership.
Eligible full-time nonuniformed employees of Upper Dublin Township as of the
effective date hereof shall become members of the nonuniformed pension plan
("members").
§ 35-27.   Establishment of Nonuniformed Pension Board of Trustees.
   A.   A Board of Trustees is hereby established for the purpose of
administering the Nonuniformed Pension Plan, which Board shall be known as the
"Upper Dublin Township Nonuniformed Pension Plan and Pension Fund Board of
Trustees" (hereinafter "Nonuniformed Pension Board").
   B.   Composition.
      (1)   The Nonuniformed Pension Board shall consist of five Trustees who
shall be selected as follows:
         (a)   The President of the Board of Commissioners or an individual
appointed by the Board of Commissioners.
         (b)   The Township Manager.
         (c)   The Township Finance Director.
         (d)   One member representing the unionized employees of the township,
selected by the vote of a majority of such unionized employees.
         (e)   One member representing the nonunionized employees of the
township, selected by the vote of a majority of such nonunionized employees.
      (2)   The Chairman of the Nonuniformed Pension Board shall be the
President of the Board of Commissioners or the Commissioners' representative.
   C.   Pension Board Trustees shall serve without compensation.
   D.   Initially, one Trustee shall be appointed to serve for five years, one
for four years, one for three years, one for two years and one for one year.
Thereafter, each Trustee shall be appointed for a five-year term. Trustees may
be appointed or reelected.
   E.   The Township Manager shall appoint a secretary as the nonvoting
Secretary of the Nonuniformed Pension Board who shall keep minutes of the
Nonuniformed Pension Board's proceedings and all dates, records and documents
pertaining to the nonuniformed Pension Board's administration and the
Nonuniformed pension plan.
   F.   No Trustee shall be liable for any act or omission of any other Trustee
nor for any act or omission on his own part excepting only his own willful
misconduct. The township shall indemnify and save harmless claims or
liabilities arising from an individuals actions taken as a Nonuniformed Pension
Board Trustee, excepting only expenses and liabilities arising out of a
Trustee's own willful misconduct. Trustees shall serve without bond.
   G.   No Trustee shall vote on any matter in which he has a direct personal
interest.
   H.   The action of the Nonuniformed Pension Board shall be determined by the
vote or other affirmative expression of a majority of its Trustees. All actions
of the Nonuniformed Pension Board shall be certified by its Chairman and
attested by its Secretary.
   I.   The Nonuniformed Pension Board shall meet at least semiannually and at
other times at the call of the Chairman or the request of at least three
members of the Nonuniformed Pension Board.
§ 35-28.   Powers and duties of the Nonuniformed Pension Board.
The Pension Board shall have the following powers and duties:
   A.   To administer the nonuniformed pension plan in accordance with any
agreements as may be entered into from time to time by the Board of
Commissioners and professional money manager(s). Said agreements may permit the
money manager(s) to manage and operate the nonuniformed pension plan and to
receive, hold, invest and disperse any sum or sums as may be necessary to carry
out the nonuniformed pension plan and all other applicable statutes, ordinances
and regulations.
   B.   To provide guidance to any money manager(s) of the nonuniformed pension
plan for the investment of all moneys deposited in such nonuniformed pension
plan and the reinvestment of all earnings of the nonuniformed pension plan.
   C.   To adopt rules and regulations for the governance of the affairs of the
Nonuniformed Pension Board to better enable it to carry out its powers and
duties imposed hereunder.
   D.   To employ, retain and compensate actuaries, accountants, auditors,
attorneys, money managers and investment consultants as it may deem necessary
to carry out its duties hereunder upon approval of the Board of Commissioners.
   E.   To make all decisions pertinent to the Nonuniformed Pension Board
regarding pension payments to any applicant or participant or for the return of
any individual contributions to any person who may be entitled to the same
under the nonuniformed pension plan.
   F.   To designate a nonuniformed pension plan custodian for the depository
of all funding. G. To determine what amounts shall be deposited into the
nonuniformed pension plan.
§ 35-29. Determinations by Pension Board.
The Nonuniformed Pension Board shall have full power and authority to make all
decisions in accordance with the terms of the nonuniformed pension plan,
including but not limited to the following:
   A.   To determine all questions relating to the eligibility of employees to
become participants in the nonuniformed pension plan.
   B.   To compute and certify to the nonuniformed pension plan custodian the
amount and kind of benefits payable to participants in the nonuniformed pension
plan.
   C.   To make and publish such rules and regulations for the administration
of the nonuniformed pension plan as are not inconsistent with the terms of any
agreement.
   D.   The determinations by the Nonuniformed Pension Board shall be made
based upon the submission of such evidence as the nonuniformed Pension Board
shall require.
   E.   The determination of the Nonuniformed Pension Board in each case shall
be final and conclusive.
§ 35-30.   Payments to be free from all claims.
Payments under the nonuniformed pension plan shall not be subject to levy,
attachment, execution, garnishment or other legal process and shall be payable
only to the member or his designated beneficiary and shall not be subject to
assignment or transfer.
§ 35-31.   Administration expenses.
The expense of the management and administration of the nonuniformed pension
plan, including the compensation of an actuary and custodian of the fund, shall
be paid by the nonuniformed pension plan to the extent allowable by law and
otherwise by appropriations made by the Board of Commissioners.
§ 35-32.   Appropriations from township funds.
Appropriation is hereby continued and made from the proper fund or funds of the
township in the necessary amount to purchase funds for the administration of
the nonuniformed pension plan.
§ 35-33.   Reservation of rights by Board of Commissioners.
The Board of Commissioners reserves the right to amend, modify or wholly
discontinue the nonuniformed pension plan at any time; provided, however, that
any such action shall not adversely affect the previously acquired rights of
any participant in the nonuniformed pension plan
§ 35-34.   Construal of provisions.
As used in this article, the masculine shall include the feminine and the
feminine shall include the masculine.
Chapter 39
PLANNING AGENCY
§
39-1.   (Reserved)
§
39-2.   (Reserved)
§
39-3.   Creation; membership; compensation.
§
39-4.   Appointment; term; vacancies.
§
39-5.   Membership qualifications.
§
39-6.   Removal from office.
§
39-7.   Officers; rules and regulations; reports.
§
39-8.   Powers and duties.
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Board of Commissioners of the Township of Upper Dublin
5-13-1986 as Title 2, Ch. 4, of the 1986 Code; amended in its entirety 8-8-2006
by Ord. No. 1169. Amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
 
Subdivision and land development — See  Zoning — See
Ch. 212.                                  Ch. 255.
 
§ 39-1.   (Reserved)
§ 39-2.   (Reserved)
§ 39-3.   Creation; membership; compensation.
The Planning Commission of the Upper Dublin Township is hereby created pursuant
to the Act of July 31, 1968, P.L. 805, Article II, Section 201. The Commission
shall be composed of seven members, who shall serve without compensation but
may be reimbursed for necessary and reasonable expenses.
§ 39-4.   Appointment; term; vacancies.
   A.   The Board shall appoint all members of the Planning Commission.
   B.   The term of each of the members of the Commission shall be for four
years or until his successor is appointed and qualified, except that the terms
of the members first appointed pursuant to this chapter shall be so fixed that
no more than two shall be reappointed or replaced during any future calendar
year.
   C.   The Chairman of the Planning Commission shall promptly notify the Board
concerning vacancies in the Commission, and such vacancies shall be filled for
the unexpired term by the Board.
§ 39-5.   Membership qualifications.
All of the members of the Planning Commission shall be residents of the
Township. No more than two officers and/or employees of the Township may be
members of the Planning Commission.
§ 39-6.   Removal from office.
Any member of a Planning Commission, once qualified and appointed, may be
removed from office, for malfeasance, misfeasance or nonfeasance in office or
for other just cause, by a majority vote of the Board, taken after the member
has received 15 days' advance notice of the intent to take such a vote. A
hearing shall be held in connection with the vote if the member shall request
it in writing. Any appointment to fill a vacancy created by removal shall be
only for the unexpired term.
§ 39-7.   Officers; rules and regulations; reports.
   A.   The Commission shall elect its own Chairman and Vice Chairman and
create and fill such other offices as it may determine. Officers shall serve
annual terms and may succeed themselves.
   B.   The Commission may make and alter bylaws and rules and regulations to
govern its procedures consistent with the ordinances of the Township and the
laws of the commonwealth.
   C.   The Commission shall keep a full record of its business and shall
annually, by March 1 of each year, make a written report of its activities to
the Board. Interim reports may be made as often as may be necessary or as
requested by the Board.
§ 39-8.   Powers and duties. The Commission:
   A.   Shall, upon the request of the Board, revise the Comprehensive Plan,
and may from time to time submit amendments to the Comprehensive Plan.
   B.   Shall review all subdivision and land development applications and
submit its recommendations thereon to the Board. 1
   C.   Shall review such proposed amendments to
Chapter 206, Stormwater Management,
Chapter 212, Subdivision and Land Development, and
Chapter 255, Zoning, as may be referred to it by the Board or any of its
committees and may recommend amendments to any of such ordinances on its own
motion.
   D.   Shall give final approval to subdivision applications filed pursuant to
Chapter 212 wherein the only request is for lot line change(s).
   E.   May make recommendations to the Board concerning land development
policies and their implementation.
   F.   Shall promote the preservation of the natural environment of the
Township, including adherence to and enforcement of any conservation agreements
to which the Township may be a party.
1. Editor's Note: See
Ch. 212, Subdivision and Land Development.
Chapter 43
RECORDS
ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§
43-1.   Definitions.
ARTICLE II
Retention and Disposal
§
43-2.   Disposition of original documents which have been reproduced; records.
§
43-3.   Adoption of Retention and Distribution Schedule.
§
43-4.   Retention and disposal of records.
§
43-5.   Retention of records independently.
ARTICLE III
Public Records
§
43-6.   Access to public records.
§
43-7.   Posting.
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Board of Commissioners of the Township of Upper Dublin
4-8-2003 by Ord. No. 1106. Amendments noted where applicable.]
ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 43-1.   Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
   COMMISSION — The Pennsylvania Historical and Museum Commission.
   COMMITTEE — The Local Government Records Committee established by the
Municipal Records Act, the Act of December 19, 1996, P.L. 1158.
   PUBLIC RECORDS — Any account, voucher or contract dealing with the receipt
or disbursement of funds by the Township of Upper Dublin or its acquisition,
use or disposal of services or of supplies, materials, equipment or other
property and any minute, order or decision by the Township fixing the personal
or property rights, privileges, immunities, duties or obligations of any person
or group of persons, provided that the term "public record" shall not mean any
report, communication or other paper, the publication of which would disclose
the institution, progress or result of an investigation undertaken by the
Township in the performance of its official duties, except those reports filed
by the Township pertaining to safety and health in industrial plants; it shall
not include any record, document, material, exhibit, pleading, report,
memorandum or other paper, access to or the publication of which is prohibited,
restricted or forbidden by statute, law or order or decree of court, or which
would operate to the prejudice or impairment of a person's reputation or
personal security, or which would result in the loss by the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania or any of its political subdivisions (including the Township) or
commissions or State or municipal authorities of federal funds, excepting
therefrom, however, the record of any conviction for any criminal act.
   RECORDS Any papers, books, maps, photographs or other documentary materials,
regardless of physical form or characteristics, made or received by Upper
Dublin Township in pursuance of law or in connection with the exercise of its
legitimate functions and the discharge of its responsibilities.
ARTICLE II
Retention and Disposal
§ 43-2.   Disposition of original documents which have been reproduced;
records.
Whenever any officer, commission or agency of the Township shall have
photographed, microphotographed or microfilmed any record with the approval of
and in conformance with standards established by the Committee, the original
documents may be destroyed by burning or other disposition may be made thereof,
provided that the Commission shall first have given its written consent by
certificate to such destruction or other disposition, and provided that each
individual act of destruction or other disposition shall first be approved by
resolution of the Board of Commissioners. A record of items destroyed or
disposed of shall be kept for reporting purposes and shall list the date and
method of disposal, a description of the record sufficient for identification,
inclusive dates and quantity (cubic feet).
§ 43-3.   Adoption of Retention and Distribution Schedule.
A certain document, three copies of which have been and are presently on file
in the office of the Secretary of the Township, being marked and designated
"Retention and Distribution Schedule," and all amendments thereto, as proposed
by the Commission and approved and promulgated by the Committee, be and is
hereby adopted as part of this chapter as the schedule for the retention and
disposition of original or reproduced records.
§ 43-4.   Retention and disposal of records.
All public documents, whether in the form of the original document or in a
reproduced form as provided for in §
43-2 of this chapter, shall be retained for the time periods set forth in the
schedule adopted by §
43-3 of this chapter. When the retention period has expired, the documents may
be destroyed by burning or other disposition may be made thereof, provided that
the Commission shall first have given its written consent to such destruction
or other disposition and shall have certified that such destruction or disposal
is in accordance with the established schedule, and provided that each
individual act of destruction or other disposition shall be first approved by
resolution of the Board of Commissioners. A record of items destroyed or
disposed of shall be kept for reporting purposes and shall list date and method
of destruction or disposal, a description of the record sufficient for
identification, inclusive dates and quantity (cubic feet).
§ 43-5.   Retention of records independently.
Nothing in this chapter shall prevent the Township from retaining records
longer than the periods provided in schedules approved by the Board of
Commissioners.
ARTICLE III
Public Records
§ 43-6.   Access to public records.
Access to the public records of Upper Dublin Township shall be governed by the
Right To Know Law of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, Act of June 21, 1957, as
amended, and by the following regulations promulgated under the authority of
that Act:
   A.   All requests for public records shall be made in writing to the
Township Secretary and submitted in person, by mail, or by facsimile. The
request shall identify with reasonable particularity the document or documents
sought, whether the documents are to be made available for inspection and/or
duplication, and the medium in which the record is requested to be provided.
   B.   The Township Secretary shall initially determine if the document or
documents is in the Township's possession, and if so, whether one or more of
the following factors would prevent a response to the request within five
business days:
      The request requires redaction of the public record.
      The request requires retrieval of records stored in a remote location.
Bona fide and specified staffing limitations inhibit a timely response.
      A legal review is necessary to determine if the record is a public
record. The requester has not complied with the agency's policies regarding
access The requester refuses to pay the applicable fees.
   C.   Within five business days of the receipt of the request, the Township
Secretary shall respond to the request either by notifying the requester that
the document is not in the Township's possession, or that the request is
denied, or that the request is being reviewed, specifying one or more of the
reasons set forth in Subsection B hereinabove, but will be available at an
anticipated date no less than 35 days from the date the request was received,
or that the document will be available for inspection at the Township during
normal business hours. Whenever records are made available for access, the
Public Information Officer shall not be required to maintain them for that
purpose for a period in excess of 30 days prior to returning them to storage.
      (1)   If the request is denied, whether initially or after review, the
Public information Officer shall so notify the requester in a writing which
shall include:
         (a)   A description of the record requested.
         (b)   The specific reasons for the denial, including a citation of
supporting legal authority. If the denial is the result of a determination that
the record requested is not a public record, the specific reasons for that
determination by the Township.
         (c)   The typed or printed name, title, business address, business
telephone number and signature of the public official or public employee on
whose authority the denial is issued.
         (d)   The date of the response.
         (e)   The procedure to appeal the denial of access under the Act.
      (2)   The Township Secretary shall maintain a schedule of fees for the
official certification of copies, and for the duplication of records by
photocopying, printing from electronic media or microfilm, copying onto
electronic media, transmission by facsimile or other electronic means and for
any other means of duplication. Duplication fees shall be reasonable and based
on prevailing fees for comparable services provided by local business entities.
If it is estimated by the Township Secretary that the fees will exceed $100, or
if there is a balance due the Township for fees billed as the result of prior
requests, the requester shall be required to remit the estimated and or past
due fees prior to being given access to the records. Otherwise the requester
will be required to remit the actual fees for certification, duplication and
postage, if applicable, at the time the records are delivered. In addition to
the fees set forth in the schedule of fees, a requester may be charged costs
the Township necessarily incurs in complying with the request, other than a fee
for the cost of determining whether a record is a public record subject to
access.
§ 43-7.   Posting.
The regulations set forth in §
43-6 above, together with the schedule of fees maintained pursuant to this
article, shall be posted in the Township Building.
Chapter 47
SOCIAL SECURITY
§
47-1.   Findings.
§
47-2.   Authority.
§
47-3.   Secretary to establish system; payments.
§
47-4.   Appropriations.
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Board of Commissioners of the Township of Upper Dublin
5-13-1986 as Title 2,
Ch. 9, of the 1986 Code. Amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
 
Pensions — See
Ch. 35.
 
§ 47-1.   Findings.
The extension of the Social Security System to employees and officers of the
Township of Upper Dublin will be of a great benefit, not only to the employees
of the Township of Upper Dublin by providing that said employees and officers
may participate in the provisions of the Old Age and Survivors Insurance
System, but will also be of great benefit to the Township of Upper Dublin by
enabling it to attract and retain in employment the best of personnel and thus
increase the efficiency of its government.
§ 47-2.   Authority.
The 1951 Session of the General Assembly of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania,
in regular session, enacted a statute, known as Act. No. 491, which is the
enabling act provided for in Section 318 of Public Law 734, 81st Congress,
which designated the Secretary of Labor and Industry of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania to act as the state agency to implement the coverage of employees
and officers under the said Old Age and Survivors Insurance System. The
Township of Upper Dublin is hereby authorized to execute and deliver to the
state agency a plan or plans and agreement, required under Section 6 of said
enabling Act and the Social Security Act, to extend coverage to employees and
officers of the Township of Upper Dublin and do all other necessary things to
effectuate coverage of employees and officers under the Old Age and Survivors
Insurance System.
§ 47-3.   Secretary to establish system; payments.
The Secretary is hereby authorized to establish a system of payroll deduction
to be matched by payments by the Township of Upper Dublin to be made into the
Contribution Fund of the Social Security Act through the office of the state
agency and to make charges of this tax to the fund, or funds, from which wage
or salary payments are issued to employees of the Township of Upper Dublin.
Such payments are to be made in accordance with the provisions of the law and
regulations promulgated by the state agency and the Federal Security
Administrator. Such payments which are delinquent shall bear interest at the
rate of one-half of one percent (Y2 of 1%) per month until such time as
payments are made.
§ 47-4.   Appropriations.
Appropriation is hereby made from the proper fund, or funds, of the Township of
Upper Dublin in the necessary amount to pay into the contribution fund as
provided in Section 4 of the enabling Act and in accordance with the plan, or
plans, and agreement. Authority is given to the President and Secretary of the
Township of Upper Dublin to enter into an agreement with the state agency,
which agreement shall be in accordance with Act. No. 491 and with Paragraph 218
of the Social Security Act. Such plan and agreement shall provide that the
participation of this Township of Upper Dublin shall commence as of January 1,
1951.
PART II
GENERAL LEGISLATION
Chapter 54
ADULT-ORIENTED BUSINESSES
§
54-1.   Intent.
§
54-2.   Definitions.
§
54-3.   Classification.
§
54-4.   License requirements.
§
54-5.   License issuance.
§
54-6.   Fees.
§
54-7.   Inspections.
§
54-8.   License expiration.
§
54-9.   License suspension.
§
54-10.   License revocation.
§
54-11.   License transfer.
§
54-12.   Location of adult-oriented businesses.
§
54-13.   Exhibition of adult explicit films videos or live entertainment in
viewing booths.
§
54-14.   Escort agency specific requirements.
§
54-15.   Nude model studio specific requirements.
§
54-16.   (Reserved)
§
54-17.   Prohibition against children in an adult-oriented business.
§
54-18.   Appeals.
§
54-19.   Violations and penalties.
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Board of Commissioners of the Township of Upper Dublin
12-10-2002 by Ord. No. 1101. 1 Amendments noted where applicable.]
1 Editor's Note: This ordinance was adopted as
Ch. 193 but renumbered as
Ch. 54 to maintain the alphabetical organization of the Code.
§ 54-1.   Intent.
It is the intent of this chapter to regulate adult-oriented businesses in order
to promote the health, safety and welfare of the public and to establish
reasonable and uniform regulations to prevent the deleterious location and
concentration of adult-oriented businesses within the Township. The provisions
of this chapter have neither the purpose nor effect of imposing a limitation or
restriction on the content of any communicative materials, including adult-
oriented materials Similarly, it is not the intent nor effect of this chapter
to restrict or deny access by adults to adult-oriented materials protected by
the First Amendment or to deny access by the distributors and exhibitors of
adult-oriented entertainment to their intended market.
§ 54-2.   Definitions.
Unless otherwise expressly stated, the following words and phrases shall be
construed throughout this chapter to have the meanings indicated below:
   ADULT ARCADE — Any place to which the public is permitted or invited wherein
electronically, electrically or mechanically controlled still- or motion-
picture machines, projectors, video or laser disc players or other image-
producing devices are maintained to show for monetary consideration images to
five or fewer persons per machine at any one time, and where the images so
displayed are distinguished or characterized by the depicting or describing of
specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.
   ADULT CABARET — A nightclub, bar, restaurant or similar commercial
establishment which regularly features:
   A.   Persons who appear in a state of nudity or seminude; or
   B.   Live performances which are characterized by the exposure of specified
sexual activities or specified anatomical areas; or
   C.   Films, motion pictures, videocassettes, slides or other photographic
reproductions which are characterized by the depiction or description of
specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.
   ADULT MOTEL — A hotel, motel or similar commercial establishment which
offers bedroom accommodations to the public for any form of consideration and
provides patrons with closed-circuit television transmissions, films, motion
pictures, videocassettes, slides or other photographic reproductions which are
characterized by the depiction or description of specified sexual activities or
specified anatomical areas, and has a sign visible from the public right-of-way
which advertises the availability of this adult-type of photographic
reproductions.
   ADULT MOTION-PICTURE THEATER — A commercial establishment where, for any
form of consideration, films, motion pictures, videocassettes, slides or
similar photographic reproductions are regularly shown which are characterized
by the depiction or description of specified sexual activities or specified
anatomical areas.
   ADULT-ORIENTED BUSINESS — An adult arcade, adult cabaret, adult motel, adult
motion-picture theater, adult theater, escort agency, nude model studio or
sexual encounter center.
   ADULT THEATER A theater, concert hall, auditorium or similar commercial
establishment which regularly features persons who appear in a state of nudity
or seminude, or live performances which are characterized by the exposure of
specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.
   EMPLOYEE — A person who performs any service on the premises of an adult-
oriented business on a full-time, part-time or contract basis, whether or not
the person is denominated an employee, independent contractor, agent or
otherwise, and whether or not said person is paid a salary, wage or other
compensation by the operator of said business. Employee does not include a
person exclusively on the premises for repair or maintenance of the premises or
equipment on the premises or for the delivery of goods to the premises.
   ESCORT — A person who, for consideration, agrees or offers to act as a
companion, guide or date for another person or who agrees or offers to
privately model lingerie or to privately perform a striptease for another
person.
   ESCORT AGENCY — A person or business association who furnishes, offers to
furnish or advertises to furnish escorts as one of its primary business
purposes for a fee, tip or other consideration.
   ESTABLISHMENT — Includes any of the following:
   A.   The opening or commencement of any adult-oriented business as a new
business;
   B.   The conversion of an existing business, whether or not an adult-
oriented business, to any adult-oriented business;
   C.   The additions of any adult-oriented business to any other existing
adult-oriented business; or
   D.   The relocation of any adult-oriented business.
   LICENSEE — A person in whose name a license to operate an adult-oriented
business has been issued, as well as the individual listed as an applicant on
the application for a license; and in the case of an employee, a person in
whose name a license has been issued authorizing employment in an adult-
oriented business.
   NUDE MODEL STUDIO — Any place where a person who appears seminude, in a
state of nudity or who displays specified anatomical areas and is provided to
be observed, sketched, drawn, painted, sculptured, photographed or similarly
depicted by other persons who pay money or any form of consideration. Nude
model studio shall not include a proprietary school licensed by the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania or a college, junior college or university
supported entirely or in part by public taxation; a private college or
university which maintains and operates educational programs in which credits
are transferable to a college, junior college, or university supported entirely
or partly by taxation; or in a structure:
   A.   That has no sign visible from the exterior of the structure and no
other advertising that indicates a nude or seminude person is available for
viewing; and
   B.   Where, in order to participate in a class, a student must enroll at
least three days in advance of the class; and
   C.   Where no more than one nude or seminude model is on the premises at any
time.
   NUDE, NUDITY or STATE OF NUDITY — The showing of the human male or female
genitals, pubic area, vulva, anus, anal cleft, or cleavage with less than a
fully opaque covering, the showing of the female breast with less than a fully
opaque covering of any part of the nipple, or the showing of the covered male
genitals in a discernibly turgid state. [Amended 3-11-2003 by Ord. No. 1103]
   PERSON — An individual, proprietorship, partnership, corporation,
association or other legal entity.
   SEMINUDE or in a SEMINUDE CONDITION — The showing of the female breast below
a horizontal line across the top of the areola at its highest point or the
showing of the male or female buttocks. This definition shall include the
entire lower portion of the human female breast, but shall not include any
portion of the cleavage of the human female breast exhibited by a dress,
blouse, skirt, leotard, bathing suit or other wearing apparel, provided the
areola is not exposed in whole or in part.
   SEXUAL ENCOUNTER CENTER — A business or commercial enterprise that, as one
of its principal business purposes, offers for any form of consideration:
   A.   Physical contact in the form of wrestling or tumbling between persons
of the opposite sex; or
   B.   Activities between male and female persons and/or persons of the same
sex when one or more of the persons is in a state of nudity or seminude.
   SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS:
   A.   The human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if
completely and opaquely covered; or
   B.   Less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals, pubic region,
buttocks or a female breast below a point immediately above the top of the
areola.
   SPECIFIED CRIMINAL ACTIVITY — Any of the following offenses:
   A.   Prostitution or promotion of prostitution; dissemination of obscenity;
sale, distribution or display of harmful material to a minor; sexual
performance by a child; possession or distribution of child pornography; public
lewdness; indecent exposure; indecency with a child; engaging in organized
criminal activity; sexual assault; molestation of a child; gambling;
distribution of a controlled substance; or any similar offenses to those
described above under the criminal or penal code of other states or countries;
   B.   For which:
      (1)   Less than two years have elapsed since the date of conviction or
the date of release from confinement imposed for the conviction, whichever is
the later date, if the conviction is of a misdemeanor offense;
      (2)   Less than five years have elapsed since the date of conviction or
the date of release from confinement for the conviction, whichever is the later
date, if the conviction is of a felony offense; or
      (3)   Less than five years have elapsed since the date of the last
conviction or the date of release from confinement for the last conviction,
whichever is the later date, if the convictions are of two or more misdemeanor
offenses or combination of misdemeanor offenses occurring within any twenty-
four-month period.
   C.   The fact that a conviction is being appealed shall have no effect on
the disqualification of the applicant or a person residing with the applicant.
   SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITIES — Any of the following:
   A.   The fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic region,
buttocks, anus or female breasts;
   B.   Sex acts, normal or perverted, actual or simulated, including
intercourse, oral copulation, masturbation or sodomy; or
   C.   Excretory functions as part of or in connection with any of the
activities set forth in Subsections A through B above.
   SUBSTANTIAL ENLARGEMENT — The increase in the floor areas occupied by an
adult-oriented business by more than 25% as the floor areas exist on the date
this chapter takes effect.
   TRANSFER OF OWNERSHIP or CONTROL — Includes any of the following:
   A.   The sale, lease or sublease of an adult-oriented business;
   B.   The transfer of securities which constitute a controlling interest in
the adult-oriented business, whether by sale, exchange or similar means; or
   C.   The establishment of a trust, gift or other similar legal device which
transfers the ownership or control of the business except for transfer by
bequest or other operation of law upon the death of the person possessing the
ownership or control.
§ 54-3.   Classification.
Adult oriented businesses are classified as follows:
   A.   Adult arcades;
   B.   Adult cabarets;
   C.   Adult motels;
   D.   Adult motion-picture theaters;
   E.   Adult theaters;
   F.   Escort agencies;
   G.   Nude model studios; and
   H.   Sexual encounter centers.
§ 54-4.   License requirements.
   A.   A valid adult-oriented business license issued by the Township pursuant
to this chapter is required for any person to operate an adult-oriented
business.
   B.   An application for a license must be made on a form provided by the
Township.
   C.   All applicants must be qualified according to the provisions of this
chapter. The application may request and the applicant shall provide such
information (including fingerprints) as to enable the Township to determine
whether the applicant meets the qualifications established in this chapter.
   D.   If a person who wishes to operate an adult-oriented business is an
individual, the person must sign the application for license as applicant. If a
person who wishes to operate an adult-oriented business is other than an
individual, each individual who has a ten-percent or greater interest in the
business must sign the application for a license as applicant. Each applicant
must be qualified under §
54-5 and each applicant shall be considered a licensee if a license is granted.
   E.   The completed application for an adult-oriented business license shall
contain the following information and shall be accompanied by the following
documents:
      (1)   If the applicant is:
         (a)   An individual, the individual shall state his/her legal name and
any aliases and submit proof that he/she is 18 years of age;
         (b)   A partnership, the partnership shall state its complete name and
the names of all partners, whether the partnership is general or limited, and a
copy of the partnership agreement, if any;
         (c)   A corporation, the corporation shall state its complete name,
the date of its incorporation, evidence that the corporation is in good
standing under the laws of its state of incorporation, the names and addresses
of all officers, directors and principal stockholders (i.e., the stockholders
beneficially owning a 10% or greater interest in a corporation) and the name of
the registered corporate agent and the address of the registered office for
service of process.
      (2)   If the applicant intends to operate the adult-oriented business
under a name other than that of the applicant, he or she must state the adult-
oriented business's fictitious name and submit the required registration
documents.
      (3)   Whether the applicant has been convicted of a specified criminal
activity as defined in this chapter, and, if so, the specified criminal
activity involved, the date, place and jurisdiction of each.
      (4)   -Whether the applicant has had a previous license under this
chapter or other similarly adult-oriented business ordinances from another
municipality or jurisdiction denied, suspended or revoked, including the name
and location of the adult-oriented business for which the permit was denied,
suspended or revoked, as well as the date of the denial, suspension or
revocation, and whether the applicant has been a partner in a partnership or an
officer, director or principal stockholder of a corporation that is licensed
under this chapter whose license has previously been denied, suspended or
revoked, including the name and location of the adult-oriented business for
which the permit was denied, suspended or revoked as well as the date of
denial, suspension or revocation.
      (5)   Whether the applicant holds any other licenses under this chapter
or other similar adult-oriented business code or regulation from another
municipality or jurisdiction, and, if so, the names and locations of such other
licensed businesses.
      (6)   The single classification of license for which the applicant is
filing
      (7)   The location of the proposed adult-oriented business, including a
legal description of the property, street address and telephone number(s), if
any.
      (8)   The applicant's mailing address and residential address.
      (9)   A recent photograph of the applicant(s).
      (10)   The applicant's driver's license number, social security number
and/or his/her state or federally issued tax identification number.
      (11)   A sketch or diagram showing the configuration of the premises,
including a statement of total floor space occupied by the business. The sketch
or diagram need not be professionally prepared, but it must be drawn to a
designated scale or drawn with marked dimensions of the interior of the
premises to an accuracy of plus or minus six inches.
      (12)   A current certificate and straight-line drawing prepared within 30
days prior to application by a registered land surveyor depicting the property
lines and the structures containing any existing adult-oriented businesses
within 1,000 feet of the property to be certified; the property lines of any
established religious institution or place of worship, school or public park or
recreation area within 1,000 feet of the property to be certified. For purposes
of this section, a use shall be considered existing or established if it is in
existence at the time an application is submitted.
      (13)   If an applicant wishes to operate an adult-oriented business which
shall exhibit on the premises, in a viewing room or booth of less than 150
square feet of floor space, films, videocassettes other video reproductions, or
live entertainment, which depict specified sexual activities or specified
anatomical areas, then the applicant shall comply with the application
requirements set forth in this chapter.
§ 54-5.   License issuance.
   A.   Within 60 days after receipt of a completed adult-oriented business
license application, the Township shall approve or deny the issuance of a
license to an applicant. The Township shall approve the issuance of a license
to an applicant unless it is determined by a preponderance of the evidence that
one or more of the following findings is true:
      (1)   An applicant is under 18 years of age.
      (2)   An applicant is overdue in payment to the Township of taxes, fees,
fines or penalties assessed against or imposed upon him/her in relation to any
business.
      (3)   An applicant has failed to provide information reasonably necessary
for issuance of the license or has falsely answered a question or request for
information on the application form.
      (4)   An applicant has been denied a license by the Township to operate
an adult-oriented business within the preceding 12 months or whose license to
operate an adult-oriented business has been revoked within the preceding 12
months.
      (5)   An applicant has been convicted of a specified criminal activity
defined in this chapter.
      (6)   The premises to be used for the adult-oriented business have not
been approved by the Fire Marshal and the Code Enforcement Department as being
in compliance with the applicable laws and codes.
      (7)   The license fee required by this chapter has not been paid.
      (8)   An applicant of the proposed establishment is in violation of or is
not in compliance with any of the provisions of this chapter.
   B.   The license, if granted, shall state on its face the name of the person
or persons to whom it is granted, the expiration date, the address of the
adult-oriented business and the classification for which the license is issued
pursuant to §
54-3. All licenses shall be posted in a conspicuous place at or near the
entrance to the adult-oriented business so that they may be easily read at any
time.
   C.   The Township officials shall complete their certification that the
premises is in compliance or not in compliance within 60 days of receipt of the
application by the Township.
   D.   An adult-oriented business license shall issue for only one
classification as found in §
54-3.
   E.   An adult-oriented business license granted pursuant to this chapter
shall be subject to annual renewal upon the written application of the
applicant and a finding by the Township that the applicant has not been
convicted of any specified criminal activity as defined in this chapter or
committed any act during the existence of the previous license which would be
grounds to deny the initial license application. The renewal of the license
shall be subject to the payment of the fee as set forth in §
54-6.
§ 54-6.   Fees.
   A.   Every application for an adult-oriented business license (whether for a
new license or for renewal of an existing license) shall be accompanied by a
five-hundred-dollar nonrefundable application and investigation fee.
   B.   In addition to the application and investigation fee required above,
every adult-oriented business that is granted a license (new or renewal) shall
pay to the Township an annual nonrefundable license fee of $250 within 30 days
of license issuance or renewal.
   C.   All license applications and fees shall be submitted to the Code
Enforcement Department of the Township.
§ 54-7.   Inspections.
An applicant or licensee shall permit representatives of the Police Department,
Fire Marshal, Code Enforcement Department or other Township departments or
agencies to inspect the premises of an adult-oriented business for the purpose
of insuring compliance with the law at any time it is occupied or open for
business.
§ 54-8.   License expiration.
   A.   Each license shall expire one year from the date of issuance and may be
renewed only by making application as provided in §
54-4. Application for renewal shall be made at least 60 days before the
expiration date, and when made less than 60 days before the expiration date,
the expiration of the license will not be affected.
   B.   When the Township denies renewal of a license, the applicant shall not
be issued a license for one year from the date of denial.
§ 54-9.   License suspension.
The Township shall suspend a license for a period not to exceed 30 days if it
determines that a licensee or an employee of a licensee has violated or is not
in compliance with any section of this chapter.
§ 54-10.   License revocation.
   A.   The Township shall revoke a license if a cause of suspension in §
54-9 occurs and the license has been suspended within the preceding 12 months.
   B.   The Township shall revoke a license if it determines that:
      (1)   A licensee gave false or misleading information in the material
submitted during the application process;
      (2)   The act of possession, use or sale of controlled substances has
occurred on the premises;
      (3)   The act of prostitution has occurred on the premises;
      (4)   An adult-oriented business has operated on the premises during a
period of time when the licensee's license was suspended;
      (5)   A licensee is delinquent in payment to the Township, county or
state for any taxes or fees past due;
      (6)   A licensee has refused to allow an inspection of the adult-oriented
business premises as authorized by this chapter.
   C.   When the Township revokes a license, the revocation shall continue for
one year, and the licensee shall not be issued an adult-oriented business
license for one year from the date the revocation became effective.
§ 54-11.   License transfer.
A licensee shall not transfer his/her license to another, nor shall a licensee
operate an adult- oriented business under the authority of a license at any
place other than the address designated in the application.
§ 54-12.   Location of adult-oriented businesses.
   A.   No adult-oriented business may be operated within 1,000 feet of:
      (1)   A church, synagogue, mosque, temple or building which is used
primarily for religious worship and related religious activities; or
      (2)   The following public or private educational/child-care facilities:
child day-care facility, nursery school, preschool, kindergarten, elementary
school, intermediate school, junior high school, middle school, high school,
vocational school, secondary school, special education school; school includes
the school grounds, but does not include facilities used primarily for another
purpose and only incidentally as a school; or
      (3)   An entertainment business which is oriented primarily towards
children or family entertainment.
   B.   No adult-oriented business may be operated, established or
substantially enlarged within 1,000 feet of another adult-oriented business.
   C.   No adult-oriented business may be operated, established or maintained
in any building, structure or portion thereof containing another adult-oriented
business.
   D.   For the purpose of Subsection A of this section, measurement shall be
made in a straight line, without regard to the intervening structures or
objects, from the nearest portion of the building or structure used as the part
of the premises where an adult-oriented business is conducted to the nearest
property line of the premises of a use listed in Subsection A. The presence of
a municipal, county, or other political subdivision boundary shall be
irrelevant for purposes of calculating and applying the distance requirements
of this section.
   E.   For purposes of Subsection B of this section, the distance between any
two adult-oriented businesses shall be measured in a straight line, without
regard to the intervening structures or objects or political boundaries, from
the closest exterior wall of the structure in which each business is located.
   F.   Any adult-oriented business lawfully operating on the effective date of
this section, December 10, 2002, that is in violation of Subsections A through
E of this section shall be deemed a nonconforming use. Such nonconforming uses
shall not be increased, enlarged, extended or altered, except that the use may
be changed to a conforming use. If two or more adult-oriented businesses are
within 1,000 feet of one another and otherwise in a permissible location, the
adult-oriented business which was first established and continually operating
at a particular location is the conforming use and the later established
business(es) is/are nonconforming.
   G.   An adult-oriented business lawfully operating as a conforming use is
not rendered a nonconforming use by the location, subsequent to the grant or
renewal of the adult- oriented business license, of a use listed in Subsection
A of this section within 1,000 feet of the adult-oriented business. This
provision applies only to the renewal of a valid license and does not apply
when an application for a license is submitted after a license has expired or
been revoked.
   H.   No adult-oriented business shall be operated in a manner that will
permit the observation of any material or activities depicting, describing or
relating to specific sexual activities or specified anatomical areas from any
public way or from any location outside the building or area of such
establishment. This provision shall apply to any display, decoration, sign,
show window or other opening. No exterior door or window on the premises shall
be propped or kept open at any time while the business is open, and any
exterior windows shall be covered with opaque covering at all times.
§ 54-13.   Exhibition of adult explicit films, videos or live entertainment in
viewing booths.
A person who operates or causes to be operated an adult-oriented business which
exhibits on the premises in a viewing room of less than 150 square feet of
floor space a film, videocassette, live entertainment or other video
reproduction, which depicts specified sexual activities or specified anatomical
areas, shall comply with the following requirements:
   A.   Upon application for an adult-oriented business license, the
application shall be accompanied by a diagram of the premises showing a plan
thereof specifying the location of one or more manager's stations and the
location of all overhead lighting fixtures and designating any portion of the
premises in which patrons will not be permitted. A manager's station may not
exceed 32 square feet of floor area. The diagram shall also designate the place
at which the permit will be conspicuously posted, if granted. A professionally
prepared diagram in the nature of an engineer's or architect's blueprint shall
not be required; however, each diagram should be oriented to the north or to
some designated street or object and should be drawn to a designated scale or
with marked dimensions sufficient to show the various internal dimensions of
all areas of the interior of the premises to an accuracy of plus or minus six
inches. The Township may waive the foregoing diagram for renewal applications
if the applicant adopts a diagram that was previously submitted and certifies
that the configuration of the premises has not been altered since it was
prepared.
   B.   The application shall be sworn to be true and correct by the applicant.
   C.   No alteration in the configuration or location of a manager's station
may be made without the prior approval of the Township.
   D.   It is the duty of the licensee of the premises to ensure that at least
one employee is on duty and situated in each manager's station at all times
that any patron is present inside the premises.
   E.   The interior of the premises shall be configured in such a manner that
there is an unobstructed view from a manager's station of every area of the
premises to which any patron is permitted access for any purpose, excluding
rest rooms. Rest rooms may not contain video reproduction equipment. If the
premises has two or more manager's stations designated, then the interior of
the premises shall be configured in such a manner that there is an unobstructed
view of each area of the premises to which any patron is permitted access for
any purpose from at least one of the manager's stations. The view required in
this subsection must be by direct line of sight from the manager's station.
   F.   It shall be the duty of the licensee to ensure that the view area
specified in Subsection E remains unobstructed by any doors, curtains,
partitions, walls, merchandise, display racks or other materials and, at all
times, to ensure that no patron is permitted access to any area of the premises
which has been designated as an area in which patrons will not be permitted in
the application filed pursuant to Subsection A of this section.
   G.   No viewing room may be occupied by more than one person at any time.
   H.   The premises shall be equipped with overhead lighting fixtures of
sufficient intensity to illuminate every place to which patrons are permitted
access at an illumination of not less than 5.0 footcandles as measured at the
floor level.
   I.   It shall be the duty of the licensee to ensure that the illumination
described above is maintained at all times that any patron is present in the
premises.
   J.   No licensee shall allow openings of any kind to exist between viewing
rooms or booths.
   K.   No person shall make or attempt to make an opening of any kind between
viewing booths or rooms.
   L.   The licensee shall, during each business day, regularly inspect the
walls between the viewing booths to determine if any openings or holes exist.
   M.   The licensee shall cause all floor coverings in viewing booths to be
nonporous, easily cleanable surfaces, with no rugs or carpeting.
   N.   The licensee shall cause all wall surfaces and ceilings surfaces in
viewing booths to be constructed of, or permanently covered by, nonporous,
easily cleanable material. No wood, plywood, composition board or other porous
material shall be used within 48 inches of the floor.
§ 54-14.   Escort agency specific requirements.
   A.   An escort agency shall not employ any person under the age of 18 years.
   B.   A person commits an offense if the person acts as an escort or agrees
to act as an escort for any person under the age of 18 years.
§ 54-15.   Nude model studio specific requirements.
   A.   A nude model studio shall not employ any person under the age of 18
years.
   B.   No person under the age of 18 years may appear seminude or in a state
of nudity in or on the premises of a nude model studio. It is a defense to
prosecution under this subsection if the person under 18 years was in a rest
room not open to public view or visible to any other person.
   C.   No person may appear in a state of nudity or knowingly allow another to
appear in a state of nudity in an area of a nude model studio premises which
can be viewed from the public right-of-way.
   D.   A nude model studio shall not place or permit a bed, sofa or mattress
in any room on the premises, except that a sofa may be placed in a reception
room open to the public.
   E.   It is a defense to prosecution under this section that a person
appearing in a state of nudity did so in a modeling class operated:
      (1)   By a proprietary school, licensed by the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania; a college, junior college or university supported entirely by
partly by taxation;
      (2)   By a private college or university which maintains and operates
educational programs in which credits are transferable to a college, junior
college or university supported entirely or partly by taxation; or
      (3)   In a structure:
         (a)   Which has no sign visible from the exterior of the structure and
no other advertising that indicates a nude person is available for viewing; and
         (b)   Where, in order to participate in a class, a student must enroll
at least three days in advance of the class; and
         (c)   Where no more than one nude model is on the premises at any one
time.
§ 54-16.   (Reserved) 2
2 Editor's Note: Former §
54-16, Public nudity, was repealed 3-11-2003 by Ord. No. 1103.
§ 54-17.   Prohibition against children in an adult-oriented business.
No person may knowingly allow a person under the age of 18 years on the
premises of an adult-oriented business.
§ 54-18.   Appeals.
Upon the grant or denial of an application for a license, or the grant or
denial of the renewal thereof, or upon the suspension or revocation of any
license, an appeal may be taken to the Board of Commissioners. Such appeal
shall be made in writing within 30 days after such decision has been made,
shall set forth the reasons therefor, shall be verified by affidavit and filed
with the Township Secretary. The Board of Commissioners will schedule the date
for a hearing at which time the appellant and his representatives shall have
the right to appear and be heard.
§ 54-19.   Violations and penalties.
   A.   Any person or persons, firm or corporations who or which shall fail to
comply with any of the provisions of this chapter, including the procuring of a
license to operate an adult-oriented business within the Township of Upper
Dublin, shall be liable, upon conviction for a first offense, to a fine of $500
for each and every day he, she, they or it shall operate an adult-oriented
business contrary to the provisions of this chapter; and for a second offense,
and each and every offense thereafter, in a like manner to a fine of $1,000 for
each and every day, together with costs of prosecution in each case.
   B.   A person who operates or causes to be operated an adult-oriented
business without a valid license or otherwise in violation of this chapter is
subject to a suit for injunction as well as prosecution for the civil
violations set forth above. Each day an adult-oriented business so operates is
a separate offense or violation.
Chapter 57
ALARMS
§
57-1.   Definitions.
§
57-2.   Timing mechanism required; exceptions.
§
57-3.   (Reserved).
§
57-4.   Registration of installation and permit required.
§
57-5.   Requirements.
§
57-6.   User manual required.
§
57-7.   Repair service.
§
57-8.   (Reserved).
§
57-9.   (Reserved).
§
57-10.   Fees.
§
57-11.   (Reserved).
§
57-12.   Violations and penalties.
§
57-13.   Enforcement.
§
57-14.   Verified response.
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Board of Commissioners of the Township of Upper Dublin
5-13-1986 as Title 7,
Ch. 1, of the 1986 Code. Amendments noted where applicable.]
§ 57-1.   Definitions.  
[Amended 3-11-2014 by Ord. No. 14-1286, § 1]
The following definitions shall apply in the interpretation and enforcement of
this chapter:
   ALARM COMPANY—An entity that provides a service or protective system, or
group of such systems, operated privately for an alarm user by a person, firm
or corporation, and which maintains trained personnel and accepts signals or
other messages from automatic protection devices at a protected premises
reporting an emergency at a stated location and which has a duty to relay
immediately by live voice or other communication method through designated
channels, including and primarily through 9-1-1 telephone call answering points
to emergency responders, particularly the Police Department or Fire Company.
[Added 3-11-2014 by Ord. No. 14-1286]
   ALARM EQUIPMENT SUPPLIER—Any person, firm or corporation who sells or leases
or installs automatic protection devices.
   ALARM REGISTRATION FORM—Form provided by the Code Enforcement Department to
be updated and returned annually to the Code Enforcement Department by every
alarm user; also “permit.” [Added 12-12-1995 by Ord. No. 900]
   ALARM SYSTEM—Any commercial or residential automatic protection device or
any commercial audible alarm system. [Added 12-12-1995 by Ord. No. 900]
   ALARM USER—Any individual, partnership, unincorporated association,
corporation, trust or other legally recognized entity in control of any
premises having an automatic protection device which notifies the Police
Department or Fire Company, either directly or indirectly, and requires the
response of the Police Department or Fire Company. [Added 7-13-1993 by Ord. No.
843; amended 12-12-1995 by Ord. No. 900; 3-11-2014 by Ord. No. 14-1286]
   ANSWERING SERVICE—A service whereby trained employees in attendance at all
times receive prerecorded voice messages from automatic protection devices
reporting an emergency at a stated location and who have the duty to relay
immediately by live voice any such emergency message over a designated or
direct trunkline to the communications center of the Police or Fire Department.
   AUDIBLE ALARM—Any device, bell, horn or siren which is attached to the
interior or exterior of a building and emits a warning signal audible outside
the building and designed to attract attention when activated by criminal act
or other emergency requiring the Police Department or Fire Company to respond.
[Amended 12-12-1995 by Ord. No. 900; 3-11-2014 by Ord. No. 14-1286]
   AUTOMATIC PROTECTION DEVICE—Also “automatic protective device.” An
electrically operated instrument, composed of sensory apparatus and related
hardware, which automatically transmits an alarm or signal to be relayed to the
Police Department or Fire Company. [Amended 12-12-1995 by Ord. No. 900; 3-11-
2014 by Ord. No. 14-1286]
   CENTRAL STATION PROTECTIVE SYSTEM—A protective system, or group of such
systems, operated privately for customers by a person, firm or corporation
which maintains supervisors and accepts recorded messages from automatic
protection devices at a central station having trained operators and guards in
attendance at all times that have the duty to take appropriate action upon
receipt of a signal or message, including the relaying of messages by
designated or direct trunkline to the communications center of the Police or
Fire Department.
   CHIEF OF FIRE DEPARTMENT—The Chief of the Fire Department of Upper Dublin
Township.
   CHIEF OF POLICE—The Chief of the Upper Dublin Township Police Department.
   CODE ENFORCEMENT DEPARTMENT—The Code Enforcement Department of the Township
of Upper Dublin. [Added 12-12-1995 by Ord. No. 900]
   DESIGNATED TRUNKLINE [Repealed 12-12-1995 by Ord. No. 900]
   DIRECT TRUNKLINE [Repealed 12-12-1995 by Ord. No. 900]
   EMERGENCY RESPONDER [FIRST RESPONDER]—An individual or organization that
responds in an official or officially authorized capacity to situations that
endanger health, safety, or property. [Added 3-11-2014 by Ord. No. 14-1286]
   FALSE ALARM—Any signal activated by an automatic protection device, any
audible alarm or any other kind of direct or indirect signal given the Police
Department or Fire Company to which police or firemen respond, which alarm or
signal is not the result of a burglary, fire, robbery or similar emergency.
[Amended 12-12-1995 by Ord. No. 900; 3-11-2014 by Ord. No. 14-1286]
   FIRE COMMUNICATIONS CENTER—The fire communications room and other rooms
which house auxiliary communication equipment.
   FIRE DEPARTMENT—The Township of Upper Dublin Fire Department. [Amended 3-11-
2014 by Ord. No. 14-1286]
   FIRE MARSHAL—The Fire Marshal appointed by the Board of Commissioners of
Upper Dublin Township.
   INTERMEDIARY—An alarm company as herein defined. [Amended 3-11-2014 by Ord.
No. 14-1286]
   KEY—To use a telephone line and equipment for transmitting a message either
directly or indirectly by an automatic protection device.
   PERMIT—See “alarm registration form.” [Amended 12-12-1995 by Ord. No. 900]
   POLICE COMMUNICATIONS CENTER—The police communications room and other rooms
which house auxiliary communication equipment.
   POLICE DEPARTMENT—The Upper Dublin Township Police Department. [Amended 12-
12-1995 by Ord. No. 900]
   PRIMARY TRUNKLINE [Repealed 12-12-1995 by Ord. No. 900]
   SECONDARY TRUNKLINE [Repealed 12-12-1995 by Ord. No. 900]
   SECRETARY—The Secretary of the Township of Upper Dublin.
   VERIFIED RESPONSE—The process by which an alarm company attempts to contact
a person at the premises protected by the alarm system by telephone and/or
other electronic means to determine whether an alarm signal is valid or the
result of an actual emergency before requesting the dispatch of emergency
personnel in an attempt to avoid an unnecessary alarm dispatch request. A
person on site at the protected premises who can properly be identified must
verify whether an alarm signal is a valid emergency alarm prior to notification
of an alarm to emergency responders. [Added 3-11-2014 by Ord. No. 14-1286]
§ 57-2.   Timing mechanism required; exceptions. 
[Amended 7-13-1993 by Ord. No. 843]
Except as provided in Subsections A and B of this section, alarm users must
equip audible alarms with a timing mechanism that will disengage the audible
alarm after a maximum period of 15 minutes and leave the alarm disengaged until
the alarm is serviced. Audible alarms without such a timing mechanism shall be
unlawful in the Township and must be disconnected by the alarm user within 90
days from the effective date of this chapter, or the alarm user will be subject
to a penalty as set forth in §
57-12 of this chapter. The following shall be excepted from the provisions of
this section:
   A.   Audible fire alarm signals provided for the evacuation of occupants of
industries, institutions and other similar premises.
   B.   Audible signals provided to indicate water flow in an automatic fire
sprinkler system.
§ 57-3.   (Reserved). 1
1 Editor's Note: Former §
57-3, Keying to direct primary and secondary lines, was repealed 12-12-1995 by
Ord. No. 900.
§ 57-4.   Registration of installation and permit required. 
[Amended 7-13-1993 by Ord. No. 843; 12-12-1995 by Ord. No. 900; 3-11-2014 by
Ord. No. 14-1286, § 2]
   A.   Before any alarm system is installed, enlarged, extended or modified, a
permit to use such alarm must be obtained from the Code Enforcement Department.
A permit for alarm system use shall be in addition to any permits required by
applicable building and construction codes. [Amended 3-11-2014 by Ord. No. 14-
1286]
   B.   Within 120 days from the effective date of this chapter and thereafter
within 30 days of the installation of any new or modified alarm system, every
alarm user in the Township shall furnish as required by the Code Enforcement
Department a registration of such installation, which alarm registration form
shall include, but not be limited to, the following information: [Amended 3-11-
2014 by Ord. No. 14-1286]
      (1)   The name, residence and telephone number of the user.
      (2)   The address where the device is installed and the telephone number
of that address.
      (3)   The name, address and telephone number of the alarm company
authorized to provide verified response as required by this chapter or gain
access to the address where the device is installed. [Amended 3-11-2014 by Ord.
No. 14-1286]
      (4)   The name and telephone number of the alarm equipment supplier and
of any person other than the alarm equipment supplier who is responsible for
the maintenance and repair of the automatic protection device.
      (5)   A local emergency name and telephone number for the premises.
      (6)   Any additional information requested on the alarm registration
form.
   C.   (Reserved). [Amended 3-11-2014 by Ord. No. 14-1286]
   D.   All information famished pursuant to these sections shall be kept
confidential and shall be for the use of the Township only. [Amended 3-11-2014
by Ord. No. 14-1286]
   E.   Failure to provide registration information required by this section
shall subject the alarm user to a penalty as set forth in §
57-12 of this chapter.
§ 57-5.   Requirements. 
[Amended 7-13-1993 by Ord. No. 843; 12-12-1995 by Ord. No. 900]
Automatic protection devices installed in the Township shall meet the following
requirements:
   A.   The sensory mechanism used in connection with an automatic protective
device must be adjusted to suppress false indications of fire or intrusion, so
that the device will not be actuated by impulses due to fleeting pressure
changes in water pipes, short flashes of light, the rattling or vibrating of
doors and windows, vibrations to the premises caused by the passing of vehicles
or any other force not related to genuine alarms.
   B.   All components comprising such a device must be maintained by the user
in good repair to assure maximum reliability of operation.
   C.   Equipment is required to be installed in such a way as to neutralize
electrical surges on the alarm system.
   D.   In all newly installed fire alarm systems, the sensory mechanism used
in smoke detectors for fire alarm systems shall be installed with an alarm
verification system that will attempt to reset the detector once prior to
transmitting an alarm activation signal. In the event that a second signal is
received from the same zone or an adjacent zone prior to verification, the
system will go into alarm without delay.
§ 57-6.   User manual required. 
[Amended 12-12-1995 by Ord. No. 900]
Each alarm equipment supplier who sells or leases an automatic protection
device in the Township after the effective date of this chapter shall furnish
operating instructions, a circuit diagram and maintenance manual to the user.
§ 57-7.   Repair service.
   A.   Each alarm equipment user in the Township shall arrange for repair
service to be available directly or through an agent on a 24-hour-per-day
basis, seven days a week, to repair such device or to correct any malfunction
that may occur. [Amended 12-12-1995 by Ord. No. 900]
   B.   The alarm user shall be responsible for having the device disconnected
or repaired as quickly as possible after notice that the automatic protection
device is not functioning properly.
§ 57-8.   (Reserved). 
[Amended 3-11-2014 by Ord. No. 14-1286, § 3]
§ 57-9.   (Reserved). 
[Amended 3-11-2014 by Ord. No. 14-1286, § 4]
§ 57-10.   Fees. 
[Amended 12-12-1995 by Ord. No. 900; 3-11-2014 by Ord. No. 14-1286, § 5]
Alarm users shall pay such permit and permit renewal or repair fees as the
Township shall set by resolution from time to time. 2  The Township may set
permit fees and adopt regulations to implement this chapter from time to time.
2 Editor's Note: See fee schedule.
§ 57-11.   (Reserved). 
[Amended 3-11-2014 by Ord. No. 14-1286, § 6]
§ 57-12.   Violations and penalties. 
[Amended 8-9-1988 by Ord. No. 753; 12-19-1989 by Ord. No. 776; 7-13-1993 by
Ord. No. 843; 12-12-1995 by Ord. No. 900]
   A.   During a period of 30 days after installation of a new alarm system or
the modification of an existing system, the owner thereof shall be permitted
three false activations without penalty only if the alarm system has been
registered in accordance with §
57-4 of this chapter. If the alarm system is not registered in accordance with
the requirements of this chapter, each false activation will incur a penalty as
outlined in Subsection C below.
   B.   False activations shall incur penalties as follows:
      (1)   Upon the expiration of the 30-day test period provided for in
Subsection A of this section, the owner of an alarm system that is registered
pursuant to §
57-4 of this chapter shall be permitted one false activation without penalty
for any cause whatsoever, including misuse, accidental activation or equipment
malfunction.
      (2)   If more than one false activation occurs within 12 months following
a false activation, the alarm user will be subject to a penalty as outlined in
Subsection C below.
      (3)   If a false activation occurs more than 12 months after a previous
false activation and the alarm system is registered in accordance with the
requirements of this chapter, the subsequent false activation shall be without
penalty for any cause whatsoever, including misuse, accidental activation or
equipment malfunction.
      (4)   If a false activation occurs more than 12 months after a previous
false activation but the alarm system is not registered in accordance with the
requirements of this chapter, the subsequent false activation will incur a
penalty in accordance with Subsection C below.
   C.   The Township shall notify an alarm user of a false activation on his
property. Subject to the provisions of Subsections A and B above, within a
twelve-month period following a false activation without penalty, or if the
alarm system is not registered in accordance with this chapter, the alarm user
may elect to avoid prosecution by paying the Township $25 for the first
penalized false activation, $100 for the second penalized false activation and
$300 for the third penalized false activation, provided that payment is made
within 48 hours after receipt of the notice.
   D.   For all subsequent false activation violations in any 12-month period
following a false activation without penalty or in each case where the alarm
user does not elect to avoid prosecution as set forth above, the alarm user
shall be liable for prosecution and, if found guilty, shall pay a fine of not
more than $600, plus costs of prosecution, to be collectible before any
District Justice as like fines or penalties are now by law collectible.
   E.   If an alarm system is not registered in accordance with the
requirements of this chapter, for every alarm activation, whether false or for
cause, in addition to any penalty the alarm user may incur as outlined above,
the alarm user shall pay a fine of $50.
   F.   Violation of any of the regulations set forth in this chapter other
than false activations as outlined above shall result in a fine of not less
than $25 nor more than $600, plus costs of prosecution, to be collectible
before any District Justice as like fines or penalties are now by law
collectible.
§ 57-13.   Enforcement. 
[Amended 12-12-1995 by Ord. No. 900; 3-11-2014 by Ord. No. 14-1286, § 7]
Authorized officials of the Code Enforcement Department, the Fire Marshal, or
any police officer are hereby empowered to enforce all provisions of this
chapter and to write citations for any alarm violations.
§ 57-14.   Verified response. 
[Added 3-11-2014 by Ord. No. 14-1286, § 8]
An alarm user and/or property owner shall implement verified response for a
fire alarm system installed in a residential dwelling unit within one year of
the effective date of this section.
   A.   Alarm verification. An alarm company shall not retransmit a fire alarm
signal to emergency responders until an attempt is made to verify the accuracy
of a fire alarm signal originating from a residential dwelling unit.
Verification shall be made within 90 seconds of receipt of a fire alarm signal.
If the alarm user or other properly identified person on site at the dwelling
unit is contacted and can confirm that no emergency condition exists, then the
alarm signal shall not be retransmitted. In all other situations, the alarm
signal shall be immediately retransmitted.
   B.   Alarm verification exceptions. Waterflow alarms, and manual pull
station alarms shall be immediately retransmitted without alarm verification
when they can be distinguished by the alarm company from other fire alarm
systems on the protected premises.
Chapter 61
AMUSEMENT GAMES
§
61-1.   Purpose.
§
61-2.   Definitions.
§
61-3.   License required.
§
61-4.   License application.
§
61-5.   Issuance of license; fee.
§
61-6.   Display.
§
61-7.   Transferability of license.
§
61-8.   Number of games.
§
61-9.   Site requirements.
§
61-10.   Permitted zones.
§
61-11.   Prohibited locations.
§
61-12.   Operation requirements; compliance required.
§
61-13.   Termination, suspension or revocation of license.
§
61-14.   Violations and penalties.
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Board of Commissioners of the Township of Upper Dublin
5-13-1986 as Title 7,
Ch. 11, of the 1986 Code. Amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
 
Disorderly conduct — See  Fees — See fee schedule.
Ch. 86.
 
§ 61-1.   Purpose.
The provisions of this chapter are designed to promote and protect the health,
safety, morals and general welfare of the residents of the Township of Upper
Dublin by regulating the installation and operation of amusement games within
the township.
§ 61-2.   Definitions.
As used in this chapter, unless expressly stated, the following terms shall
have the meanings indicated:
   AMUSEMENT GAME — Any automatic, mechanical, electric or electronic machine
or device used or designed to be operated as a game, or for entertainment or
amusement, by the insertion of a coin, token, money or other article, or by the
payment of money to have it activated. This definition shall not include the
following:
   A.   Jukebox.
   B.   Rides.
   C.   Bowling alleys.
   D.   Merchandise machines.
   E.   Photographic machines.
   F.   Any game or device maintained within a residence for the sole use of
the occupants thereof and their guests.
§ 61-3.   License required.
No person, firm, association, corporation or other entity shall place, possess,
keep, maintain, exhibit, use or operate, or permit to be placed, possessed,
kept, maintained, exhibited, used or operated, any amusement game in or upon
any building, premises, store or other public or quasi-public place in their
possession or under their control within the Township of Upper Dublin without
first obtaining a license therefor.
§ 61-4.   License application.
   A.   Application for an amusement game license shall be made to the Township
Manager, or his authorized representative, on forms to be prescribed by him,
which shall set forth, among other information deemed to be required and
prescribed by the Manager, the following:
      (1)   The name and address of the applicant, if individuals, or, if a
partnership, association or other entity, the names, residences and occupations
of each member of the partnership, association or other entity, and, if a
corporation, the address of its registered office and principal place of
business and the names and addresses of its officers and directors.
      (2)   Any prior criminal record of the applicant or of anyone associated
with the applicant as a partner, associate, agent or employee or as an officer
or director of a corporation.
      (3)   The manufacturer, name, dimensions, serial number and a general
description, including a statement of ownership, of the amusement game.
      (4)   The address of the place where the amusement game is to be placed,
possessed, kept, maintained, exhibited, used or operated.
      (5)   A floor plan of the building, premises, store or other public or
quasi-public place showing the proposed placement of the amusement game on the
applicant's premises, in form and detail designated by the Manager.
      (6)   Authorization for the Fire Marshal or other duly authorized
township official to inspect the building, premises, store or other public or
quasi-public place for which the application is sought.
   B.   Compliance with all township zoning requirements is required.
   C.   Upon receipt of a properly completed and filed application, the
Township Manager shall transmit the same to the appropriate township officials,
including but not limited to the Chief of Police, Building and Zoning Officer,
Fire Marshal, as the Manager deems appropriate, in order to verify the accuracy
of the information submitted on the application, compliance with all local
ordinances, state and federal laws and suitability of the applicant and the
premises for an amusement game license.
   D.   Any applicant whose application for an amusement game license has been
denied by the Township Manager shall have the right to have the denial reviewed
by the Board of Commissioners upon filing a written notice of appeal within 30
days after notice of denial.
§ 61-5.   Issuance of license; fee.
   A.   Upon approval of an application and payment of the proper fee, the
Township Manager shall issue a license to the applicant for the location and
placement of an amusement game.
   B.   The fee for each license per amusement game upon the applicant's
premises shall be provided in the township fee schedule. 1 Said license shall
be issued for the calendar year commencing January 1 and expiring December 31.
Said license shall be renewed annually on or before December 31 by the filing
of a written renewal application, accompanied by the license fee for each
renewal. The license fee for any license issued in any calendar year after July
1 shall be 1/2 of the annual license fee. [Amended 1-10-1995 by Ord. No. 879]
   C.   The fee fixed herein may be modified from time to time by resolution of
the Board of Commissioners.
1 Editor's Note: See fee schedule.
§ 61-6.   Display.
The license shall be displayed in a manner approved by the Township Manager.
§ 61-7.   Transferability of license.
   A.   License may be transferred to another amusement game by the license
holder within the calendar year of issuance upon obtaining a transfer license
from the township and paying the sum provided in the township fee schedule. 2
   B.   The transfer license shall be affixed to the amusement game and
displayed in accordance with §
61-6 of this chapter.
   C.   A license may be transferred to a purchaser of the business where the
amusement game is located for the balance of the unexpired license term.
2 Editor's Note: See fee schedule.
§ 61-8.   Number of games.
The number of amusement games permitted in any one building, premises, store or
other public or quasi-public place shall be limited to three unless a special
exception has been granted by the Zoning Hearing Board in conformance with the
provisions of
Chapter 255, Zoning.
§ 61-9.   Site requirements.
   A.   There shall be not less than 30 square feet of usable floor space on
the premises for each amusement game.
   B.   The holder of the license may locate the amusement games on the
premises as he wishes, subject to the approval of the Township Manager and Fire
Marshal to ensure safe and adequate ingress and egress.
§ 61-10.   Permitted zones.
An amusement game license may be issued for a building, premises, store or
other public or quasi-public place located within the following zoning
districts only:
   A.   CR Commercial Retail District.
   B.   SC Shopping Center District.
§ 61-11.   Prohibited locations.
No amusement game shall be licensed, placed, possessed, kept, maintained,
exhibited, used or . operated in any location the entrance or exit to which is
within 600 feet of any entrance to or exit from any school, park, playground or
church.
§ 61-12.   Operation requirements; compliance required.
   A.   The owner of any amusement game within the Township of Upper Dublin
shall comply with all provisions of law, ordinance, rule or regulation
applicable thereto and relating to the conduct of the business in connection
with which the game is used and the use and maintenance of the premises where
it is located.
   B.   The owner of the game shall maintain good order on the premises at all
times. The lack of good order on the premises shall include but not be limited
to the following:
      (1)   Excessive noise, fighting and rowdy behavior. Excessive noise shall
be determined in accordance with §
158-12 of this Code. [Amended 5-13-1997 by Ord. No. 943]
      (2)   Possession or consumption of alcoholic beverages, except upon
premises licensed for on-premises consumption thereof.
      (3)   Gambling.
      (4)   The use of marijuana or any controlled substance possession of
which is prohibited by law.
   C.   Amusement games may be in operation between the hours of 10:00 a.m. and
12:00 midnight only, subject to the following:
      (1)   Games shall not be operated by school-age children during school
hours when schools are open.
      (2)   Games shall not be operated after 10:00 p.m. on Sundays through
Thursdays by any person under the age of 18 years when schools are open the
following day.
      (3)   Games shall at no time be operated after 10:00 p.m. by any person
under the age of 16 years unless accompanied by and under the supervision of a
parent or guardian.
      (4)   The aforesaid time limitations on operation shall not apply to
premises licensed for on-premises consumption of alcoholic beverages, provided
that persons under the legal drinking age are prohibited from operating
amusement games on the premises at all times.
   D.   The owner or occupant of any premises where amusement games are located
shall maintain adequate supervision of the premises at all times when the games
are in operation. No amusement game shall be available for use or operation
unless it is under the control of and supervision by one or more persons over
the age of 18 years who shall ensure that it is operated in compliance with
this chapter.
   E.   Any premises where amusement games are located shall maintain a minimum
light level of not less than 10 footcandles.
   F.   The interior portion of the premises, where the amusement games are
located, shall, except as hereafter provided, be visible to the public from the
exterior of the premises. This provision shall not apply to premises with fewer
than three amusement games or to premises licensed for on-premises consumption
of alcoholic beverages.
   G.   Any premises where amusement games are located which school-age
children patronize shall provide and maintain bicycle racks or other adequate
provision for parking of bicycles.
§ 61-13.   Termination, suspension or revocation of license.
   A.   Any license issued pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall
terminate upon any of the following occurrences:
      (1)   Discontinuance of the license holder's business.
      (2)   Removal of permitted amusement games from the business premises.
   B.   [Amended 5-13-1997 by Ord. No. 943] All licenses issued pursuant to the
provisions of this chapter are subject to suspension or revocation by the
Township Manager upon any of the following occurrences:
      (1)   Willful misrepresentation made by the license holder or his agent
in applying for the license.
      (2)   Conviction of the license holder for any felony or misdemeanor
involving force, violence, moral turpitude or involving any violation of this
chapter or other provisions of the Upper Dublin Township Code or other state or
federal laws pertaining to business operation.
      (3)   The existence of a nuisance to the general public, to persons
residing in the vicinity or business located in the vicinity resulting from
loitering by persons on or near the premises in which the license holder's
amusement games are located or any loud or unreasonable noise caused by the
amusement games or person playing the amusement games. The existence of a
nuisance and/or excessive noise shall be determined in accordance with
Chapter 158 of this Code.
      (4)   The violation of §
61-12 of this chapter.
   C.   Prior to any action suspending or revoking any license, the Township
Manager shall give the license holder written notice of such action, affording
an opportunity to the license holder to correct any such deficiencies forming
the basis for the suspension or revocation.
§ 61-14.   Violations and penalties.
   A.   Any person, firm, association, corporation or other entity who shall
violate any of the provisions of §
61-12, "Operation requirements; compliance required," of this chapter shall be
notified of such violation and given an opportunity to correct the same within
10 days.
   B.   Any person, firm, association, corporation or other entity who, after
receiving notice as hereinbefore provided, continues to be in violation of any
of the provisions of this chapter shall, upon summary conviction before a
District Justice, be sentenced to pay a fine of not less than $300 nor more
than $1,000 and costs of prosecution for each violation. [Amended 8-9-1988 by
Ord. No. 753; 1-10-1995 by Ord. No. 879]
Chapter 64
ANIMALS
ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§
64-1.   Purpose.
§
64-2.   Definitions.
§
64-3.   Permitted animals.
§
64-4.   Animals permitted with license.
§
64-5.   Prohibited animals.
§
64-6.   Board of Animal Regulation.
§
64-7.   Zoological garden or menagerie.
§
64-8.   Fees.
§
64-9.   Violations and penalties.
ARTICLE II
Animals at Large
§
64-10.   Dogs.
§
64-11.   Cats.
§
64-12.   Disposal of unclaimed dogs and cats.
ARTICLE III
Rabies Control
§
64-13.   Construal of provisions.
§
64-14.   Implementation.
§
64-15.   Violations and penalties.
ARTICLE IV
Dog Control
§
64-16.   Police to assist in enforcement.
§
64-17.   Cats.
§
64-18.   Defecation.
§
64-19.   Odors and noise.
§
64-20.   Declaration of nuisance.
§
64-21.   Animal runs.
§
64-22.   Enforcement.
§
64-23.   Civil action.
§
64-24.   Violations and penalties.
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Board of Commissioners of the Township of Upper Dublin
5-13-1986 as Title 7, Ch. 2, of the 1986 Code. Amendments noted where
applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
 
Fees — See fee schedule.
 
ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 64-1.   Purpose.
This article is enacted to regulate the maintenance, keeping or possession of
animals within the Township of Upper Dublin in order to promote the health,
safety and general welfare of its inhabitants. Where the provisions of this
article impose greater restrictions than those of any other ordinances,
regulation or resolution, the provisions of this article shall be controlling.
Where the provisions of any other ordinances, such as
Chapter 255, Zoning, regulation or resolution impose greater restrictions than
this article, the provisions of such other ordinance, regulation or resolution
shall be controlling.
§ 64-2.   Definitions.
The following definitions shall apply in the interpretation and enforcement of
this article:
   ANIMAL — Includes not only animals so-called, but also birds, fish, reptiles
and insects.
   BOARD — Board of Animal Regulation.
   MENAGERIE — A collection of animals not listed in §
64-3 of this article kept in cages or enclosures for exhibition by a full-time
professional trainer.
   PERSON — Any individual, partnership, association, corporation, estate or
trust, as well as all officers, agents, servants, employees or others acting
for any of the same, and shall be taken as applying in the singular or plural,
as the case may require.
   PET SHOP — A retail shop primarily in the business of selling animals and
maintaining, keeping or possessing any animal for which a permit may be issued
by the Board under §
64-4 hereto at any time during the calendar year or any part thereof.
   ZOOLOGICAL GARDEN — A collection of animals not listed in §
64-3 of this article maintained in a park or garden by an educational nonprofit
or governmental corporation under the supervision of at least one professional
zoologist.
§ 64-3.   Permitted animals.
Any person is permitted to maintain, keep or possess within the Township of
Upper Dublin any of the following animals, which classifications shall be
strictly construed:
   A.   Cage birds (the term includes parakeets, parrots, canaries, finches,
love birds, mynah birds and other birds ordinarily kept in cages in households;
it excludes wild birds captured or rescued and kept in cages).
   B.   Cats (Fells catus).
   C.   Cows (Bos taurus), beef and dairy; subject to zoning.
   D.   Frogs (Salientia).
   E.   Dogs (Canis familiaris), including prairie but excepting dingoes.
   F.   Goats (Capra hircus), subject to zoning.
   G.   Goldfish and carp (Cyprindae).
   H.   Guinea pigs (Cavia cobaya).
   I.   Hamsters (Cricetus and Mesocricetus).
   J.   Horses and ponies (Equus caballus), subject to zoning.
   K.   Lizard (Sauna, except those listed under animals prohibited in the
township, § 65-5).
   L.   Mice, white (Mus musculus).
   M.   Mink, subject to zoning.
   N.   Poultry (ducks, chickens, swans, geese, turkeys, guinea fowl and
pigeons kept for show or racing), subject to zoning.
   O.   Rabbits, restricted to European type rabbits (Oryctolagus cuniculus),
commonly kept as pets or livestock.
   P.   Rats, white (Rattus norvegicus).
   Q.   Salamanders (any tailed amphibian).
   R.   Sheep (Ovis aries), subject to zoning.
   S.   Snakes, nonpoisonous and native to the Township of Upper Dublin.
   T.   Toads (Salientia).
   U.   Tropical fish, limited to those customarily maintained in a household
aquarium except piranhas.
   V.   Turtles (Chelonia).
   W.   Llamas and alpacas (Lama), subject to zoning. 1
   X.   Ferrets (Mustela furo). 2
1 Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code; see
Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
2 Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code; see
Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
§ 64-4.   Animals permitted with license.
   A.   No person other than a registered veterinarian in the course of his
professional duties is permitted to maintain, keep or possess within the
Township of Upper Dublin any animal not specifically mentioned in §
64-3 hereof unless application for a permit shall have been made by such person
to the Board of Animal Regulation and a permit shall have been issued therefor.
Among such animals for which a permit may be issued by the Board are the
following:
      (1)   Coati-mundis (Nasua).
      (2)   Crocodilians (Crocodilia), under thirty (30) inches in length;
includes baby alligators and caymans
      (3)   Eagles (Aquila and Haliaeetus). Subject to state and federal laws.
      (4)   Falcons (Falconidae). Subject to state and federal laws.
      (5)   Foxes (Vulpes and Urocyon).
      (6)   Iguanas (Iguanidae).
      (7)   Jaguarondis (Herpailurus).
      (8)   Kinkajous (Potos).
      (9)   Margays (Fells tigrina).
      (10)   Monkeys, white-throated capuchins and other Cebus monkeys; night
monkeys or douroucoulis (Aotus); Marmosets (Callimico, Callithrix and
Leontocebus); squirrel monkeys (Saimiri); and Wooly monkeys (Lagothrix).
      (11)   Ocelots (Fells pardalis).
      (12)   Otters (Lutrinae).
      (13)   Skunks (Mephitinae).
      (14)   Snakes, nonpoisonous and not native to the Township of Upper
Dublin, including pythons and boas under six (6) feet in length.
   B.   The application for a permit shall have attached thereto a registered
veterinarian's health certificate for each animal to be covered by the permit
and shall be verified by an affidavit and shall set forth the following:
      (1)   The type and number of animals to be covered by the permit.
      (2)   The purpose of keeping such animals
      (3)   The period for which a permit is requested.
      (4)   A description of the quarters in which the animals will be kept,
including plans and specifications thereof, where appropriate.
      (5)   Circumstances, if any, under which the animals will be removed from
quarters.
      (6)   Biographical information of the applicant and any other person to
be placed in charge of the animals, with particular emphasis on the knowledge
of such persons about the animals in question and experience of such persons in
handling the animals in question.
      (7)   Such additional information as the Board of Animal Regulation may
require.
§ 64-5.   Prohibited animals.
No person is permitted to maintain, keep or possess within the Township of
Upper Dublin any of the following animals, which classifications shall be
broadly construed:
   A.   All poisonous animals, including rear-fang snakes
   B.   Apes, including Chimpanzees (Pan); Gibbons (Hylobates); Gorillas
(Gorilla); Orangutans (Pongo); and Siamangs (Symphalangus).
   C.   Baboons (Papio, Mandrillus).
   D.   Bears (Ursidae).
   E.   Bison (Bison bison).
   F.   Cheetahs (Acinonyx jubatus).
   G.   Crocodilians (Crocodilia), 30 inches in length or more.
   H.   Constrictor snakes six feet in length or more.
   I.   Coyotes (Canis latrans).
   J.   Deer (Cervidae). Includes all members of the deer family; for example,
white-tailed deer, elk, antelope, moose.
   K.   Elephants (Elephas and Loxodonta).
   L.   Gamecocks, i.e., fighting birds.
   M.   Hippopotami (Hippopotamidae).
   N.   Hyenas (Hyaenidae).
   O.   Jaguars (Felis onca).
   P.   Leopards (Felis pardus).
   Q.   Lions (Fells leo).
   R.   Lynxes (Lynx).
   S.   Monkeys, old world (Cercopithecidae).
   T.   Ostriches (Struthio).
   U.   Piranha fish (Characidae).
   V.   Pumas (Felis concolor); also known as cougars, mountain lions and
panthers.
   W.   Raccoons (Procyon).
   X.   Rhinoceroses (Rhinocerotidae).
   Y.   Sharks (Class Chondrichthyes).
   Z.   Snow leopards (Felis uncia). AA. Swine (Suidae).
   BB.   Tigers (Fells tigris).
   CC.   Wolves (Canis lupus).
§ 64-6.   Board of Animal Regulation.
   A.   The Board of Animal Regulation shall consist of the members of the
Board of Health. This Board shall have the power to review or cause to be
reviewed each application for a permit, and may either approve or reject such
application, or require modification of the application. When the Board has
approved the application, the Township Health Enforcement Officer shall issue
the permit. The permit shall be personal and not transferable and shall be
issued for a calendar year or part thereof. The Health Enforcement Officer, on
advice of the Board, shall also have the power to revoke a permit.
   B.   [Amended 1-10-1995 by Ord. No. 879; 5-13-1997 by Ord. No. 943] The
Board shall also have the power, with the consent of the Township
Commissioners, to make such rules and regulations as it shall deem necessary to
carry out the purpose of this article and, on request of the Township Health
Enforcement Officer, to determine whether any person is violating any
provisions of this article or the rules and regulations adopted hereunder. No
regulations of the Board of Animal Regulation shall take effect until approved
by the Board of Commissioners. In making such determination, the Board shall
consider the following standards:
      (1)   All animals and animal quarters shall be kept in clean and sanitary
condition. Adequate ventilation shall be maintained.
      (2)   The permittee shall use every reasonable precaution to ensure that
animals are not teased, abused, mistreated, annoyed, tormented or in any manner
made to suffer by any person or by any means.
      (3)   Animals which are enemies by nature, or are temperamentally
unsuited, shall not be quartered together or so near each other as to cause
animals fear, or to be abused, tormented or annoyed.
      (4)   The permittee shall maintain premises so as to eliminate offensive
odors or excessive noise. The existence of offensive odors and/or excessive
noise shall be determined in accordance with
Chapter 158 of this Code.
      (5)   The permittee shall not permit any condition causing disturbance of
peace and quiet of his neighbors.
      (6)   Animals must be maintained in quarters so constructed as to prevent
their escape. The permittee assumes full responsibility for recapturing any
animal that escapes from his premises. The permittee shall make adequate
provisions and safeguards to protect the public from the animals.
      (7)   Every person shall conform to all present and future laws of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania and the United States of America, the ordinances
of the township and the rules and regulations of the Board in any way connected
with animals, including specifically anti-cruelty laws.
§ 64-7.   Zoological garden or menagerie.
[Amended 1-10-1995 by Ord. No. 879]
The Board of Animal Regulation may approve a permit for a zoological garden or
a menagerie limiting the latter to no more than one month in any one calendar
year, which includes animals otherwise prohibited under §
64-4 hereof, provided that:
   A.   The Board is satisfied that the applicant and all other persons placed
in charge of such animals are experts in their knowledge of the care and
handling of such animals.
   B.   The highest standards are applied in safeguarding the public and no
human being lives or resides within 100 feet of the quarters in which the
animals will be kept.
   C.   The applicant provides the Board with a certificate of public liability
insurance in form and amount satisfactory to the Board issued by a carrier
satisfactory to the Board.
§ 64-8.   Fees.
The applicant for any permit hereunder shall, at the time of his application,
pay to the township a fee in accordance with the fee schedule adopted by the
Board of Commissioners and found in the Township fee schedule.
§ 64-9.   Violations and penalties.
[Amended 7-12-1988 by Ord. No. 751; 1-10-1995 by Ord. No. 879]
Any person who violates any provisions of this Article or of any rules and
regulations made pursuant hereto shall be liable, for each offense, upon
conviction before any Justice of the Peace, to a fine of not more than $600,
together with the costs of prosecution, and each day's failure to comply with
any such provision shall constitute a separate violation. In addition, the
township may institute any appropriate action or proceeding, whether by legal
process or otherwise, to restrain, correct or abate a continuing violation of
any provision of this Article or of any rules and regulations made pursuant
hereto.
ARTICLE II
Animals at Large
§ 64-10.   Dogs.
[Amended 1-10-1995 by Ord. No. 879]
   A.   Hereafter, it shall be unlawful for an owner or keeper of any dog or
dogs, licensed or unlicensed, to permit such dog or dogs to run at large
unaccompanied by the owner or keeper. When not on the premises of the owner or
keeper, a dog must be leashed at all times when on foot. The leash shall be of
sturdy material, not more than eight feet in length.
   B.   It shall be unlawful for any owner of any dog or dogs, unlicensed or
licensed, to permit such dog or dogs to run at large unaccompanied by the
owner. The word "owner," as used in this section, shall include every person
having a right of proprietorship or ownership in a dog and every person who
keeps or harbors a dog or has it in his care, and every person who permits a
dog to remain on or about any premises occupied by him. A dog shall be deemed
"at large" if off the premises of the owner and not on a leash. 1
1 Editor's Note: Former Secs. 2.02 and 2.03, Duty of Township Police and
Impoundment of Licensed Dogs, which immediately followed this section, were
deleted 1-10-1995 by Ord. No. 879. In addition, the township intends to comply
and to require compliance with any state law or regulatory provisions on dogs.
§ 64-11.   Cats.
[Added 1-10-1995 by Ord. No. 879; amended 6-13-2000 by Ord. No. 1035]
   A.   Hereafter, it shall be unlawful for an owner or keeper of any cat or
cats to permit such cat or cats to run at large unaccompanied by the owner or
keeper without identification on said cat or cats demonstrating vaccination
against rabies. The following means of identification demonstrating vaccination
shall be acceptable: collar and tag, a microchip inserted under the skin, a
tattoo on the inside of the ear or thigh, an ear tip or an ear notch. The word
"owner," as used in this section, shall include every person having a right of
proprietorship or ownership in a cat and every person who keeps, feeds or,
harbors a cat or has it in his care, and every person who permits a cat to
remain on or about any premises occupied by him. A cat shall be deemed "at
large" if off the premises of the owner and not on a leash.
   B.   The Board of Health of Upper Dublin Township shall be empowered to
issue a declaration prohibiting cats from running at large in the Township of
Upper Dublin if an epidemic of rabies is confirmed in the township or in any
municipality adjacent to the township. The end of the period of prohibition
shall be determined by the Board of Health. Notice of the declaration
prohibiting cats from running at large and notice of the end of the period of
prohibition shall be given to the public by means of an announcement in a
newspaper of general circulation within the township and by means of
appropriate announcements through other available media sources. Following the
issuance of such declaration, it shall be unlawful for the owner of any cat to
allow such cat off a leash while outside.
§ 64-12.   Disposal of unclaimed dogs and cats.
[Amended 6-13-2000 by Ord. No. 1035].
Any dog, dogs, cat or cats not claimed within a reasonable time, as determined
by the township police, and by virtue of the provisions of this article, shall
be disposed of in accordance with the Acts of Assembly of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania in such case made and provided.
§ 64-13.   Construal of provisions.
[Amended 6-13-2000 by Ord. No. 1035]
It is the intent that this article shall be supplemental to any laws of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania hereinbefore or hereinafter adopted covering dogs
and/or cats within the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania and specifically in the
Township of Upper Dublin. Should any of the provisions of this article be
contrary to the provisions of any Act of Assembly, it is the intent that the
Act of Assembly shall supersede this article.
§ 64-14.   Implementation.
[Amended 6-13-2000 by Ord. No. 1035]
The proper officers of the township are authorized to enter into such
agreements or contracts with any individual or individuals or corporations as
may be reasonably necessary to implement the provisions of this article in
regard to the care and custody of such dogs and cats detained by the township
pursuant to the provisions of this article and to provide for the reasonable
compensation of such person, persons or corporations for such services.
§ 64-15.   Violations and penalties.
[Amended 12-19-1989 by Ord. No. 776]
   A.   Any owner, person, firm, association or corporation who shall violate
or fail or refuse to comply with any provision of this article shall, upon
conviction in a summary proceeding before a District Justice of the Township of
Upper Dublin, be sentenced to pay a fine of not less than $100 and not more
than $1,000, plus costs of prosecution.
   B.   For the first offense under this article, any owner, person, firm,
association or corporation can avoid prosecution by reporting to the police
station within 72 hours after receipt of such notice and paying the sum of $25;
for a second offense, such prosecution may be avoided by reporting to the
police station within 72 hours after receipt of such notice and paying the sum
of $50; for a third offense, such prosecution may be avoided by reporting to
the police station within 72 hours after receipt of such notice and paying the
sum of $100; for a fourth and subsequent offenses, the owner, person, firm,
association or corporation shall be prosecuted in accordance with Subsection A
above.
   C.   A new and separate offense shall be deemed to have been committed for
each day that any violation of the provisions of this article shall continue to
exist.
ARTICLE III
Rabies Control
§ 64-16.   Police to assist in enforcement.
The Police are directed to assist the Health Enforcement Officer of Agriculture
of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania in the enforcement of the provisions of the
Dog Law of 1965, enacted December 22, 1965, P.L. 1124, Act No. 437, 2 and any
amendments thereto.
2 Editor's Note: See 3 P.S. § 459-101 et seq.
§ 64-17.   Cats.
For the purpose of protecting the public health and welfare, and the
protection, to the extent possible, of persons from rabies, not only from dogs
but from cats, the vaccination against rabies, as required by the Dog Law of
1965, shall apply to cats.
ARTICLE IV
Dog Control
[Added 8-11-1992 by Ord. No. 825; amended in its entirety 1-10-1995 by Ord. No.
879]
§ 64-18.   Defecation.
   A.   No person owning, harboring, keeping or in charge of any dog shall
cause or allow such dog to soil, defile or defecate upon any other person's
private property without the permission of such other person or upon any public
property. Where such person shall immediately remove all feces deposited by the
dog and dispose of the same in a sanitary manner, the nuisance created by
defecation- shall be considered abated, and such person shall not be in
violation of this article.
   B.   Guide dogs accompanying a blind person, dogs used to assist any other
physically handicapped person or dogs used in any police or Fire Department
activities shall be exempt from provisions of this article.
§ 64-19.   Odors and noise.
   A.   No person shall keep or harbor any animal in the township so as to
create offensive odors, excessive noise 3 or unsanitary conditions which are a
menace to the health or safety of the public. The existence of offensive odors
and/or excessive noise shall be determined in accordance with
Chapter 158 of this Code. [Amended 5-13-1997 by Ord. No. 943]
   B.   Howling animals. Any animal which by habitual barking, howling or
yelping disturbs the peace or endangers the health or safety of persons is
creating a nuisance. It shall be unlawful for any owner or person having
custody of such animals(s) to permit it to create such nuisance.
3 Editor's Note: See also the provisions on noise in
Ch. 86, Disorderly Conduct, and 255, Zoning.
§ 64-20.   Declaration of nuisance.
   A.   Any animal which scratches, digs or defecates upon any lawn, tree,
shrub, plant, building or any other public or private property, other than the
property of the owner or person in charge or control of such animal, is
considered to be a nuisance.
   B.   No person being the owner or in charge or control of any animal shall
allow or permit such animal to commit a nuisance on any school grounds,
township park or other public property or upon any private property other than
that of the owner or person in charge or control of such animal without the
permission of the owner of such property. Where the owner or person in charge
or control of such animal immediately removes all feces deposited by such
animal and disposes of the same in a sanitary manner, such nuisance shall be
considered abated.
§ 64-21.   Animal runs.
Animal runs must be kept clean and cannot drain onto premises other than that
of owner or person in charge or control of such animal(s).
§ 64-22.   Enforcement.
   A.   The provisions of this article shall be enforced by the Health
Department and the Animal Control Officer, their duly authorized
representatives, any officer of the township or any affected party.
   B.   In undertaking the enforcement of this article, the township is
assuming only to promote the general welfare.. The township is not assuming,
nor is it imposing on any of its officers or employees, an obligation for
breach of which it is liable in money damages to any person who claims that any
breach proximately caused injury.
   C.   A violation of this article shall not be considered negligence per se.
§ 64-23. Civil action.
   A.   Except as provided in Subsection B below, any citizen may commence a
civil action on his own behalf against any person except the township,
Commonwealth or United States, or any department or agency thereof, to enforce
the provisions of this article.
   B.   No action may be commenced under this subsection:
      (1)   Prior to 30 days after the plaintiff has given written notice of
the alleged violation to the Health Enforcement Officer and to the alleged
violator; or
      (2)   If the township has commenced and is diligently prosecuting a civil
or criminal proceeding against the alleged violator that incorporates the
citizen's cause of action.
   C.   For the purpose of this section, the term "citizen" means any person or
persons having an interest which is or may be adversely affected.
§ 64-24.   Violations and penalties.
Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this article shall be
liable, on conviction thereof in a summary proceeding, to pay a fine of not
less than $25 nor more than $600 for each offense, unless a lesser penalty is
provided thereunder. Whenever such person shall have been notified by service
of a citation in a summary proceeding, by service of a notice of violation by
the Health Enforcement Officer or by receipt of a written notification from an
affected person that he or she is committing such violation of this article,
each day that he or she shall thereafter continue the violation shall
constitute a separate offense punishable by a like fine.
Chapter 69
BRUSH, GRASS AND WEEDS
§
69-1.   Definitions.
§
69-2.   Prohibited acts.
§
69-2.1.   Regulation of bamboo.
§
69-3.   Land developers.
§
69-4.   Farm land.
§
69-5.   Enforcement.
§
69-6.   Notice for removal.
§
69-7.   Abatement by Township.
§
69-8.   Municipal claims.
§
69-9.   Violations and penalties.
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Board of Commissioners of the Township of Upper Dublin
5-13-1986 as Title 5, Ch. 8, of the 1986 Code. Amendments noted where
applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
 
Property maintenance — See
Ch. 180.
 
§ 69-1.   Definitions. 
[Amended 2-10-2015 by Ord. No. 15-1298, § 1]
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
   BAMBOO — Any monopodial (running) bamboo of the tribe “bambuseae,”
including, but not limited to, the genus Phyllostachys, and Pseudosasa as well
as the common bamboo, golden bamboo, and arrow bamboo. [Added 2-10-2015 by Ord.
No. 15-1298]
   BAMBOO OWNER — Any property owner or resident who has planted and/or grows
bamboo, or maintains bamboo on his property, or permits bamboo to grow or
remain on the property even if the bamboo has spread from an adjoining
property. Any owner of or resident at property on which bamboo is found will be
considered a bamboo owner, except any property owner or resident who:
         (a)   Did not plant or grow or cause bamboo to be planted or grown on
his property.
         (b)   Has provided satisfactory proof to the Township that, within a
reasonable amount of time after discovering the encroachment of bamboo onto the
property from an adjoining neighbor, he advised the owner of such property of
his objection to the encroachment of bamboo.
         (c)   Has initiated steps for the removal of the bamboo from his
property.
[Added 2-10-2015 by Ord. No. 15-1298]
   GRASS — Various green plants with bladelike leaves usually densely grown and
cultivated for lawns.
   NOXIOUS PLANTS — Harmful distasteful or obnoxious plants, such as but not
limited to, ragweed, goldenrod, Canadian thistle, milkweed, mustard,
honeysuckle, poison ivy, poison oak, poison sumac, jimson weed and burdock.
   PERSON — An individual, firm, corporation, partnership, unincorporated
association or municipality.
   WEEDS — Growths of wild vegetation having little or no value.
§ 69-2.   Prohibited acts. 
[Amended 2-10-2015 by Ord. No. 15-1298, § 2]
It is hereby declared to be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation, being
an owner of any improved or unimproved lot, to permit or allow any of the
following to occur on such lot, each of the following acts hereby being
declared a public nuisance: [Amended 2-10-2015 by Ord. No. 15-1298]
   A.   Permit the lot to become overgrown with grass, weeds or noxious plants
exceeding the height indicated in the BOCA Property Maintenance Code. 1  Those
lots exceeding one acre in size may be permitted to remain in their natural
state except for a depth of 25 feet around the perimeter thereof.  [Amended 1-
10-1995 by Ord. No. 879]
   B.   Permit any hedge, shrub, bush or tree to obstruct normal passage along
streets, lanes, highways or sidewalks or to impair vision at highway
intersections whenever it is judged by the duly authorized Township enforcement
authority that a hazardous condition exists.
   C.   Allow poison ivy, poison oak or honeysuckle to grow in trees.
   D.   Permit bamboo to be planted or grown on the lot, or to spread to an
adjoining lot, it being the intent to prohibit bamboo within the Township,
except as provided herein. Bamboo found growing on a property shall constitute
presumptive evidence that bamboo was planted and/or grown by and/or with the
consent of the bamboo owner. [Added 2-10-2015 by Ord. No. 15-1298]
1 Editor's Note: See
Ch. 180, Property Maintenance.
§ 69-2.1.   Regulation of bamboo. 
[Added 2-10-2015 by Ord. No. 15-1298, § 3]
The following special regulations pertain to the planting and maintenance of
bamboo.
   A.   Any bamboo that has been planted or otherwise permitted to grow on any
lot within the Township prior to the effective date of this Section may remain
on such property subject to compliance with this Section.
      (1)   Bamboo shall not be planted, maintained, or otherwise permitted to
exist within 40 feet of the edge of the pavement or traveled portion of a
public road in the Township, within 40 feet of the property line of any
Township/public property, or within 25 feet of the property line of an
adjoining or neighboring property.
      (2)   Each bamboo owner shall be required to take such measures as are
reasonably expected to prevent such bamboo from invading the setbacks set forth
in subsection (1) above. Such measures shall include, but are not limited to,
installation of sheathing comprised of metal or other material impenetrable by
bamboo at a sufficient depth within the property line or lines where the
running bamboo is planted or is growing to prevent such growth or encroachment
prohibited herein.
   B.   Removal.
      (1)   In the event that bamboo growing on a bamboo owner’s property
invades or grows on adjoining or neighboring property that is owned or held on
behalf of the Township, the Township will notify the bamboo owner in writing
that the bamboo has invaded the Township property and that the bamboo owner is
responsible for the removal of such running bamboo from the Township property.
This notice shall be sent via certified mail, return receipt requested and by
regular mail to the latest address of the bamboo owner on file with the
Township and a copy of the notice shall also be posted at the bamboo owner’s
property.
      (2)   In the event that the bamboo owner does not remove or contract for
the removal of the bamboo from the Township property, or does not make an
arrangement agreeable to the Township for removal of such bamboo within 60 days
from the date the Township first provided notice pursuant to the above, the
Township, at its discretion, may remove or arrange for the removal of such
bamboo from the Township property. The bamboo owner shall be liable and
responsible to the Township for the cost incurred for removal of the bamboo
from the Township property. Such costs may be assessed against the property of
the bamboo owner.
   C.   Replanting prohibited. Any bamboo either planted or caused to be
planted or existing on a property prior to the effective date of this Section
may not be replanted or replaced once such running bamboo is or has become, for
any reason, dead, destroyed, uprooted, or otherwise removed.
§ 69-3.   Land developers. 
[Added 1-10-1995 by Ord. No. 879]
Builders and land developers must remove all tree trunks, stumps, limbs and
brush from land under development and level all ground so the same will not
retain pools of water.
§ 69-4.   Farm land.
All farm land is to be excluded from the provisions of this chapter, excepting
that owners of farms shall cut all thistle and poison prior to blooming or
going to seed.
§ 69-5.   Enforcement.
The Health Officer or other duly authorized agent of the Board of Commissioners
shall have the power and the duty to enforce the provisions of this chapter.
§ 69-6.   Notice for removal. 
[Amended 2-8-2000 by Ord. No. 1021]
The Township will provide one notice, by actual delivery, certified mail,
registered mail or first class mail, to the owner, as set forth and at the
address indicated on the tax duplicate for the property, of the duty to cut or
remove such plant growth within seven days after the date of such notice.
§ 69-7.   Abatement by Township. 
[Amended 2-10-2015 by Ord. No. 15-1298, § 4]
In the event that any person shall refuse or neglect to abate such nuisance
within the time set forth in §
69-6 above, the Township may cause such grass, weeds, noxious plants or bamboo
to be cut or removed and bill the owner for the cost thereof, plus an
administrative fee of 10%.
§ 69-8.   Municipal claims.
In the event of a refusal or failure to pay said bill within 30 days of said
billing, the Township may file a municipal claim for such costs and expenses,
together with a penalty of 10% in the manner provided for by law for the
collection of municipal claims.
§ 69-9.   Violations and penalties. 
[Amended 7-12-1988 by Ord. No. 751; 1-10-1995 by Ord. No. 879]
Any person who shall violate this chapter shall, upon conviction before any
District Justice, be sentenced to pay a fine not exceeding $1,000 and costs of
prosecution for each and every offense. Each day’s continuance of the offense
shall constitute a new offense.
Chapter 73
BUILDING CONSTRUCTION - UNIFORM CONSTRUCTION CODE
ARTICLE I
Construction Standards
§
73-1.   Adoption of standards.
§
73-2.   Modification of standards.
§
73-3.   Construal of provisions.
ARTICLE II
One- and Two-Family Dwellings
§
73-4.   Adoption of standards.
§
73-5.   Modifications to standards.
ARTICLE III
Uniform Construction Code
§
73-6.   Election and adoption of Uniform Construction Code.
§
73-7.   Duties and powers of Code Official.
§
73-8.   Permits.
§
73-9.   Construction documents.
§
73-10.   Fees.
§
73-11.   Inspections.
§
73-12.   Certificate of occupancy.
§
73-13.   Service utilities.
§
73-14.   Board of Appeals.
§
73-15.   Violations.
§
73-16.   Repeal and savings clause.
§
73-17.   Changes to Uniform Construction Code
 
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Board of Commissioners of the Township of Upper Dublin
as indicated in article histories. Amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
 
Numbering of buildings — See   Property maintenance — See
Ch. 76.                          Ch. 180.
Fees — See fee schedule.       Subdivision and land development — See
                                 Ch. 212.
Fire prevention — See          Swimming pools — See
Ch. 117.                         Ch. 218.
Flood damage prevention — See  Zoning — See
Ch. 122.                         Ch. 255.
Plumbing — See                  
Ch. 174.
 
ARTICLE I
Construction Standards
[Adopted 1-10-1995 by Ord. No. 880]
§ 73-1.   Adoption of standards.
A certain document, three copies of which are on file in the office of the
Secretary of the Township of Upper Dublin, being marked and designated as the
“BOCA National Building Code, Twelfth Edition, 1993,” as published by the
Building Officials and Code Administrators International, Inc., be and is
hereby adopted as the Building Code of the Township of Upper Dublin in the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, for the control of buildings and structures as
herein provided; and each and all of the regulations, provisions, penalties,
conditions and terms of said BOCA National Building Code are hereby referred
to, adopted and made a part hereof as if fully set out in this article, with
the additions, insertions, deletions and changes, if any, prescribed in §
73-2 of this article.
§ 73-2.   Modification of standards.
[Amended 11-14-2006 by Ord. No. 1175]
Changes from the International Building Code, to the Building Code of the
Township of Upper Dublin, are as follows:
   A.   Section 101.1, insert: “the Township of Upper Dublin.”
   B.   Section 112.3.1, insert: "The currently adopted fee schedule of the
Township of Upper Dublin."
   C.   Section 116.4, insert: “... a summary offense, punishable by a fine of
not more than $1,000.”
   D.   Section 117.2, insert: “... of not more than $1,000.”
   E.   Section 121.0, add the following:
      SECTION 121.0 MEANS OF APPEAL
      121.1 Appeals: An appeal from any decision of the Code Official may be
taken to the Commissioners. Such appeal shall be made in writing within 10 days
after such decision has been made, shall be verified by affidavit and filed
with the Township Secretary. The appellant or his representatives shall have
the right to appear and be heard, if such a right is requested in the written
appeal. A prompt decision of such appeal shall be made. In making the decision,
the Commissioner may vary or modify any provision of this chapter where there
are practical difficulties in the way of executing the strict letter of the
law, so that the spirit of the law shall be observed, public safety secured and
substantial justice done. Every action of the Commissioners on such appeals
shall be by resolution, copies of which shall be certified to the Code Official
and the appellant.
      121.2 Committee on Building Code: The Commissioners shall appoint a
Committee on Building Code, to serve at the will of the Commissioners. It shall
be the duty of the Committee on Building Code to review the Building Code and
make such recommendation to the Commissioners as the Committee deems necessary.
      121.3 Rules:
      1.   Rules necessary to define or carry out the intent or purpose of this
Article, or to set forth conditions under which new materials or methods of
construction may be used, may be recommended from time to time by the Building
Code Committee to the Commissioners.
      2.   Rules adopted as herein provided shall have the same force and
effect as the provisions of this chapter.
      3.   Any rule may be amended or repealed by the same procedure provided
for the adoption of new rules.
   F.   Section 3408.2, insert: August 15, 1994.
   G.   (Reserved)
   H.   (Reserved)
   I.   (Reserved)
   J.   (Reserved)
   K.   In Section 3407, Historic Buildings, add a new subsection 3407.3, to
provide as follows:
      3407.3 Special Requirements For Building Permits - Historic Resources:
The following special requirements shall apply to a building permit to demolish
a building, structure, or site listed on the Upper Dublin Historic Inventory,
Chapter A264. Terms set forth herein shall be as defined in
Chapter 127 and
Chapter 255.
      1.   Applicability of Special Requirements. No historic resource on the
Historic Resource Inventory,
Chapter A264 of the Upper Dublin Township Code, may be demolished, in whole or
in part, unless a building permit therefor is obtained from the Code
Enforcement Officer in accordance with the procedures and requirements of this
section.
      2.   Procedure for Obtaining Building Permit - Class II Resource.
         (a)   The applicant shall submit one copy of an application for a
building permit to the Code Enforcement Officer in a form acceptable to the
Township. If the Code Enforcement Officer determines that the permit request is
for the demolition of a building, structure, or site listed as a Class II
resource on the Historic Resource Inventory,
Chapter A264 of the Upper Dublin Township Code, he shall not issue the building
permit and the application shall be forwarded to the Historical Commission.
         (b)   Information to be Provided. In addition to the other
requirements of this section, an applicant seeking a permit to demolish an
historic resource on the Historic Resource Inventory shall provide the
following information:
            (i)   Name and address of owner of record.
            (ii)   Site plan showing all buildings and structures on the
property.
            (iii)   Recent photographs of the resource proposed for demolition.
(the applicant may request the Township to secure photographs provided
permission is given to enter the property for this purpose)
            (iv)   Reasons for the demolition.
            (v)   Proposed method of demolition.
            (vi)   Intended future use of the site and of the architecturally
significant materials from the demolished resource.
            (vii)   Where applicable, plans showing any proposed new
construction or reconstruction.
         (c)   The applicant or the Code Enforcement Officer shall, within 10
days from the filing thereof, post a notice on the property indicating that the
owner has applied for a permit to demolish an historic resource on the
property. The notice shall be posted on each street frontage of the premises
with which the notice is concerned and shall be clearly visible to the public.
Posting of a notice shall not be required in the event of an emergency which is
determined by the Code Enforcement Officer to require immediate action to
protect the health or safety of the public.
         (d)   Review by Historical Commission. Within 45 days of receipt of a
complete application from the Code Enforcement Officer, the Historical
Commission, at a regular or special meeting, shall review the application for
demolition. The applicant will be notified of such meeting at least 10 days
prior to its date and shall have the opportunity to present his reasons for
filing the application. The Historical Commission shall consider the following:
            (i)   The effect of demolition on the historical significance and
architectural integrity of the resource in question and neighboring historic
resources;
            (ii)   Whether the applicant has demonstrated that he has
considered all alternatives to demolition;
            (iii)   Economic feasibility of adaptive reuse of the resource
proposed for demolition;
            (iv)   Alternatives to demolition of the resource;
            (v)   Whether the resource in its current condition presents a
threat to public safety;
            (vi)   Whether the resource has been intentionally neglected;
            (vii)   Whether the retention of the resource would represent an
unreasonable economic hardship.
         (e)   Where the Historical Commission determines that additional
information is needed from the applicant in order to adequately address the
issues enumerated in Subsection 2(d) above, request for such information shall
be made in writing to the applicant prior to the expiration of the initial
thirty-day review period.
         (f)   Historical Commission recommendation. Within 30 days following
conclusion of the meeting and the receipt of additional requested information,
whichever is later, the Historical Commission shall set forth its
recommendations in a written report to the Board of Commissioners.
            (i)   Immediate approval. After reviewing the building permit
application with attachments, the Commission may recommend:
               (i.i)   Approval of the permit, as provided under Subsection (2)
(g)(i), below; or
               (i.ii)   Conditional approval subject to the applicant providing
appropriate documentation of the historical significance of the resource(s)
prior to demolition, in the same manner as provided in Subsection 2(h)(ii)
below.
            (ii)   Delay of demolition. Alternatively, the Commission may
recommend delay of demolition in accordance with Subsection 2(h) below.
         (g)   Approval of building permit or delay of demolition by the Board
of Commissioners.
            (i)   Within 30 days after receiving the recommendation from the
Historical Commission, the Board of Commissioners shall consider the
application, together with the recommendations of the Historical Commission,
and vote either to approve the application, approve the application with
changes and/or conditions, or defer their decision, affording a delay of
demolition for up to 90 days as set forth in Subsection 2(h) below. The
applicant shall be notified of the meeting of the Board at least 10 days prior
to its date, and shall have the opportunity to present his reasons for filing
the application. Within seven days after making its decision, the Board shall
provide written communication of its decision to the applicant, the Historical
Commission, the Commissioners Planning Committee and the Code Enforcement
Officer.
            (ii)   Issuance of building permit. Where the Board acts to approve
the application, it shall authorize the Code Enforcement Officer to issue the
permit. Where the approval is granted with conditions attached, the Code
Enforcement Officer shall be authorized to issue the permit subject to those
conditions.
         (h)   Delay of demolition.
            (i)   The specified period of delay up to 90 days shall be used to
provide an opportunity to engage in discussion with the applicant about
alternatives to demolition of an historical resource; to allow for appropriate
documentation of the resource pursuant to Subsection h(ii) as set forth below;
and/or for preparation of a financial analysis, as set forth below for Class I
only. The Historical Commission shall make every effort to communicate with the
applicant to inform him of the historical importance of the resource, its
significance to the Township, and alternatives to demolition.
            (ii)   Documentation of historic resources. When ordering the delay
of demolition, the Board of Commissioners may request the Historic Commission
to provide documentation of the resource proposed for demolition. Such
documentation may include, as available: historical data, surveys, and other
data provided by local, state, and federal historic preservation organizations
and agencies; photographs; floor plans; measured drawings; archaeological
surveys (if appropriate); and any other comparable form of documentation
recommended by the Historical Commission. The extent of documentation required
shall reasonably relate to the architectural quality and/or historical
significance of the resource(s). Where the Historical Commission determines
that additional information is needed from the applicant in order to adequately
address the issues enumerated above, request for such information shall be made
in writing to the applicant prior to the expiration of the initial thirty-day
review period. The Board of Commissioners may extend the stipulated 90 days
until the applicant has sufficiently satisfied the documentation requirements.
            (iii)   With respect to a Class II resource, the Historical
Commission shall provide its recommendation on issuance of the permit to the
Board of Commissioners not later than the end of the applicable one-hundred-
five-day review period, as it might be extended. The Board of Commissioners
shall approve the application for demolition of the resource(s) in accordance
with Subsection (2)(g)(i), above, within the applicable one-hundred-five-day
review period, whether it receives a recommendation from the Historical
Commission or not.
         (i)   Historical Commission recommendation.
            (i)   Once the delay of demolition has expired, the Historical
Commission shall review the application again together with any further
documentation requested by the Board of Commissioners at its next regular
meeting. The Commission may recommend to the Board of Commissioners approval of
the permit or, where the Commission does not believe that the applicant has
proven unreasonable economic hardship or the lack of a reasonable alternative,
recommend denial of the permit. The Commission shall consider the following in
making its recommendation:
               (i.i)   The effect of demolition on the historical significance
and architectural integrity of the resource in question and neighboring
historic resources;
               (i.ii)   Whether the applicant has demonstrated that he has
considered all alternatives to demolition;
               (i.iii)   The economic feasibility of adaptive reuse of the
resource proposed for demolition;
               (i.iv)   Alternatives to demolition of the resource;
               (i.v)   Whether the resource in its current condition presents a
threat to public safety;
               (i.vi)   Whether the resource has been intentionally neglected;
               (i.vii)   Whether the retention of the resource would represent
an unreasonable economic hardship.
            (ii)   The Commission shall communicate its recommendation in
writing to the Board of Commissioners within 30 days of the expiration of the
ninety-day delay period.
      3.   Procedure For Obtaining Building Permit - Class I Resource. The
procedure for obtaining a building permit to demolish a Class I Resource shall
be the same as that for a Class II resource, except as follows:
         (a)   No permit shall be issued for the demolition of a Class I
resource except in cases where the applicant specifically alleges that
demolition is necessary due to unreasonable economic hardship. In such cases,
the Board of Commissioners may, during the period of delay, request that the
applicant prepare and submit the basis for this allegation. This may include a
financial analysis to the Board containing some or all of the following
information, as applicable and available:
            (i)   Amount paid for the property;
            (ii)   Date of purchase and party from whom purchased, including a
description of the relationship, if any, whether business or familial, between
the owner and the person from whom the property was purchased;
            (iii)   Assessed value of the land and improvements thereon
according to the most recent assessment;
            (iv)   A pro forma financial statement prepared by an accountant or
broker of record;
            (v)   All appraisals obtained by the owner in connection with his
purchase or financing of the property, or during his ownership of the property,
if any;
            (vi)   Bona fide offers to sell or rent the property, the price
asked, and offers received, if any;
            (vii)   Any consideration by the owner as to profitable, adaptive
uses for the property, and any other practical uses; incentives which could be
offered by the Township to preserve the resource; and any input from local,
state, or federal historic preservation and architectural organizations or
agencies;
            (viii)   Where relevant, written estimates of the cost(s) of
restoration and/or renovation from at least two professional restoration
contractors.
         (b)   Approval or denial of building permit for Class I resources
after delay of demolition.
            (i)   At its next regular meeting after receiving the
recommendation from the Historical Commission, or at a special meeting if
necessary to comply with Subsection 3(b)(iii) below, unless an extension of
time has been granted by the Applicant, the Board of Commissioners shall again
consider the application, together with the recommendations of the Historical
Commission and any further documentation which had been requested, and vote
either to approve the application or to approve the application with changes as
set forth in Subsection (2)(g)(i) above, or to deny the application as set
forth below.
            (ii)   Denial of application. Where the Board acts to deny the
application, a notice of denial shall be sent to the applicant indicating what
changes in the plans and specifications, if any, would be sufficient to meet
the standards of this section.
            (iii) Action by the Board of Commissioners, including appropriate
notification to the applicant, shall occur within 60 days of the expiration of
the ninety-day delay period.
   L.   In Section 3407, Historic Buildings, add a new subsection 3407.4, to
provide as follows:
      3407.4 Enforcement of Special Requirements for Building Permits for
Historic Resources: Any person who demolishes a building, structure, or site on
the Historic Resource Inventory,
Chapter A264 of the Upper Dublin Township Code, in violation of the provisions
of Section 3407.3, or in violation of any conditions or requirements specified
in a permit issued under Section 3407.3, shall be required to restore the
building, structure, or site involved to its appearance prior to the violation,
in default of which the Township may perform such restoration and charge the
cost thereof together with an administrative fee of 10% as a municipal lien
against the property. Such restoration shall be in addition to and not in lieu
of any penalty or remedy available under
Chapter 73 of the Upper Dublin Township Code, or any other applicable law.
§ 73-3. Construal of provisions.
Nothing in this article or in the Building Code hereby adopted shall be
construed to affect any suit or proceeding impending in any court, or any
rights acquired, or liability incurred, or any cause or causes of action
acquired or existing, under any act or ordinance hereby repealed, nor shall any
just or legal right or remedy of any character be lost, impaired or affected by
this article.
ARTICLE II
One- and Two-Family Dwellings
[Adopted 1-10-1995 by Ord. No. 881]
§ 73-4. Adoption of standards.
That certain document, three (3) copies of which are on file in the offices of
the Township of Upper Dublin, being marked and designated as the "CABO One- and
Two-Family Dwelling44 Code/1992," as published by the Building Officials and
Code Administrators International, Inc., is hereby adopted as the One- and Two-
Family Dwelling Code of the Township of Upper Dublin for the control of
buildings and structures as therein provided; and each and all of the
regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of the One- and Two-
Family Dwelling Code/1992 are hereby referred to, adopted and made a part
hereof as if fully set out in this article, with the additions, insertions,
deletions and changes prescribed in §
73-5.
§ 73-5. Modifications to standards.
The following sections are hereby revised as follows:
   A.   Chapter 3, Foundations.
      (1)   Section R-303 Footings. Add the following:
         R-303.1: All footings shall be a minimum of three (3) feet below
grade.
         R-303.2: All footings shall be at least eight (8) inches wider than
the foundation wall.
         R-303.3: All footings shall be poured separate and before the
foundation walls are placed.
         R-303.4: Minimum thickness of all footings shall be eight (8) inches
thick.
         R-303.5: A two-by-four (2 x 4) key way is required in footings prior
to the placement of a concrete foundation wall.
      (2)   Section R-304.1 Concrete and masonry. Add the following:
         R-304.1.a: Minimum thickness is ten (10) inches. The only exception to
this rule is a single-story ranch home of all frame construction. In this type
of construction an eight-inch poured wall or eight-inch block wall top coarse
solid is allowed, provided that there is no masonry such as brick, stone or
veneer used as facing for the home.
         R-304.1.b: All honeycombing shall be filled with cement mortar.
         R-304.1.c: Exterior wall snap ties shall be broken off and filled with
a waterproofing coating.
   B.   Chapter 4, Wall Construction.
      (1)   Section R-402.2. Delete and replace with the following:
         R-402.2 Grade: All lumber shall be No. 2 or better for load bearing.
      (2)   Section R-402.3. Add the following:
         R-402.3.a Construction: Studs, joist and rafters shall be placed
sixteen (16) inches on center and all top plates, jambs, trimmers and headers
shall be doubled on bearing walls or be of an engineering design.
   C.   Chapter 6, Floors.
      (1)   Section R-602.1, Identification and grade. Add: R-602.1.a: All
lumber shall be No. 2 or better.
      (2)   Section R-602.2.2, Floor sheathing. Add:
         R-602.2.2.a: Minimum thickness of floor sheathing used as subflooring
shall be three-fourths (3/4) inch American Plywood Association approved, or an
approved lumber or plywood grading from an inspection bureau or agency.
      (3)   Section R-602.2.1, Joist, beams and girders. Add:
         R-602.2.1.a: The main supporting beam or girder shall be steel meeting
the standards of the American Steel Institute or engineered lumber products.
   D.   Chapter 7, Roof-Ceiling Construction.
      (1)   Section R-703.1 Identification and grade. Add the following
sentence at the end of the first paragraph:
         Minimum one-half-inch-thick roof sheathing or approved lumber or
plywood grading as approved by the American Plywood Association.
   E.   Chapter 22, Plumbing, Drainage Waste and Vent Systems (DWV).
      (1)   Section P-2206.7.3 Vertical leg for waste fixture drains. Amend
Subsection 6 to read as follows: “The diameter of Section C may be the same
diameter as Section B, but not smaller.”
   F.   Chapter 23, Plumbing Fixtures and Receptors.
      (1)   Section P-2301 Fixtures, fittings and appurtenances. Add to this
section ordinance E 817, conservation of water for plumbing fixtures. 1
   G.   Chapter 24, Water Service and Distribution.
      (1)   Table No. P-2403.1, Water Service, Supply and Distribution Piping.
Delete all reference to type ‘M’ pipe.
      (2)   Section P-2408.4 Hose bibb. Add the following:
         P-2408.4.1: All sillcocks shall be of the anti-freeze type.
   H.   Chapter 25, Sewers and Private or Individual Sewage Disposal Systems.
      (1)   Section P-2501.3 Materials. Delete all sections which reference
individual sewage disposal systems. Refer to Commonwealth of Pennsylvania
Department of Environmen tal Resources Sewage Facilities Act (Act 537) 2  for
any private or individual sewage disposal systems.
   I.   Part VI, Electrical. Delete all reference made to aluminum wiring as
listed in the NFIPA 70A listed in Section S-26-6000. The use of aluminum wire
within a dwelling is not permitted.
   J.   Part VII, Energy Conservation. Delete energy conservation requirements
of the CABO Model Energy Code listed in Section S-26-7000. Refer to
Pennsylvania Department of Community Affairs and Pennsylvania Residential
Building Industries Act 222 (The Building Energy Conservation Act 3 ).
1. Editor’s Note: See
Ch. 174, Plumbing.
2. Editor’s Note: See 35 P.S. § 750.1 et seq.
3. Editor’s Note: See 35 P.S. § 7201.101 et seq.
ARTICLE III
Uniform Construction Code
[Adopted 6-15-2004 by Ord. No. 1132]
§ 73-6.   Election and adoption of Uniform Construction Code. 
[Amended 7-14-2009 by Ord. No. 09-1214, § 1]
   A.   Upper Dublin Township hereby elects to administer and enforce the
provisions of the Pennsylvania Construction Code Act, Act 45 of 1999, 35 P.S.
§§ 7210.101 through 7210.1103, as amended from time to time, together with the
regulations promulgated thereunder by the Pennsylvania Department of Labor and
Industry.
   B.   The Uniform Construction Code (referred to in this Chapter as the
“Code”), as adopted by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania and contained in 34
Pa.Code, Chapters 401 through 405, as amended from time to time, is hereby
adopted and incorporated herein by reference as the Uniform Building Code of
Upper Dublin Township. The codes included within the Uniform Construction Code
are those published by the International Code Council, Inc., as are now and as
may be hereafter supplemented, reissued, amended, revised, and adopted by the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, copies of which have been and are now on file in
the Township Department of Code Enforcement, and the same are hereby adopted
and incorporated as if fully set out at length herein. [Amended 7-14-2009 by
Ord. No. 09- 1214]
§ 73-7.   Duties and powers of Code Official. 
[Amended 7-14-2009 by Ord. No. 09-1214, § 1]
   A.   General. The Board of Commissioners shall appoint a Code Official with
authority and direction to enforce the provisions of the Code. The Code
Official shall have the authority to render interpretations of the Code and to
adopt policies and procedures in order to clarify the application of its
provisions. Such interpretations, policies and procedures shall be in
compliance with the intent and purpose of the Code. Such policies and
procedures shall not have the effect of waiving requirements specifically
provided for in the Code. [Amended 7- 14-2009 by Ord. No. 09-1214]
   B.   Applications and permits. The Code Official shall receive applications,
review construction documents and issue permits for the erection and
alteration, demolition and moving of buildings and structures, inspect the
premises for which such permits have been issued and enforce compliance with
the provisions of the Code.
   C.   Notices and orders. The Code Official shall issue all necessary notices
or orders to ensure compliance with the Code.
   D.   Inspections. The Code Official shall make all of the required
inspections, or the Code Official shall have the authority to accept reports of
inspection by approved agencies or individuals. Reports of such inspections
shall be in writing and be certified by a responsible officer of such approved
agency or by the responsible individual. The Code Official is authorized to
engage such expert opinion as deemed necessary to report upon unusual technical
issues that arise, subject to the approval of the appointing authority.
   E.   Right of entry. Where it is necessary to make an inspection to enforce
the provisions of the Code, or where the Code Official has reasonable cause to
believe that there exists in a structure or upon a premises a condition which
is contrary to or in violation of the Code which makes the structure or
premises unsafe, dangerous or hazardous, the Code Official is authorized to
enter the structure or premises at reasonable times to inspect or to perform
the duties imposed by the Code, provided that if such structure or premises be
occupied that credentials be presented to the occupant and entry requested. If
such structure or premises is unoccupied, the Code Official shall first make a
reasonable effort to locate the owner or other person having charge or control
of the structure or premises and request entry. If entry is refused, the Code
Official shall have recourse to the remedies provided by law to secure entry.
   F.   Department records. The Code Official shall keep official records of
applications received, permits and certificates issued, fees collected, reports
of inspections, and notices and orders issued. Such records shall be retained
in the official records for the period required for retention of public
records.
   G.   Approved materials and equipment. Materials, equipment and devices
approved by the Code Official shall be constructed and installed in accordance
with such approval.
      (1)   Used materials and equipment. The use of used materials which meet
the require ments of the Code for new materials is permitted. Used equipment
and devices shall not be reused unless approved by the Code Official.
   H.   Modifications. Wherever there are practical difficulties involved in
carrying out the provisions of the Code in individual cases, the owner or
owner’s representative may consult with the Code Official for an interpretation
of the true intent of the Code. The Board of Appeals shall have the authority
to determine whether the true intent of the Code has been correctly
interpreted, whether the provisions of the Code do not fully apply, or an
equivalent form of construction is permissible. The Board of Appeals shall hear
and rule on appeals and requests for variances under the Code. [Amended 7-14-
2009 by Ord. No. 09-1214]
   I.   Alternative materials, design and methods of construction and
equipment. The provisions of the Code are not intended to prevent the
installation of any material or to prohibit any design or method of
construction not specifically prescribed by the Code, provided that any such
alternative can be approved as specified by the Code. An alternative material,
design or method of construction may be approved where the Code Official finds
that the proposed alternative is satisfactory and complies with the provisions
of the Code governing alternative construction materials and methods. [Amended
7-14-2009 by Ord. No. 09-1214]
§ 73-8.   Permits. 
[Amended 7-14-2009 by Ord. No. 09-1214, § 1; 6-14-2011 by Ord. No. 11- 1242, §
3]
   A.   Required. Any owner or authorized agent who intends to construct,
enlarge, alter, repair, move, demolish or change the occupancy of a building or
structure, or to erect, install, enlarge, alter, repair, remove, convert or
replace any electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing system, the installation of
which is regulated by the Code, or to cause any such work to be done, shall
first make application to the Code Official and obtain the required permit.
      (1)   Annual permit. In lieu of an individual permit for each alteration
to an already approved electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing installation,
the Code Official is authorized to issue an annual permit upon application
therefor to any person, firm or corporation regularly employing one or more
qualified tradepersons in the building, structure or on the premises owned or
operated by the application for the permit.
      (2)   Annual permit records. The person to whom an annual permit is
issued shall keep a detailed record of alterations made under such annual
permit. The Code Official shall have access to such records at all times or
such records shall be filed with the Code Official as designated.
   B.   Work exempt from permit. Exemptions from permit requirements of the
Code shall not be deemed to grant authorization for any work to be done in any
manner in violation of the provisions of the Code or any other laws or
provisions of the Upper Dublin Township Code. The Code Official may by
regulation exempt work from permit requirements.
   C.   Emergency repairs. Where equipment replacements and repairs must be
performed in an emergency situation, the permit application shall be submitted
within the next working business day to the Code Official.
   D.   Repairs. Application or notice to the Code Official is not required for
ordinary repairs to structures, replacement of lamps or the connection of
approved portable electrical equipment to approved permanently installed
receptacles. Such repairs shall not include the cutting away of any wall,
partition or portion thereof, the removal or cutting of any structural beam or
load-bearing support, or the removal or change of any required means of egress,
or rearrangement of parts of a structure affecting the egress requirements; nor
shall ordinary repairs include addition to, alteration of, replacement or
relocation of any standpipe, water supply sewer, drainage, drain leader, gas,
soil, waste, vent or similar piping, electric wiring or mechanical or other
work affecting public health or general safety.
   E.   Public service agencies. A permit shall not be required for the
installation, alteration or repair of generation, transmission, distribution or
metering or other related equipment that is under the ownership and control of
public service agencies by established right.
   F.   Application for permit. To obtain a permit, an applicant shall first
file a permit application in writing on a form furnished by the Department of
Code Enforcement. The application shall be completed with all data and
information requested by the Department. [Amended 7-14-2009 by Ord. No. 09-
1214]
   G.   Expiration of permit. Any permit issued shall become invalid if the
authorized work is not commenced within six months after issuance of the permit
or if the authorized work is suspended or abandoned for a period of six months
after the time work is commenced. The Code Official may extend the time period
of a building permit for one period not to exceed six months if the permittee
provides reasonable justification to do so. [Amended 7-14-2009 by Ord. No. 09-
1214]
   H.   Suspension or revocation of permit. The Code Official is authorized to
suspend or revoke a permit issued under the provisions of the Code wherever the
permit is issued in error or on the basis of incorrect, inaccurate or
incomplete information, or in violation of any ordinance or regulation or any
of the provisions of the Code.
   I.   Placement of permit. The building permit or copy shall be kept on the
site of the work until the completion of the project.
   J.   Certificate of rodent exterminator. A permit to demolish or remove a
structure shall not be issued until the applicant shall furnish to the Code
Official a certificate from a reputable rodent exterminator which shall state
that the building or structure to he demolished has been inspected and found to
be free of rodents or that the building or structure to be demolished has been
properly treated for the eradication of all rodents in and about the premises.
   K.   Completion guaranty. Before any building permit shall be issued for the
construction or installation of a swimming pool, the township shall be assured
by means of a proper completion guaranty in the form of a bond or the deposit
of funds or securities in escrow, sufficient to cover the cost of the required
improvements (i.e., fencing, electrical, grading, walls and drainage
structures), as estimated by the Director of Code Enforcement, that the
improvements will be installed on or before a date specified in said bond or
escrow agreement.
   L.   Sewage facilities planning. All construction projects that propose new
or expanded plumbing/sewage facilities require review by the Pennsylvania
Department of Environmen tal Protection under the Pennsylvania Sewage
Facilities Act (Act 537). No building permit, certificate of occupancy, final
subdivision or land development approval, or other proposed construction
approval may be issued until sewage planning has been approved by the
Department of Environmental Protection through the issuance of a planning
module approval or an exemption from planning, or until the Department has
issued a letter stating that sewage planning is not required. 4 [Added 6-14-
2011 by Ord. No. 11-1242]
4. Editor’s Note: Ord. No. 11-1242, 6/14/2011, added this paragraph as
“Paragraph I.” Paragraphs I, J and K having previously been adopted by Ord. No.
1132, this paragraph has been added as “Paragraph L.”
§ 73-9.   Construction documents.
   A.   Submittal documents. Construction documents, special inspection and
structural observation programs and other data shall be submitted in one or
more sets with each application for a permit. The construction documents shall
be prepared by a registered design professional where required by the statutes
of the jurisdiction in which the project is to be constructed. Where special
conditions exist, the Code Official is authorized to require additional
construction documents to be prepared by a registered design professional.
      (1)   Exception. The Code Official is authorized to waive the submission
of construction documents and other data not required to be prepared by a
registered design professional if it is found that the nature of the work
applied for is such that review of construction documents is not necessary to
obtain compliance with this code.
         (a)   Information on construction documents. Construction documents
shall be dimensioned and drawn upon suitable material. Electronic media
documents are permitted to be submitted when approved by the Code Official.
Construction documents shall be of sufficient clarity to indicate the location,
nature and extent of the work proposed and show in detail that it will conform
to the provisions of the Code and relevant laws, ordinances, rules and
regulations, as determined by the Code Official.
            [1]   Fire protection system shop drawings. Shop drawings for the
fire protection system(s) shall be submitted to indicate conformance with the
Code and the construction documents and shall be approved prior to the start of
system installation. Shop drawings shall contain all information as required by
the referenced installation standards in
Chapter 9.
         (b)   Means of egress. The construction documents shall show in
sufficient detail the location, construction, size and character of all
portions of the means of egress in compliance with the provisions of this Code.
In other than occupancies in Groups R-2, R-3, as applicable in Section 101.2,
and I-1, the construction documents shall designate the number of occupants to
be accommodated on every floor and in all rooms and spaces.
         (c)   Exterior wall envelope.
            [1]   Construction documents for all buildings shall describe the
exterior wall envelope in sufficient detail to determine compliance with the
Code, The construction documents shall provide details of the exterior wall
envelope as required, including flashing, intersections with dissimilar
materials, corners, end details, control joints, intersections at roof, eaves
or parapets, means of drainage, water-resistive membrane and details around
openings.
            [2]   The construction documents shall include manufacturer's
installation instructions that provide supporting documentation that the
proposed penetration and opening details described in the construction
documents maintain the weather resistance of the exterior wall envelope. The
supporting documentation shall fully describe the exterior wall system which
was tested, where applicable, as well as the test procedure used.
   B.   Site plan. The construction documents submitted with the application
for permit shall be accompanied by a site plan showing to scale the size and
location of new construction and existing structures on the site, distances
from the lot lines, the established street grades and the proposed finished
grades and, as applicable, flood hazard areas, floodways and design flood
elevations; and it shall be drawn in accordance with an accurate boundary line
survey. In the case of demolition, the site plan shall show construction to be
demolished and the location and size of existing structures and construction
that are to remain on the site or plot. The Code Official is authorized to
waive or modify the requirement for a site plan when the application for permit
is for alteration or repair or when otherwise warranted.
   C.   Examination of documents. The Code Official shall examine or cause to
be examined the accompanying construction documents and shall ascertain by such
examinations whether the construction indicated and described is in accordance
with the requirements of this Code and other pertinent laws or ordinances.
      (1)   Approval of Construction documents. When the Code Official issues a
permit, the construction documents shall be approved, in writing or by stamp,
as "Reviewed for Code Compliance". One set of construction documents so
reviewed shall be retained by the Code Official. The other set shall be
returned to the applicant, shall be kept at the site of work and shall be open
to inspection by the Code Official or a duly authorized representative.
      (2)   Previous approvals. The Code shall not require changes in the
construction documents, construction or designated occupancy of a structure for
which a lawful permit has been heretofore issued or otherwise lawfully
authorized, and the construction of which has been pursued in good faith within
180 days after the effective date of this Code and has not been abandoned.
      (3)   Phased approval. The Code Official is authorized to issue a permit
for the construction of foundations or any other part of a building or
structure before the construction documents for the whole building or structure
have been submitted, provided that adequate information and detailed statements
have been filed complying with pertinent requirements of the Code. The holder
of such permit for the foundation or other parts of a building or structure
shall proceed at the holder's own risk with the building operation and without
assurance that a permit for the entire structure will be granted.
      (4)   Design professional in responsible charge.
         (a)   General.
            [1]   When it is required that documents be prepared by a
registered design professional, the Code Official shall be authorized to
require the owner to engage and designate on the building permit application a
registered design professional who shall act as the registered design
professional in responsible charge. If the circumstances require, the owner
shall designate a substitute registered design professional in responsible
charge who shall perform the duties required of the original registered design
professional in responsible charge. The Code Official shall be notified in
writing by the owner if the registered design professional in responsible
charge is changed or is unable to continue to perform the duties.
            [2]   The registered design professional in responsible charge
shall be responsible for reviewing and coordinating submittal documents
prepared by others, including phased and deferred submitted items, for
compatibility with the design of the building.
            [3]   Where structural observation is required by Section 1709, the
inspection program shall name the individual or firms who are to perform
structural observation and describe the stages of construction at which
structural observation is to occur (see also duties specified in Section 1704).
         (b)   Deferred submittals.
            [1]   For the purposes of this section, "deferred submittals" are
defined as those portions of the design that are not submitted at the time of
the application and that are to be submitted to the Code Official within a
specified period.
            [2]   Deferral of any submittal items shall have the prior approval
of the Code Official. The registered design professional in responsible charge
shall list the deferred submittals on the construction documents for review by
the Code Official.
            [3]   Documents for deferred submittal items shall be submitted to
the registered design professional in responsible charge who shall review them
and forward them to the Code Official with a notation indicating that the
deferred submittal documents have been reviewed and been found to be in general
conformance to the design of the building. The deferred submittal items shall
not be installed until the design and submittal documents have been approved by
the Code Official.
   D.   Amended construction documents. Work shall be installed in accordance
with the approved construction documents, and any changes made during
construction that are not in compliance with the approved construction
documents shall be resubmitted for approval as an amended set of construction
documents.
   E.   Retention of construction documents. One set of approved construction
documents shall be retained by the Code Official for a period of not less than
180 days from date of completion of the permitted work, or as required by state
or local laws.
§ 73-10.   Fees. 
[Amended 7-14-2009 by Ord. No. 09-1214, § 1; 1-12-2010 by Ord. No. 10-1226, §
13; 2-13-2018 by Ord. No. 18-1340, § 1]
   A.   Payment of fees. A permit shall not be valid until the fees prescribed
by law have been paid, nor shall an amendment to a permit be released until the
additional fee, if any, has been paid.
   B.   Schedule of fees. Applicants for permits under the Code shall pay to
the Township at the time of application the fees, escrows, and deposits set
forth on the then-current fee schedule which shall have been adopted by
resolution or ordinance by the Board of Commissioners. When a permit fee,
escrow, or deposit is based on the cost of construction, the valuation of the
subject work shall be the fair market value of all the construction work. The
Code Official shall evaluate the accuracy of the estimate both initially and at
final completion should changes occur as the work progresses. [Amended 7-14-
2009 by Ord. No. 09-1214]
   C.   Work commencing before permit issuance. Any person who commences any
work on a building, structure, or electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing
system before obtaining the required permits shall be subject to a late fee for
each required permit. The late fee shall be paid in addition to the required
permit fee and shall be paid in an amount equal to the required permit fee up
to a maximum of $1,000. [Amended 7-14-2009 by Ord. No. 09-1214]
   D.   Related fees. The payment of the fee for the construction, alteration,
removal or demolition of work done in connection to or concurrently with the
work authorized by a building permit shall not relieve the applicant or holder
of the permit from the payment of other fees that are prescribed by law. One
such fee is a charge of $4.50 as a Uniform Construction Code fee which shall be
charged in addition to the payment of other fees upon application for any
Building, Plumbing, Electrical or HVAC permit. [Amended 1-12-2010 by Ord. No.
10-1226; 2-13-2018 by Ord. No. 18-1340, §1]
   E.   Refunds. The Code Official is authorized to establish a refund policy.
   F.   Accounting. All fees collected shall be received and accounted for by
the Department of Code Enforcement and shall be remitted to the Township
Treasurer.
§ 73-11.   Inspections.
   A.   General. Construction or work for which a permit is required shall be
subject to inspection by the Code Official, and such construction or work shall
remain accessible and exposed for inspection purposes until approved. Approval
as a result of an inspection shall not be construed to be an approval of a
violation of the provisions of the Code or of other ordinances of the
jurisdiction. Inspections presuming to give authority to violate or cancel the
provisions of the Code or of other ordinances of the jurisdiction shall not be
valid. It shall be the duty of the permit applicant to cause the work to remain
accessible and exposed for inspection purposes. Neither the Code Official nor
the jurisdiction shall be liable for expense entailed in the removal or
replacement of any material required to allow inspection.
   B.   Required inspections. A list of the minimum required inspections shall
be on file with the Director of Code Enforcement for distribution upon request.
   C.   Inspection agencies. The Code Official is authorized to accept reports
of approved inspection agencies, provided such agencies satisfy the
requirements as to qualifications and reliability.
   D.   Inspection requests. It shall be the duty of the holder of the building
permit or their duly authorized agent to notify the Code Official when work is
ready for inspection. It shall be the duty of the permit holder to provide
access to and means for inspections of such work that are required by the Code.
   E.   Approval required. Work shall not be done beyond the point indicated in
each successive inspection without first obtaining the approval of the Code
Official. The Code Official, upon notification, shall make the requested
inspections and shall either indicate the portion of the construction that is
satisfactory as completed, or notify the permit holder or his or her agent
wherein the same fails to comply with the Code. Any portions that do not comply
shall be corrected, and such portion shall not be covered or concealed until
authorized by the Code Official.
§ 73-12.   Certificate of occupancy.
   A.   Use and occupancy. No building or structure shall be used or occupied,
and no change in the existing occupancy classification of a building or
structure or portion thereof shall be made until the Code Official has issued a
certificate of occupancy therefor as provided herein. Issuance of a certificate
of occupancy shall not be construed as an approval of a violation of the
provisions of the Code or of other ordinances of the jurisdiction.
   B.   Certificate issued. After the Code Official inspects the building or
structure and finds no violations of the provisions of the Code or other laws
that are enforced by the Code Enforcement Department, the Code Official shall
issue a certificate of occupancy.
   C.   Temporary occupancy. The Code Official is authorized to issue a
temporary certificate of occupancy before the completion of the entire work
covered by the permit, provided that such portion or portions shall be occupied
safely. The Code Official shall set a time period during which the temporary
certificate of occupancy is valid.
   D.   Revocation. The Code Official is authorized to, in writing, suspend or
revoke a certificate of occupancy or completion issued under the provisions of
the Code wherever the certificate is issued in error, or on the basis of
incorrect information supplied, or where it is determined that the building or
structure or portion thereof is in violation of any ordinance or regulation or
any of the provisions of the Code.
§ 73-13.   Service utilities.
   A.   Connection of service utilities. No person shall make connections from
a utility, source of energy, fuel or power to any building or system that is
regulated by the Code for which a permit is required until released by the Code
Official.
   B.   Temporary connection. The Code Official shall have the authority to
authorize the temporary connection of the building or system to the utility
source of energy, fuel or power.
   C.   Authority to disconnect service utilities. The Code Official shall have
the authority to authorize disconnection of utility service to the building,
structure or system regulated by the Code and the codes referenced in case of
emergency where necessary to eliminate an immediate hazard to life or property.
The Code Official shall notify the serving utility, and, wherever possible, the
owner and occupant of the building, structure or service system of the decision
to disconnect prior to taking such action. If not notified prior to
disconnecting, the owner or occupant of the building, structure or service
system shall be notified in writing as soon as practical thereafter.
§ 73-14.   Board of Appeals. 
[Amended 7-14-2009 by Ord. No. 09-1214, § 1; 5-10-2011 by Ord. No. 11-1239, §
2]
   A.   General. To hear and rule on applications for variances and requests
for extensions of time with respect to compliance with the requirements of the
Code and this Chapter, and to hear and decide appeals of orders, decisions or
determinations made by the Code Official relative to the application and
interpretation of the Code and this Chapter, there is hereby created a Building
Code Board of Appeals.
   B.   Authority. The Building Code Board of Appeals shall hear and rule on
appeals, requests for variances and requests for extensions of time as
specified by the Code. An appeal shall be based on a claim that the true intent
of the Code or this Chapter has been incorrectly interpreted, the provisions of
the Code or this Chapter do not fully apply, or an equivalent form of
construction is proposed. An application for a variance or extension of time
shall be based on the reasonableness of the application of the Code and this
Chapter, the extent the variance or extension of time will violate the Code and
this Chapter or create an unsafe condition, the availability of technical or
mechanical expertise to comply with the Code and this Chapter, the availability
of materials to comply with the Code and this Code, the extent of the effort
made to comply with the Code and this Chapter, and the compensatory features
and actions offered to provide an equivalent degree of protection. The Building
Code Board of Appeals may adopt rules of procedure for conducting its business
consistent with the Code and this Chapter.
   C.   Composition. The Building Code Board of Appeals shall be appointed by
the Board of Commissioners. The Building Code Board of Appeals shall consist of
five voting members and two alternate members. An alternate member may
participate in any proceeding or discussion of the Building Code Board of
Appeals but shall not be entitled to vote as a member of the Building Code
Board of Appeals unless designated as a voting member. Each regular and
alternate member of the Building Code Board of Appeals shall serve for a term
of five years, except that the terms of the regular members shall be staggered
so that one shall expire each year. Each member of the Building Code Board of
Appeals serves at the pleasure of the Board of Commissioners.
   D.   Qualifications. All members of the Building Code Board of Appeals shall
be qualified by experience and training to pass on matters pertaining to
building construction as specified by the Code and who are not officials or
employees of the Township All members of the Building Code Board of Appeals
shall be residents of the Township unless the Board of Commissioners cannot
find a sufficient number of qualified persons from within the Township to serve
on the Building Code Board of Appeals.
   E.   Applications and appeals. Applications for variances and extensions of
time, and appeals from any decision pertaining to the Code or this Chapter
shall be taken to the Building Code Board of Appeals as specified by the Code.
All applications and appeals shall be submitted to the Building Code Board of
Appeals with the designated fee using a form furnished by the Department of
Code Enforcement. Applicants and appellants, or their representatives, shall
have the right to a hearing on their application or appeal if such right is
requested on the form.
§ 73-15.   Violations.
   A.   Unlawful acts. It shall be unlawful for any person to violate a
provision of the Code or fail to comply with any of the requirements thereof or
use, erect, construct, alter, extend, repair, remove, demolish or occupy any
building, structure or equipment regulated by the Code, or cause the same to be
done, in conflict with or in violation of an approved plan or of a directive of
the Director of Code Enforcement or of a permit or certificate issued under the
provisions of the Code.
   B.   Violation penalties. Any person who violates a provision of the Code or
fails to comply with any of the requirements thereof or who commits an unlawful
act hereunder shall be liable to fines and penalties not exceeding $1,000,
which fines and penalties may be collected by suit or summary proceeding
brought in the name of the Township of Upper Dublin before any District Justice
in like manner as debts of a like amount are now by law recoverable. Each day
that a violation continues shall be deemed a separate offense.
   C.   Abatement of violation. The imposition of the penalties herein
prescribed shall not preclude the Township from instituting appropriate action
to prevent unlawful construction or to restrain, correct or abate a violation
or to prevent illegal occupancy of a building, structure or premises or to stop
an illegal act, conduct, business or use of a building or structure on or about
any premises.
   D.   Unlawful continuance. Any person who shall continue any work in or
about the structure after having been served with a stop-work order, except
such work as that person is directed to perform to remove a violation or unsafe
condition, shall be deemed to have committed a violation of the Code and shall
be subject to those penalties prescribed hereinabove in addition to such other
legal and equitable remedies as the township may seek.
   E.   Disregard of unsafe notice. Upon refusal or neglect of the person
served with an unsafe notice to comply with the requirements of the order to
abate the unsafe condition, the legal officer or the Director of Code
Enforcement shall be advised of all the facts and shall institute the
appropriate action to compel compliance.
§ 73-16.   Repeal and savings clause.
   A.   All construction codes or portions thereof which were adopted by Upper
Dublin Township on or before July 1, 1999, and which equal or exceed the
requirements of this Code, shall continue in full force and effect until such
time as such provisions fail to equal or exceed the minimum requirements of the
Code, as amended from time to time.
   B.   All construction codes or portions thereof which are in effect as of
the effective date of this ordinance and whose requirements are less than the
minimum requirements of the Code are hereby amended to conform with the
comparable provisions of the Code.
   C.   All relevant codes, regulations and policies of Upper Dublin Township
not governed by the Code shall remain in full force and effect.
§ 73-17.   Changes to Uniform Construction Code.
[Added 9-8-2009 by Ord. No. 09-1218, § 1; Amended 1-12-2010 by Ord. No. 10-
1226, § 14]
   A.   Intent. The intent of this section is to supplement and amend the
provisions of the Uniform Construction Code so that it better applies to the
Township and more fully satisfies the unique building code requirements of the
Township for the protection of health, safety, and welfare within the Township
as justified below:
      (1)   Established in 1701, Upper Dublin Township was originally a part of
a 1684 land grant from William Penn called “Dublin.” In its early years, the
Township was mostly farmland with population centers around the settlements of
Dreshertown, Fort Washington, Fitzwatertown, Jarrettown, Maple Glen, Rose
Valley and Three Tons. During the Revolutionary War the Continental Army
encamped within the Township in 1777 and the Township was witness to many
military movements and expeditions. Today, Upper Dublin Township occupies the
inner suburban ring around Philadelphia and is over 90% built-out as a near-
urban suburban community.
      (2)   The historic population centers of Dresher, Fort Washington,
Fitzwatertown, Jarrettown, and Maple Glen grew tremendously following World War
II, through the 1950's to the present. The vast majority of the 13 square miles
of Upper Dublin Township are now developed and committed to the following uses:
residential use (58%); commercial, office and industrial use (11%); and as
institutional and public use (27%). Only 4% of the land area of Upper Dublin
Township is currently undeveloped.
      (3)   As of the year 2000, Upper Dublin Township accommodated a
population of 25,878 persons. The Township's forecasted population in the year
2025 is 27,370. The population density of the Township in the year 2000 was
1,960 persons per square mile As a densely developed inner-ring suburban
community near Philadelphia, with distinct historic neighborhoods connected by
modern suburban housing and commercial development, the Township must address
complex health, safety and welfare issues, including environmental protection,
stormwater management, historic preservation, place identity, population
density, and redevelopment. These issues are experienced on a scale within the
Township that exceeds that of most other municipalities within the Commonwealth
of Pennsylvania.
      (4)   As one consequence of the Township's size and extent of
urbanization, the Township is compelled by the Clean Water Act to obtain and
comply with a Municipal Separate Storm Sewer System (“MS4"), National Pollutant
Discharge Elimination System (“NPDES”) permit for the management and discharge
of stormwater within the Township, the terms of which require increased
Township regulation of development and construction activities with respect to
stormwater runoff and the effects of such runoff on public health, safety,
welfare, and the environment.
      (5)   The Board of Commissioners of Upper Dublin Township finds that the
provisions of the Uniform Construction Code do not fully meet the building code
requirements of the Township of Upper Dublin and therefore must be supplemented
and amended to better apply to the Township.
   B.   The Uniform Construction Code standards as administered in Upper Dublin
Township shall be supplemented and amended with the addition of the following
standards:
      (1)   (Reserved)
      (2)   (Reserved)
      (3)   (Reserved)
      (4)   (Reserved)
      (5)   Section 403.26 related to Swimming Pools, shall have added the
following subsection (d) which reads: “(d) Completion guaranty. Before any
building permit shall be issued for the construction or installation of a
swimming pool, the Township shall be assured by means of a proper completion
guarantee in the form of a bond or the deposit of funds or securities in escrow
in the amount of 20% of the estimated cost of construction, as determined by
the Director of Code Enforcement, to assure that the required improvements
(i.e., fencing, electrical, grading, walls and drainage structures) will be
installed on or before a date specified in said bond or escrow agreement.”
[Added 1-12- 2010 by Ord. No. 10-1226]
      (6)   Swimming pools, spas, and hot tubs. In addition to the provisions
of 34 Pa.Code § 403.26, the provisions of the International Residential Code
and the provisions of the International Building Code relating to swimming
pools, the construction of all swimming pools, spas, and hot tubs shall comply
with the provisions of
Chapter 218, Swimming Pools, Article I, Construction Standards.
   C.   Commercial permits and inspections.
      (1)   As the Uniform Construction Code is administered in Upper Dublin
Township, 34 Pa.Code § 403.42(c)(1)(xiii) regarding permit exceptions shall be
amended to read, “except for Historic Resources, where the installation and
replacement of windows shall require a building permit.”
      (2)   As the Uniform Construction Code is administered in Upper Dublin
Township, 34 Pa.Code § 403.43(a) regarding the grant of a permit shall have
added a second sentence which reads: “When a grading permit has been applied
for in conjunction with proposed construction, the 30-day approval/denial time-
frame may be extended because the building permit shall not be issued until the
grading permit has been approved.”
      (3)   As the Uniform Construction Code is administered in Upper Dublin
Township, 34 Pa.Code § 403.43(g) regarding permit expiration shall read with
respect to permit expiration: “A permit is valid for one year from its issue
date and may be renewed annually for up to five years from its issue date.”
      (4)   As the Uniform Construction Code is administered in Upper Dublin
Township, 34 Pa.Code § 403.45(c) regarding inspections shall have added a
sentence which reads: “The owner or contractor shall provide a minimum of
twenty-four-hour notice to the Code Official for inspection.”
   D.   Residential permits and inspections.
      (1)   Contrary to 34 Pa.Code §§ 403.1(b)(3) and 403.62(c) regarding
exclusions and exemptions, the Uniform Construction Code as administered in
Upper Dublin Township shall apply to all utility and miscellaneous use
structures that are accessory to one- and two-family dwellings and that are
greater than or equal to 120 square feet in building area, including, but not
limited to, carports, detached private garages, greenhouses, and sheds.
      (2)   Contrary to 34 Pa.Code §§ 403.1(b)(8) and 403.62(c) regarding
exclusions and exemptions, the Uniform Construction Code as administered in
Upper Dublin Township shall apply to all uncovered decks regardless of the
elevation of the deck floor above grade, and a permit shall be required for the
installation of an uncovered deck.
      (3)   Contrary to 34 Pa.Code §§ 403.1(b)(8) and 403.1(b)(9) regarding
alterations and repairs to residential buildings, the Uniform Construction Code
as administered in Upper Dublin Township shall apply to alterations and repairs
to residential buildings, including basement remodeling projects and the
installation and replacement of doors and windows in historic resources.
      (4)   As the Uniform Construction Code is administered in Upper Dublin
Township, 34 Pa.Code § 403.62(c)(8) shall be deleted. The Township shall
require a building permit for the installation of an uncovered deck regardless
of the height of the floor of the deck.
      (5)   As the Uniform Construction Code is administered in Upper Dublin
Township, 34 Pa.Code § 403.63 (a) regarding the grant of a permit shall have
added a second sentence which reads: “When a grading permit has been applied
for in conjunction with proposed construction, the 15-day approval/denial time-
frame may be extended because the building permit cannot be issued until the
grading permit has been approved.”
      (6)   As the Uniform Construction Code is administered in Upper Dublin
Township, 34 Pa.Code § 403.63 (g) regarding permit expiration shall read: “A
permit is valid for one year from its issue date and may be renewed annually
for up to five years from its issue date.”
      (7)   As the Uniform Construction Code is administered in Upper Dublin
Township, 34 Pa.Code § 403.64 (b) regarding inspections shall have added a
sentence which reads: “The owner or contractor shall provide a minimum of 24-
hour notice to the Code Official for inspection.”
Chapter 76
BUILDINGS, NUMBERING OF
§
76-1.   Definitions and word usage.
§
76-2.   Assignation of numbers.
§
76-3.   Display required.
§
76-4.   New construction.
§
76-4.1.   Truss construction.
§
76-5.   Violations and penalties.
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Board of Commissioners of the Township of Upper Dublin
5-13-1986 as Title 8, Ch. 7, of the 1986 Code. Amendments noted where
applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
 
Building construction — See  Subdivision and land development — See
Ch. 73.                        Ch. 212.
 
§ 76-1.   Definitions and word usage.
   A.   The word "shall" is construed as mandatory.
   B.   As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
   BUILDING — Any principal buildings, such as but not limited to single- and
multiple-family dwellings, places of business, public service facilities,
churches and other institutions, but shall not include accessory buildings on
the same lot as and occupied by the same person as a principal building on such
lot.
   TRUSS CONSTRUCTION — A combination of members, such as beams, bars and ties,
usually arranged in triangular units or constructed of a top chord, bottom
chord and web to form a rigid framework for supporting loads over a span of
structural members, that connect together to span the space between the walls
of a building to support a vertical load. [Added 1-10-2006 by Ord. No. 1159]
   TRUSS EMBLEM — An official sign secured from the Township consisting of an
isosceles triangle not less than 12 inches horizontally by six inches
vertically made of reflective material with white as the background and red
lettering containing the following: "F" to signify a building or structure
having a floor with truss construction; "R" to signify a building or structure
having a roof with truss construction; or "FR" to signify a building or
structure having both a floor and roof with truss construction. [Added 1-10-
2006 by Ord. No. 1159]
§ 76-2.   Assignation of numbers.
From and after the effective date of this chapter, the Township shall assign
street or road numbers to all buildings in the Township which have heretofore
not been numbered and shall give notice to the registered owner and to the
occupant of each building of the number so assigned, provided that nothing
herein contained shall be construed to relieve such owner and occupant of the
duty to ascertain such assigned street number.
§ 76-3.   Display required.
[Amended 1-10-1995 by Ord. No. 879]
Every owner and occupant of every building in the Township shall display the
street number of the building, either on the building, upon a lamppost or a
signpost provided for the purpose of displaying the street number in such a
manner that the street number can be read during daylight hours from the road
or street by persons of normal vision and shall be located and maintained so
that the view thereof is not obstructed. Street numbers shall not be displayed
on curbside mail boxes unless also displayed on the building or upon a post as
hereinbefore provided. Identification shall be in Arabic numbers and not less
than three inches in height.
§ 76-4.   New construction.
[Amended 11-11-1997 by Ord. No. 957]
In all cases of new construction, or upon request, the Director of Public Works
shall assign a street number at the time the building permit is issued, and
such number shall be displayed within 30 days after construction is commenced,
or within 30 days before the building is ready for occupancy, whichever date
shall be earlier.
§ 76-4.1.   Truss construction.
[Added 1-10-2006 by Ord. No. 1159]
   A.   Identification of truss construction.
      (1)   Except as provided in Subsection B below, the owner, developer and/
or entity responsible for the exterior maintenance of a building or a group of
buildings containing truss construction in any form or manner shall install and
maintain a truss emblem as follows:
         (a)   To the left of the main entrance to the building and at a height
of not less than five feet above the floor level.
         (b)   Where a tract of land is improved with multiple buildings, the
truss emblem may be installed within the public right-of-way or upon the common
element/area (in the case of a private street or condominium) at each entrance
to such tract, provided the written approval of the location is first obtained
from the Township Fire Marshal.
   B.   Exemption. The provisions of this section shall not apply to a single-
family or two-family residential dwelling.
   C.   Fire Marshal approval. Every applicant for land development approval
for property on which a building employing truss construction has been or will
be constructed shall indicate on the land development plan the proposed
location of the truss emblem(s) to be erected and shall secure the written
approval of the Township Fire Marshal for such location.
   D.   Retroactive compliance required. The provisions of this section shall
apply to existing buildings having truss construction and must be complied with
within one year from the effective date of this section.
§ 76-5.   Violations and penalties.
[Amended 8-9-1988 by Ord. No. 753; 1-10-2006 by Ord. No. 1159]
Any owner or occupant who shall fail to display a street number or truss emblem
as in this chapter is provided shall be in violation of the provisions of this
chapter and shall, upon summary conviction before a District Justice, be
sentenced to pay a fine of not less than $600 for each offense and the costs of
prosecution. A new and separate offense shall be deemed to have been committed
for each day that a violation exists. Such fines shall be collected and
distributed as like fines are now collected by law.
Chapter 79
BURNING
§
79-1.   Prohibited acts.
§
79-2.   Violations and penalties.
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Board of Commissioners of the Township of Upper Dublin
5-13-1986 as Title 5, Ch. 3, Sec. 1.01, of the 1986 Code. Amendments noted
where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
 
Brush, grass and weeds — See  Property maintenance — See
Ch. 69.                         Ch. 180.
Fire prevention — See
Ch. 117.
 
§ 79-1.   Prohibited acts.
No leaves, grass, weeds, hedges or tree trimmings shall be burned within the
boundaries of any public highway, nor shall any fire be made which will cause
damage to the highway or street paving.
§ 79-2.   Violations and penalties. 1
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of
the offense of disorderly conduct, and upon conviction thereof in a summary
proceeding shall be sentenced to pay the cost of prosecution and a fine not
exceeding one thousand dollars ($1,000.).
1 Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see
Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
Chapter 82
CABLE TELEVISION FRANCHISES
ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§
82-1.   Title.
§
82-2.   Purpose.
ARTICLE II
Definitions and Word Usage
§
82-3.   Word usage.
§
82-4.   Definitions.
ARTICLE III
Grant of Franchise
§
82-5.   Grant.
§
82-6.   Use of public rights-of-way.
§
82-7.   Use of grantee facilities.
§
82-8.   Franchise required.
§
82-9.   Term of franchise.   
§
82-10.   Franchise nonexclusive.
§
82-11.   Timeliness of actions.
§
82-12.   Transfer of ownership or control.
§
82-13.   Franchise renewal.
§
82-14.   Franchise fees.
§
82-15.   Revocation.
§
82-16.   Receivership and foreclosure.
§
82-17.   Equal opportunity policy.
§
82-18.   Notices.
ARTICLE IV
Regulation of Franchise
§
82-19.   Regulatory authority.
§
82-20.   Supervision of the franchise.
§
82-21. Rates and charges.
§
82-22. Performance evaluation.
ARTICLE V
Bonds, Insurance and Indemnification
§
82-23. Performance bond; letter of credit.
§
82-24.   Security fund.
§
82-25. Liability and insurance.
§
82-26. Indemnification.
ARTICLE VI
Design and Construction Provisions
§
82-27.   Construction and technical standards.
§
82-28.   Extension of service.
§
82-29.   Use of streets.
§
82-30.   Erection, removal and common use of poles.
§
82-31.   Construction reporting requirements.
§
82-32.   Tests and performance monitoring.
ARTICLE VII
Service Provisions
§
82-33.   Services to subscribers and users.
§
82-34.   Installations, connections and other grantee services.
§
82-35.   Service calls and complaint procedures.
§
82-36.   Continuity of service.
§
82-37.   Protection of subscriber privacy.
§
82-38.   Rights of individuals.
ARTICLE VIII
Books, Records and Reports
§
82-39.   Records and books available to the grantor.
§
82-40.   Reports required.
ARTICLE X
Miscellaneous Provisions
§
82-41.   Tampering with system.
§
82-42.   Presumptive evidence.
§
82-43.   Enforcement.
§
82-44.   Violations and penalties.
ARTICLE IX
Theft of Service
§
82-45. Franchise applications.
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Board of Commissioners of the Township of Upper Dublin
3-14-1995 as Ord. No. 893. Amendments noted where applicable.]
ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 82-1.   Title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Cable Communications
Regulatory Code."
§ 82-2.   Purpose.
   A.   The Township of Upper Dublin finds that the development of cable
television and communications systems has the potential of having great benefit
and impact upon the people of Upper Dublin. Because of the complex and rapidly
changing technology associated with cable television, the township further
finds that the public convenience, safety and general welfare can best be
served by establishing regulatory powers which should be vested in the township
or such persons as the township shall designate. It is the intent of this
chapter to provide for and specify the means to attain the best possible public
interest and public purpose in these matters, and any franchise issued pursuant
to this chapter shall be deemed to include this finding as an integral part
thereof.
   B.   Further, it is recognized that cable communications systems have the
capacity to provide not only entertainment and information services to the
township's residents, but can provide a variety of broadband, interactive
communications services to institutions and individuals. Many of these services
involve township agencies and other public institutions, by providing
governmental, educational or health care communications.
   C.   For these purposes, the following goals underlie the regulations
contained herein:
      (1)   Communications services should be provided to the maximum number of
township residents.
      (2)   The system should be capable of accommodating both the present and
reasonably foreseeable future communications needs of the township.
      (3)   The system shall be constructed and maintained during the franchise
term so that new components may be integrated with existing facilities to the
maximum extent possible.
      (4)   The communications system authorized by this chapter shall be
responsive to the needs and interests of the local community.
ARTICLE II
Definitions and Word Usage
§ 82-3.   Word usage.
The present tense includes the future; the singular number includes the plural,
and the plural, the singular; and the masculine gender includes the feminine
gender.
§ 82-4.   Definitions.
Unless otherwise expressly stated, the following words and phrases shall be
construed throughout this chapter to have the meanings indicated:
   ACCESS CHANNELS — Public, educational and governmental access channels as
defined herein.
   BOARD — The Board of Commissioners of the Township of Upper Dublin.
   CABLE COMMUNICATIONS SYSTEM — (Also referred to as "system" and "cable
television system.") A facility consisting of a set of closed transmission
paths and associated signal generation, reception and control equipment that is
designed to provide cable service which includes video programming and which is
provided to multiple subscribers within a community, but such term does not
include:
   A.   A facility that serves only to retransmit the television signals of one
(1) or more television broadcast stations.
   B.   A facility that serves only subscribers in one (1) or more multiple
unit dwellings under common ownership, control or management, unless such
facility or facilities uses any public right-of-way.
   C.   A facility of a common carrier which is subject, in whole or in part,
to the provisions of Title II of the Cable Act, except that such facility shall
be considered a cable system [other than for purposes of Section 621(c) of the
Cable Act to the extent such facility is used in the transmission of video
programming directly to subscribers].
   D.   Any facilities of any electric utility used solely for operating its
electric utility systems.
   CABLE SERVICE:
   A.   The one-way transmission to subscribers of video programming or other
programming service;
   B.   Subscriber interaction, if any, which is required for the selection of
any such video programming or other programming service. [Added 5-9-1995 by
Ord. No. 894]
   CHANNEL — A six-Megahertz (Mhz) frequency band, which is capable of carrying
either one (1) standard video signal, a number of audio, digital or other
nonvideo signals or some combination of such signals.
   COMMERCIAL SUBSCRIBER — A subscriber who receives a service in a place of
business where the service may be utilized in connection with a business, trade
or profession and who pays the charges therefor.
   COMMUNICATIONS POLICY ACT or CABLE ACT — The Cable Communications Policy Act
of 1984, P.L. No. 98-549, 98 Stat. 2779 (1984) [codified as 47 U.S.C. §§ 521-
611 (1982 and Supp. V 1987)] and any amendments thereto.
   DROP — A coaxial connection from feeder cable to the subscriber/user
television set, radio or other terminal.
   EDUCATIONAL ACCESS CHANNEL — Any channel designated for noncommercial
educational access use.
   FCC — The Federal Communications Commission, its designee and any legally
appointed successor.
   FRANCHISE — The nonexclusive rights granted pursuant to this chapter to
construct, operate and maintain a cable communications system along the public
ways within all or a specified area in the township. Any such authorization, in
whatever form granted, shall not mean or include any license or permit required
for the privilege of transacting and carrying on a business within the township
as required by other ordinances and laws of the township.
   FRANCHISE AREA — The entire township or portions thereof, for which a
franchise is granted under the authority of this agreement. If not otherwise
stated in the franchise, the "franchise area" shall be the corporate limits of
the township, including all territory thereafter annexed to the township.
   FRANCHISE FEE — The percentage, as specified by the township, of the
franchisee's gross annual revenues from all sources payable in exchange for the
rights granted pursuant to this chapter and the franchise agreement.
   FRANCHISEE or GRANTEE — The natural person(s), partnership(s), domestic and
foreign corporation(s), association(s), joint venture(s) or organization(s) of
any kind which has been legally granted a franchise by the township, and its
lawful successor, transferee or assignee.
   GOVERNMENT ACCESS CHANNEL — Any channel specifically designated or dedicated
for noncommercial government access use.
   GRANTOR — The Township of Upper Dublin as represented by the Township Board
of Commissioners acting within the scope of its jurisdiction.
   GROSS ANNUAL REVENUES — All revenues derived from the provision of cable
service. "Gross revenues" shall not include any tax on services furnished by
the grantee which are imposed directly on any subscriber or user by the state,
township or other governmental unit and which are collected by the grantee on
behalf of said governmental unit. [Amended 5-9-1995 by Ord. No. 894]
   INSTALLATION — The connection of the system from feeder cable to
subscribers' terminals.
   LEASED ACCESS CHANNEL or COMMERCIAL ACCESS CHANNEL — Any channel designated
or dedicated for use by persons unaffiliated with the grantee, at rates in
accordance with the Cable Act.
   MONITORING — Observing a communications signal or the absence of a signal,
where the observer is not a party to the communication, whether the signal is
observed by visual or electronic means, for any purpose whatsoever.
   PERSON — An individual, partnership, association, organization, corporation
or any lawful successor transferee of said individual, partnership,
association, organization or corporation.
   PUBLIC ACCESS CHANNEL — Any channel designated or dedicated for
noncommercial use by the general public or noncommercial organizations which is
made available for use without charge on a nondiscriminatory basis in
accordance with the rules and regulations specified in the franchise.
   PUBLIC WAY or PUBLIC RIGHTS-OF-WAY — The surface, the air space above the
surface and the area below the surface of any public street, highway, lane,
path, alley, sidewalk, boulevard, drive, bridge, tunnel, park, parkways,
waterways, utility easements or other public rights-of-way or hereafter held by
the township which shall entitle the township and the grantee to the use
thereof for the purpose of installing and maintaining the grantee cable
television system. No reference herein, or in any franchise, to the "public
way" shall be deemed to be a representation or guaranty by the township that
its title to any property is sufficient to permit its use for such purpose, and
the grantee shall, by its use of such terms, be deemed to gain only such rights
to use property in the township as the township may have the undisputed right
and power to give. The grantee is also authorized to utilize public rights-of-
way and easements within the township that have been dedicated for compatible
uses as provided for in § 621(a)(2) of the Cable Communications Policy Act.
   REASONABLE NOTICE — Where not elsewhere specified, shall be written notice
addressed to the grantee at its principal office within the township or such
other office as the grantee has designated to the township as the address to
which notice shall be transmitted to it, which notice shall be certified and
postmarked not less than ten (10) business days prior to that day in which the
party giving such notice shall commence any action which requires the giving of
notice. In computing said ten (10) business days, holidays recognized by the
township shall be excluded.
   RESIDENTIAL SUBSCRIBER — A subscriber who receives a service in an
individual dwelling unit where the service is not to be utilized in connection
with a business, trade or profession and who pays the charges therefor.
   SALE —Includes any sale, exchange or barter transaction.
   SCHOOL — Any public or nonprofit educational institution, including primary
and secondary schools, colleges and universities, both public and private.
   SERVICE AREA — The entire geographic area within the franchise territory.
   STATE — The Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
   SYSTEM FACILITIES or FACILITIES — Cable communications system equipment used
by the franchisee to provide services in the franchise area; provided, however,
that such system facility excludes buildings, contracts, facilities and
equipment whose primary use is for providing service to other system facilities
located outside the township limits.
   TRANSFER — The disposal, voluntarily or involuntarily, by the grantee,
directly or indirectly, by gift, assignment, voluntary sale, merger,
consolidation or otherwise, of five percent (5%) or more at one (1) time of the
ownership or controlling interest in the system or twenty percent (20%)
cumulatively over the term of the franchise of such interests to a corporation,
partnership, limited partnership, trust or association or person or group of
persons acting in concert. An internal reorganization in which ultimate control
of the grantee does not change shall not constitute a transfer for purposes of
this chapter.
   TRUNK LINE — The major distribution cable used in cable communications,
which divides into feeder lines which are tapped for service to subscribers.
   USER — A person or organization utilizing channel or equipment and
facilities for the purpose of producing and/or transmission of material, as
contrasted with receipt thereof in a subscriber capacity.
ARTICLE III
Grant of Franchise
§ 82-5.   Grant.
   A.   In the event that the township shall grant a nonexclusive, revocable
franchise to construct, operate and maintain a cable communications system
within the township, said franchise shall constitute both a right and an
obligation to provide the services of a cable communications system as
regulated by the provisions of this chapter and the franchise.
   B.   The franchise shall be granted under the terms and conditions contained
herein, consistent with the First Class Township Code 1 and/or other applicable
statutory requirements. In the event of conflict between the terms and
conditions of this chapter, the franchise or the terms and conditions on which
the township can grant a franchise, the franchise shall control.
   C.   Any franchise granted by the township is hereby made subject to the
general ordinance provisions now in effect and hereafter made effective.
Nothing in the franchise shall be deemed to waive the requirements of the
various codes and ordinances of the township regarding permits, fees to be paid
or manner of construction.
1 Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 55701 et seq.
§ 82-6.   Use of public rights-of-way.
For the purpose of operating and maintaining a cable communications system in
the township, the grantee may erect, install, construct, repair, replace,
reconstruct and retain in, on, over, under, upon, across and along the public
streets and ways within the township such wires, cables, conductors, ducts,
conduits, vaults, manholes, amplifiers, appliances, pedestals, attachments and
other property and equipment as are necessary to the operation of the cable
communications systems; provided, however, that the grantee complies with all
design, construction, safety and performance provisions contained in this
chapter, the franchise agreement and other applicable laws. A grantee shall own
its cable communications system, but shall have no property right in the public
rights-of-way upon the completion of the franchise term.
§ 82-7.   Use of grantee facilities.
No poles or pedestals shall be erected by a grantee without prior approval of
the township with regard to location, height, type or aesthetics. The grantee
shall not acquire a vested right in the location of its facilities, and they
shall be removed or modified by a grantee at its own expense whenever the
township determines that the public convenience would be enhanced thereby.
Existing poles and conduits shall be utilized where possible. The township
shall have the right, during the life of a franchise, to install and maintain
free of charge upon the poles owned by a grantee any wire and pole fixtures
that do not unreasonably interfere with the operations of the grantee.
§ 82-8.   Franchise required.
No cable communications system shall be allowed to occupy or use the streets of
the township or be allowed to operate without a franchise.
§ 82-9.   Term of franchise.
The term of any franchise granted pursuant to this chapter shall be specified
in the franchise.
§ 82-10.   Franchise nonexclusive.
Any franchise granted pursuant to this chapter shall be nonexclusive. The
township specifically reserves the right to:
   A.   Grant at any time such additional franchises for a cable communications
system as it deems appropriate.
   B.   Build, operate and own such cable communications system or systems as
it deems appropriate.
§ 82-11.   Timeliness of actions.
Whenever this chapter shall set forth any time for an act to be performed by or
on behalf of a grantee, such time shall be deemed of the essence, and any
failure of a grantee to perform within the time allotted shall always be
sufficient ground for the township to invoke an appropriate penalty, including
possible revocation of the franchise pursuant to §
82-14 of this chapter.
§ 82-12.   Transfer of ownership or control.
   A.   Transfer of franchise. Any franchise granted hereunder shall not be
transferred without the prior consent of the township, and then only under such
reasonable conditions as the township may establish.
   B.   The grantee shall promptly notify the township of any actual or
proposed transfer.
   C.   For the purpose of determining whether it shall consent to a transfer,
the township may inquire into the legal, financial, character, technical,
customer service and operations qualifications of the prospective controlling
party, and the grantee shall assist the township in any such inquiry. Failure
to provide all information reasonably requested by the township as part of said
inquiry shall be grounds for denial of the proposed transfer. If the township
finds the results of its inquiry are satisfactory, its consent to such transfer
shall not be unreasonably withheld.
   D.   Assumption of control. Any financial institution having a pledge of the
franchise or its assets for the advancement of money for the construction and/
or operation of the franchise shall have the right to notify the township that
it or its designees satisfactory to the township will take control and operate
the cable television system. Further, said financial institution shall also
submit a plan for such operation that will insure continued service and
compliance with all franchise obligations during the term the financial
institution exercises control over the system. The financial institution shall
not exercise control over the system for a period exceeding one (1) year,
unless extended by the township at its discretion, and during said period of
time it shall have the right to petition for transfers of the franchise to
another grantee. If the township finds that such transfer, after considering
the legal, financial, character, technical, customer service and operations
qualifications of the applicant, are satisfactory, the township will transfer
and assign the rights and obligations of such franchise as in the public
interest. The consent of the township to such transfer shall not be
unreasonably withheld.
   E.   The consent or approval of the township to any transfer of a grantee
shall not constitute a waiver or release of the rights of the township in and
to the streets, and any transfer shall, by its terms, be expressly subject to
the terms and conditions of this chapter and the franchise.
   F.   In the absence of extraordinary circumstances, the township will not
approve any transfer or assignment of the franchise prior to completion of
construction of the proposed system. This provision shall not apply to routine
line extensions.
   G.   Any approval by the township of transfer of ownership or control shall
be contingent upon the prospective controlling party becoming a signatory to
the franchise.
§ 82-13.   Franchise renewal.
   A.   Renewal discretionary. Upon or prior to completion of the term of any
franchise granted under this chapter, the township shall proceed with the
renewal process in accordance with the provisions of the Cable Act.
   B.   In the event that the Board deems it necessary, the township may hire
an independent consulting agency or consultant to advise the township with
regard to all the matters set forth hereinabove.
§ 82-14.   Franchise fees.
   A.   Fee imposed.
      (1)   Because the township finds that:
         (a)   The streets of the county, state and township to be used by a
grantee in the operation of its system within the boundaries of the franchise
area are valuable public properties acquired and maintained by the county,
state and township at great expense to its taxpayers;
         (b)   The grant of a right to use the public streets is a valuable
property right without which the grantee would be required to invest
substantial capital in right-of-way costs and acquisitions;
         (c)   The administration of this chapter and the franchise imposes
upon the township additional regulatory responsibility and expense;
      (2)   A grantee of any franchise hereunder shall pay to the township a
franchise fee in an amount as designated in the franchise, but in no event less
than five percent (5%) of gross annual revenues.
   B.   Franchise fee in addition to other tax or payment. This payment shall
be in addition to any tax, fee or assessment of general applicability,
including any tax, fee or assessment imposed on both utilities and cable
operators or their services. Payment of the franchise fee made by the grantee
to the township shall not be considered in the nature of a tax, but shall be in
addition to any and all taxes of general applicability which are now or may be
required hereafter to be paid by any federal, state or local law.
   C.   Acceptance by the township. No acceptance of any payment by the
township shall be construed as a release or as an accord and satisfaction of
any claim the township may have for further or additional sums payable as a
franchise fee under this chapter or for the performance of any other obligation
of the grantee.
   D.   Failure to make required payment. In the event that any franchise
payment or recomputed amount is not made on or before the dates specified
herein, the grantee shall pay as additional compensation an interest charge,
computed from such due date, at the annual rate equal to the commercial prime
interest rate of the township primary depository bank during the period that
such unpaid amount is owed.
   E.   Payments to be made quarterly. The franchise fee and any other cost or
damage assessed against the grantee shall be payable quarterly to the township
and shall commence as of the effective date of the franchise. The township
shall be furnished at the time of said payment with a statement certified by
the grantee's Accounting Manager reflecting the total amounts of quarterly
gross revenues and the above charges and computations for the period covered by
the payment. An annual statement of gross revenues shall be furnished to the
township by a certified public accountant. Said quarterly payments shall be
made to the township no later than forty-five (45) days following the end of
each calendar quarter. Quarterly computation dates are the last day in the
months of March, June, September and December.
   F.   Township's right of inspection. The township shall have the right to
inspect the grantee's income records and the right to audit and to recompute
any amounts determined to be payable under this chapter for a period of four
(4) years from the date of payment. Audits shall be at the expense of the
township unless the audit discloses an underpayment in any one (1) year of five
percent (5%) or more, in which case the costs of the audit shall be borne by
the grantee. Any additional amount due the township as a result of the audit
shall be paid within thirty (30) days following written notice to the grantee
by the township, which notice shall include a copy of the audit report, unless
written notice of disagreement is filed by the grantee with the township within
such time. In case of such dispute, the issue shall be resolved through binding
arbitration in accordance with the procedures of the American Arbitration
Association.
§ 82-15.   Revocation.
   A.   Grounds for revocation. The township reserves the right to revoke any
franchise granted hereunder and rescind all rights and privileges associated
with the franchise in the following circumstances, each of which shall
represent a default and breach under this chapter and the franchise grant:
      (1)   If the grantee shall default in the performance of any of the
material obligations under this chapter or under such documents, contracts and
other terms and provisions entered into by and between the township and the
grantee.
      (2)   If the grantee shall fail to provide or maintain in full force and
effect the liability and indemnification coverage or the performance bond as
required herein.
      (3)   If the grantee shall violate any lawful orders or rulings of any
regulatory body having jurisdiction over the grantee relative to this chapter
or the franchise.
      (4)   If the grantee practices any fraud upon the township.
      (5)   The grantee's construction schedule is delayed later than the
schedule contained in the franchise or beyond any extended date set by the
township.
      (6)   The grantee becomes insolvent, unable or unwilling to pay its debts
or is adjudged bankrupt.
      (7)   Failure to restore service after ninety-six (96) consecutive hours
of total system outage in forty percent (40%) or more of the system, except
when approval of such interruption is obtained from the township or is excused
pursuant to Subsection B.
      (8)   If the grantee transfers the franchise without the consent of the
township.
   B.   Effect of circumstances beyond control of the grantee. The grantee
shall not be declared in default or be subject to any sanction under any
provision of this chapter in any case in which performance of any such
provision is prevented by acts of God or other reasons beyond the grantee's
control. A default shall not be deemed to be beyond the grantee's control if
committed by a corporation or other business entity in which the grantee holds
a controlling interest, whether held directly or indirectly.
   C.   Pending litigation or any appeal to any regulatory body or court having
jurisdiction over the grantee shall not excuse the grantee from the performance
of its franchise fee obligations under this chapter or the franchise. Failure
of the grantee to perform such obligations because of pending litigation or
petition may result in forfeiture or revocation pursuant to the provisions of
this section. The township shall comply with any related court orders, unless
compliance is stayed by court order or agreement.
   D.   Procedure prior to revocation.
      (1)   The township shall make written demand that the grantee comply with
any such requirement, limitation, term, condition, rule or regulation or
correct any action deemed cause for revocation. If the failure, refusal or
neglect of the grantee continues for a period of forty-five (45) days following
such written demand, the township may place its request for termination of the
franchise upon a regular Board meeting agenda. The township shall cause to be
served upon such grantee, at least seven (7) days prior to the date of such
Board meeting, a written notice of this intent to request such termination and
the time and place of the meeting, notice of which shall be published by the
Township Secretary at least once, seven (7) days before such meeting in a
newspaper of general circulation within the township.
      (2)   The Board shall hear any persons interested therein and shall
determine, in its discretion, whether or not any failure, refusal or neglect by
the grantee was with just cause.
      (3)   If such failure, refusal or neglect by the grantee was with just
cause, as determined by the Board, the Board shall direct the grantee to comply
within such time and manner and upon such terms and conditions as are
reasonable.
      (4)   If the Board shall determine such failure, refusal or neglect by
the grantee was without just cause, then the Board may, by resolution, declare
that the franchise of the grantee shall be terminated and the performance bond
forfeited.
   E.   Disposition of facilities. In the event that a franchise expires, is
revoked or otherwise terminated, the township may, in its sole discretion, do
any of the following:
      (1)   Order the removal of the system facilities from the township within
a reasonable period of time as determined by the township.
      (2)   Require the grantee to maintain and operate its system for a period
of up to eighteen (18) months or such further time as may be mutually agreed
upon. During any time a grantee continues to operate the system, it shall do so
pursuant to the terms of this chapter, and its franchise and shall be entitled
to received revenues from the system as provided by the franchise agreement.
   F.   Restoration of property. In removing its plant, structures and
equipment, a grantee shall refill, at its own expense, any excavation that
shall be made by it and shall leave all public ways and places in as good a
condition or better as that prevailing prior to a grantee's removal of its
equipment and appliances without affecting the electrical or telephone cable
wires or attachments. The township shall inspect and approve the condition of
the public ways and public places and cables, wires, attachments and poles
after removal. The liability, indemnity, insurance and performance bond as
provided herein shall continue in full force and effect during the period of
removal and until full compliance by a grantee with the terms and conditions of
this subsection, this chapter and the franchise.
   G.   Restoration by township; reimbursement of costs. In the event of a
failure by the grantee to complete any work within a public right-of-way or any
other work required by township law or ordinance within the time as may be
established and to the satisfaction of the township, the township may cause
such work to be done, and the grantee shall reimburse the township for the cost
thereof within thirty (30) days after receipt of an itemized list of such
costs, or the township may recover such costs through the performance bond,
letter of credit or security fund provided by the grantee. The township shall
be permitted to seek legal and equitable relief to enforce the provisions of
this section.
§ 82-16.   Receivership and foreclosure.
   A.   Termination by insolvency. Any franchise granted hereunder shall, at
the option of the township, cease and terminate one hundred twenty (120) days
after the appointment of a receiver or receivers or trustee or trustees to take
over and conduct the business of a grantee, whether in a receivership,
reorganization, bankruptcy or similar action or proceeding, unless such
receivership or trusteeship shall have been vacated prior to the expiration of
said one hundred twenty (120) days, or unless:
      (1)   Such receivers or trustees shall have, within one hundred twenty
(120) days after their election or appointment, fully complied with all the
terms and provisions of this chapter and the franchise granted pursuant hereto
and the receivers or trustees within said one hundred twenty (120) days shall
have remedied all defaults under the franchise.
      (2)   Such receivers or trustees shall, within said one hundred twenty
(120) days, execute an agreement duly approved by the court having jurisdiction
in the premises, whereby such receivers or trustees assume and agree to be
bound by each and every term, provision and limitation of the franchise herein
granted.
   B.   Termination by judicial action. In the case of a foreclosure or other
judicial sale of the plant, property and equipment of a grantee or any part
thereof, including or excluding the franchise, the township may serve notice of
termination upon a grantee and the successful bidder at such sale, in which
event the franchise and all rights and privileges of a grantee granted
hereunder shall cease and terminate thirty (30) days after service of such
notice, unless:
      (1)   The township shall have approved the transfer of the franchise, in
the manner this chapter provides.
      (2)   Such successful bidder shall have covenanted and agreed with the
township to assume and be bound by all the terms and conditions of the
franchise.
§ 82-17.   Equal opportunity policy.
Equal opportunity employment shall be afforded by all the grantees to all
qualified persons, and no person shall be discriminated against in employment
because of race, color, religion, age, national origin, sex or physical
handicap. The grantee shall comply with all equal opportunity provisions
enacted by federal, state and local authorities, as well as all such provisions
contained in this chapter and the franchise.
§ 82-18.   Notices.
All notices from the grantee to the township pursuant to this chapter and the
franchise shall be to the Township Manager or his or her designee. The grantee
shall maintain with the township, throughout the term of the franchise, an
address for service of notices by mail. The grantee shall also maintain with
the township a local office and telephone number for the conduct of matters
related to the franchise during normal business hours. The grantee shall be
required to advise the township of such address(es) and telephone numbers and
any changes thereof.
ARTICLE IV
Regulation of Franchise
§ 82-19.   Regulatory authority.
   A.   The township shall exercise appropriate regulatory authority under the
provisions of this chapter and applicable law. This authority shall be vested
in the Township Board of Commissioners and administered through the Township
Manager or his designee in order to provide day-to-day administration and
enforcement of the provisions of this chapter and any franchise granted
hereunder and to carry out the township's responsibilities with regard to cable
communications.
   B.   The township reserves the right to exercise the maximum plenary
authority, as may at any time be lawfully permissible, to regulate the cable
communications system, the franchise and the grantee. Should applicable
legislative, judicial or regulatory authorities at any time permit regulation
unilaterally by the franchising authority not presently permitted to the
township, the township may without the approval of the grantee engage in any
such additional regulation as may then be permissible, whether or not
contemplated by this chapter.
§ 82-20.   Supervision of the franchise.
   A.   The township shall have the following regulatory responsibility:
      (1)   Administration and enforcement of the provisions of this chapter
and any franchise granted hereunder.
      (2)   Award, renewal, extension or termination of a franchise pursuant to
the provisions of this chapter, the franchise and other applicable law.
      (3)   Consent prior to sale or transfer of any franchise granted
hereunder.
      (4)   Performance evaluation.
      (5)   Rate regulation, if applicable per §
82-21.
   B.   The township also reserves the right to perform all other functions
allowed by law, present or future:
      (1)   Develop objectives and coordinate activities related to the
operation of government channels.
      (2)   Approve procedures and standards for public, government and
educational access and operations and services, including the use of dedicated
channels and sharing of public facilities.
      (3)   Analyze plans for expansion, interconnection and growth of cable
services.
      (4)   Analyze the possibility of integrating cable communications with
other township, state or regional telecommunications networks.
      (5)   Formulate and recommend long-range telecommunications policy for
the township and determine the future cable-related needs and interests of the
community.
      (6)   Provide the administrative effort necessary for the conduct of
performance evaluations and any other activities required for the
administration of the franchise.
      (7)   Monitor the grantee's process for handling citizen complaints and
periodically inspect and analyze the records related to such complaints.
      (8)   Receive applications for rate increases, if applicable, and provide
staff assistance in the analysis and recommendations thereto.
      (9)   Monitor a grantee's adherence to operational standards, service
requirements and line extension policies.
      (10)   Assure compliance with applicable laws and ordinances.
      (11)   Arrange tests and analysis of equipment and performance, as needed
to ensure compliance with this chapter and the franchise.
      (12)   Assure continuity in service.
      (13)   Receive for examination all data and reports required by this
chapter.
§ 82-21.   Rates and charges.
   A.   The grantee shall file with the township schedules which shall describe
all services offered, all rates and charges of any kind and all terms and
conditions relating thereto, on the effective date of the franchise and thirty
(30) days prior to any change. No rates or charges shall be effective except as
they appear on a schedule so filed. The grantee shall notify subscribers, in
writing, at least thirty (30) days prior to the implementation of any change in
services offered, rates, charges or terms and conditions related thereto. A
grantee's written notice shall include a comparison of old and new rates and
charges and shall be included in the customer's bill. A complete schedule of
the grantee's rates shall be mailed to subscribers annually.
   B.   The grantee shall establish rates that are nondiscriminatory within the
same general class of subscribers which must be applied fairly and uniformly to
all subscribers in the franchise area for all services. Nothing contained
herein shall prohibit the grantee from offering:
      (1)   Discounts to commercial and multiple-family dwelling subscribers
billed on a bulk basis.
      (2)   Promotional discounts.
      (3)   Reduced rates for subscribers who have multiple services. The
grantee's charges and rates for all services shall be itemized on subscriber's
monthly bills.
   C.   If the township is authorized by law, it may choose to regulate rates
to the extent permissible.
§ 82-22.   Performance evaluation.
   A.   The township and a grantee shall, at the discretion of the township,
hold scheduled performance evaluation sessions no more frequently than once
every two (2) years. All such evaluation sessions shall be open to the public.
   B.   Special evaluation sessions may be held at any time during the term of
the franchise at the request of the township.
   C.   All evaluation sessions shall be open to the public and announced in a
newspaper of general circulation.
   D.   Topics which may be discussed at any scheduled or special evaluation
session may include but not be limited to system performance and construction,
grantee compliance with this chapter and the franchise, customer service and
complaint response, subscriber privacy, services provided, programming offered,
service rate structures, franchise fees, services offered under the franchise,
applications of new technologies, judicial and FCC filings and line extensions.
   E.   During the review and evaluation by the township, a grantee shall fully
cooperate with the township and shall provide such current and historical
information and documents as the township may need to reasonably perform its
regulatory duties.
ARTICLE V
Bonds, Insurance and Indemnification
§ 82-23.   Performance bond; letter of credit.
   A.   Performance bond. Upon the effective date of a franchise which requires
a performance bond, a grantee shall obtain and maintain during the entire term
of the franchise and any extensions and renewals thereof, at its cost and
expense, and file with the township a corporate surety bond in the sum total of
seventy-five thousand dollars ($75,000.) or in such other sum as specified in
the franchise agreement, to guarantee the faithful performance by a grantee of
all its obligations provided under this chapter and the franchise. Failure to
timely obtain, file and maintain said bond shall constitute a substantial
violation within the meaning of this section.
   B.   Conditions. The performance bond shall provide the following
conditions:
      (1)   There shall be recoverable by the township jointly and severally
from the principal and surety, any and all fines and liquidated damages due to
the township, as specified in the franchise, and any and all damages, losses,
costs and expenses suffered or incurred by the township resulting from the
failure of a grantee to faithfully comply with the provisions of this chapter
and the franchise; comply with all orders, permits and directives of any
township agency or body having jurisdiction over its acts or defaults; pay fees
due to the township; pay any claims, liens or taxes due the township which
arise by reason of the construction, operation, maintenance or repair of the
cable communication system. Such losses, costs and expenses shall include but
not be limited to attorney's fees and other associated expenses.
      (2)   The total amount of the bond shall be forfeited in favor of the
township in the event that the township revokes the franchise pursuant to §
82-15 for the two (2) following reasons:
         (a)   A grantee abandons the cable communication system at any time
during the term of the franchise or any extension thereto.
         (b)   A grantee assigns the franchise without the express written
consent of the township, provided that a grantee has been notified of such
noncompliance, in writing, by the township and has failed to cure the same
within thirty (30) days.
   C.   Reduction of bond. Upon written application by a grantee, the township
may, at its sole option, permit the amount of the bond to be reduced or waive
the requirements for a performance bond subject to the conditions set forth
below. Reductions granted or denied upon application by a grantee shall be
without prejudice to a grantee's subsequent applications or to the township's
right to require the full bond at any time thereafter. However, no application
shall be made by a grantee within one (1) year of any prior application.
   D.   Letter of credit. If requested by the township per the franchise
agreement in lieu of the performance bond required by this section, a grantee
shall obtain, maintain and file with the township an irrevocable letter of
credit from a financial institution licensed to do business in the state in an
amount specified in the franchise, naming the township as beneficiary. The form
and contents of such letter of credit shall be approved by the Township
Solicitor and shall be released only upon expiration of the franchise or upon
the replacement of the letter of credit by a successor the grantee. Failure to
obtain the letter of credit within the time specified herein shall constitute a
substantial violation within the meaning of this section.
   E.   Use of performance bond or letter of credit. Prior to drawing upon the
letter of credit or the performance bond for the purposes described in this
section, the township shall notify the grantee, in writing, specifying the item
for which payment is claimed and the date it was due. The grantee shall have 10
days from the receipt of such written notice to make a full and complete
payment. If the grantee does not make the payment within 10 days, the township
may withdraw the amount thereof, with interest and penalties, from the letter
of credit or the performance bond.
   F.   Notification. Within three days of a withdrawal from the letter of
credit or performance bond, the township shall deliver to the grantee, by
actual mail delivery, certified mail, registered mail or first class mail,
written notification of the amount, date and purpose of such withdrawal.
[Amended 2-8-2000 by Ord. No. 1021]
   G.   Replenishment of letter of credit or performance bond. No later than 30
days after delivery to the grantee of notification of a withdrawal pursuant to
Subsection F above, the grantee shall replenish the letter of credit or
performance bond in an amount equal to the amount so withdrawn. Failure to make
timely replenishment of such amount to the letter of credit or performance bond
shall constitute a substantial violation of this chapter. [Amemded 2-8-2000 by
Ord. No. 1021]
   H.   Nonrenewal, alteration or cancellation of letter of credit or
performance bond. The performance bond or letter of credit required herein
shall be in a form satisfactory to the township and shall require 30 days'
written notice of any nonrenewal, alteration or cancellation to both the
township and a grantee. The grantee shall, in the event of any such
cancellation notice, obtain, pay all premiums for and file with the township
written evidence of the issuance of replacement bond or policies within 30 days
following receipt by the township or a grantee of any notice of cancellation.
   I.   To offset the effects of inflation, the amounts of the bond or letter
of credit provided for herein are subject to reasonable increases at the end of
every three-year period of the franchise, applicable to the next three-year
period, upon the determination of the township.
§ 82-24.   Security fund.
   A.   Within 10 days after the acceptance of a franchise agreement that
requires a security fund, the grantee shall deposit with the grantor and
maintain on deposit through the term of this franchise the sum of $25,000, in
cash or in such other sum as specified in the franchise agreement, as security
for the payment of any fees, liquidated damages or penalties imposed under this
chapter. Said sum shall be placed by the township in an interest-bearing
account, and any interest accrued thereon shall be paid annually to a grantee.
   B.   Within 10 days after notice to a grantee that any amount has been
withdrawn from the security fund deposited pursuant to Subsection A of this
section, the grantee shall pay to or deposit with the township a sum of money
or securities sufficient to restore such security fund to the original amount
of $25,000 or such other sum as specified in the franchise agreement.
   C.   The security fund deposited pursuant to this section shall become the
property of the township in the event that this franchise is canceled by reason
of default of the grantee. A grantee, however, shall be entitled to the return
of such security fund or portion thereof as remains on deposit with the
township at the expiration of the term of the franchise, provided that there is
then no outstanding default on the part of the grantee.
   D.   The rights reserved to the township with respect to the security funds
are in addition to all other rights of the township, whether reserved by this
chapter or authorized by law, and no action, proceeding or exercise of a right
with respect to such security funds shall affect any other right the township
may have.
§ 82-25.   Liability and insurance.
   A.   Within 60 days after the effective date of the franchise and thereafter
continuously throughout the duration of the franchise and any extensions or
renewals thereof, a grantee shall furnish to the township certificates of
insurance, approved by the township, for all types of insurance required under
this section. Failure to furnish said certificates of insurance in a timely
manner shall constitute a violation of this chapter.
   B.   Any insurance policy obtained by a grantee in compliance with this
section shall be filed and maintained with the Township Secretary during the
term of the franchise and may be changed from time to time to reflect changing
liability limits and/or to compensate for inflation. The grantee shall
immediately advise the township of any litigation that may develop that would
affect this insurance.
   C.   Neither the provisions of this section or any damages recovered by the
township hereunder shall be construed to or limit the liability of a grantee
under any franchise issued hereunder or for damages.
   D.   All insurance policies maintained pursuant to this chapter or the
franchise shall contain the following, or a comparable, endorsement:
      It is hereby understood and agreed that this insurance policy may not be
canceled by the insurance company nor the intention not to renew be stated by
the insurance company until 30 days after receipt by the Township Manager, by
registered mail, of a written notice of such intention to cancel or not to
renew.
   E.   All liability insurance policies maintained pursuant to this chapter or
the franchise shall name the township as an additional insured.
   F.   All insurance policies provided under the provisions of this chapter or
the franchise shall be written by companies authorized to do business in the
state and approved by the State Insurance Commission.
   G.   At any time during the term of the franchise, the township may request,
and the grantee shall comply with such request, to name the township, all
elected township officials and township employees with cable-related
responsibilities as additional named insureds for all general liability
insurance policies written under the provisions of this chapter or the
franchise.
   H.   General liability insurance. A grantee shall maintain and by its
acceptance of any franchise granted hereunder specifically agrees that it will
maintain throughout the term of the franchise general liability insurance
insuring the grantee a minimum of $2,000,000 for all damage, injury, accident
or death.
   I.   Such general liability insurance must include coverage for all of the
following: comprehensive form, premises-operations, explosion and collapse
hazard, underground hazard, products/completed operations hazard, contractual
insurance, broad form property damage and personal injury.
   J.   Automobile liability insurance. A grantee shall maintain and, by its
acceptance of any franchise granted hereunder, specifically agrees that it will
maintain throughout the term of the franchise, automobile liability insurance
for owned, nonowned or rented vehicles in the minimum amount of:
      (1)   Two million dollars ($2,000,000.) for bodily injury and consequent
death per occurrence.
      (2)   One million dollars ($1,000,000.) for bodily injury and consequent
death to any one (1) person.
      (3)   Five hundred thousand dollars ($500,000.) for property damage per
occurrence.
   K.   Worker's compensation and employer's liability insurance. The grantee
shall maintain and, by its acceptance of any franchise granted hereunder,
specifically agrees that it will maintain throughout the term of the franchise,
worker's compensation and employer's liability, valid in the state, in the
minimum amount of the statutory limit for worker's compensation.
§ 82-26.   Indemnification.
   A.   To the fullest extent permitted by law, the grantee shall, at its sole
cost and expense, fully indemnify, defend and hold harmless the township, its
officers, public officials, boards and commissions, agents and employees from
and against any and all lawsuits, claims (including without limitation worker's
compensation claims against the township or others), causes of action, actions,
liability and judgments for injury or damages (including but not limited to
expenses for reasonable legal fees and disbursements assumed by the township in
connection therewith):
      (1)   To persons or property, in any way arising out of or through the
acts or omissions of the grantee, its subcontractors, agents or employees.
      (2)   Arising out of any claim for invasion of the right of privacy, for
defamation of any person, firm or corporation or the violation or infringement
of any copyright, trademark, trade name, service mark or patent or any other
right of any person, firm or corporation, but excluding claims arising out of
or related to township programming or programming for which the grantee is not
legally responsible.
      (3)   Arising out of the grantee's failure to comply with the provisions
of any federal, state or local statute, ordinances or regulation applicable to
the grantee in its business hereunder.
   B.   The foregoing indemnity is conditioned upon the following: The township
shall give the grantee prompt notice of any claim or the commencement of any
action, suit or other proceeding covered by the provisions of this section.
Nothing herein shall be deemed to prevent the township from cooperating with
the grantee and participating in the defense of any litigation by its own
counsel at its own costs and expense.
ARTICLE VI
Design and Construction Provisions
§ 82-27.   Construction and technical standards.
   A.   Compliance with construction and technical standards. The grantee shall
construct, install, operate and maintain its system in a manner consistent with
all applicable laws, ordinances, construction standards, governmental
requirements and FCC technical standards. The system shall be designed,
constructed, operated and maintained for twentyfour-hours-a-day continuous
operation. The system shall produce, for reception on subscribers' receivers
which are in good working order, either monochrome or color pictures (provided
that the receiver is color-capable).
   B.   Contractor qualifications. Any contractor, subcontractor or affiliate
proposed for the work of construction, installation, operation, maintenance and
repair of system equipment must be properly licensed under laws of the state
and all township codes. The township should be notified in advance of the name
and address of any subcontractor to be used in the construction, operation or
maintenance of the system.
   C.   The grantee's system and associated equipment erected by a grantee
within the township shall be so located as to cause minimum interference with
the proper use of streets, alleys and other public ways and places and to cause
minimum interference with the rights and reasonable convenience of property
owners who adjoin any of the said streets, alleys or other public ways and
places. No pole or other fixtures placed in any public ways by the grantee
shall be placed in such a manner as to interfere with normal travel on such
public way.
   D.   The township does not guarantee the accuracy of any maps showing the
horizontal or vertical location of existing substructures. In public rights-of-
way, where necessary, the location shall be verified by excavation.
   E.   Construction, installation, operation and maintenance of the cable
communications system shall be performed in an orderly and workmanlike manner,
in accordance with then-current technological standards. All cables and wires
shall be installed, where possible, parallel with electric or telephone lines.
Multiple cable configurations shall be arranged in parallel.
   F.   The grantee shall at all times comply with:
      (1)   The National Electrical Safety Code (National Bureau of Standards).
      (2)   The National Electrical Code (National Bureau of Fire
Underwriters).
      (3)   The Bell System Code of Pole Line Construction.
      (4)   Applicable FCC or other federal, state and local regulations; and
standards as set forth in the franchise.
   G.   In any event, the system shall not endanger or interfere with the
safety of persons or property in the franchise area.
   H.   Any antenna structure used in the cable communications system shall
comply with construction, marking and lighting of antenna structure standards
as required by federal and state law or regulation.
   I.   All worker facilities, conditions and procedures that are used during
construction, installation, operation and maintenance of the cable television
system shall comply with the standards of the Occupational Safety and Health
Administration.
   J.   FCC Rules and Regulations shall govern the measurement of RF radiation;
however, the grantee shall endeavor to exceed the FCC cable television basic
signal leakage performance criteria Part 76.611, due to the township's
location.
   K.   The grantee shall maintain equipment capable of providing standby power
for a minimum of eight (8) hours for the headend.
§ 82-28.   Extension of service.
The grantee shall provide service to all dwelling units or commercial
subscribers within the territorial boundary of the township as soon as
reasonably and economically feasible, provided that the average number of homes
per contiguous mile of aerial cable plant is fifteen (15) or greater or the
average number of homes per contiguous mile of underground cable plant is
twenty (20) or greater. Where installation requires a drop in excess of two
hundred (200) feet from the distribution cable to connection of services to
subscribers, the subscriber will be charged for time and material necessary to
extend the drop beyond two hundred (200) feet. Upon receipt of a request for
extension of service to commercial subscribers, the grantee will evaluate the
costs and benefits of such an extension and determine whether to complete
extension based upon its analysis.
§ 82-29.   Use of streets.
   A.   All installations shall be underground in those areas of the township
where public utilities providing both telephone and electric service are
underground at the time of installation. In areas where either telephone or
electric utility facilities are above ground at the time of installation, the
grantee may install its service above ground, provided that at such time as
both those facilities are required to be placed underground by the township or
are placed underground, the grantee shall likewise place its services
underground. Where not otherwise required to be placed underground by this
chapter or the franchise, the grantee's system shall be located underground at
the request of a property owner, provided that the excess cost over the aerial
location shall be borne by the property owner making the request. All cable
passing under the public way shall be installed in conduit and in accordance
with all state and local laws and ordinances.
   B.   Prior to construction or alteration in any public way, however, the
grantee shall in each case file plans with the appropriate township agencies
and obtain all necessary construction permits and authorizations before
proceeding.
   C.   Interference with persons, improvements, public and private property
and utilities. The grantee's system and facilities, including poles, lines,
equipment and all appurtenances, shall be located, erected and maintained so
that such facilities shall:
      (1)   Not endanger or interfere with the health, safety or lives of
persons.
      (2)   Not interfere with the free and proper use of public streets,
alleys, bridges, easements or other public ways, places or property, except to
the minimum extent possible during actual construction or repair.
      (3)   Not interfere with the rights and reasonable convenience of private
property owners, except to the minimum extent possible during actual
construction or repair.
      (4)   Not obstruct, hinder or interfere with any gas, electric, water or
telephone facilities or other utilities located within the township.
   D.   Restoration to prior condition. In case of any disturbance of pavement,
sidewalk, property or other surfacing, the grantee shall, at its own cost and
expense and in a manner approved by the township, replace and restore all
paving, sidewalk, landscaping or surfacing of any property or public way
disturbed in as good a condition as or better than before said work was
commenced and in a good workmanlike, timely manner in accordance with standards
for such work set by the township. Conditions permitting, such restoration
shall be undertaken within no more than ten (10) business days after the damage
is incurred and shall be completed within thirty (30) business days unless
otherwise authorized by the township.
   E.   Relocation of the facilities. In the event that at any time during the
period of the franchise, the township, county or state shall lawfully elect to
alter or change the grade of any street, alley or other public ways or make
repairs or improvements to any infrastructure, the grantee, upon reasonable
notice by the proper authority, shall remove or relocate as necessary its
poles, wires, cables, underground conduits, manholes and other fixtures at its
own expense and with all due deliberate speed. In the event that any utility is
reimbursed for the same work, the grantee will be reimbursed on the same terms
and conditions.
   F.   Cooperation with building movers. The grantee shall, on the request of
any person holding a building moving permit issued by the township, temporarily
raise or lower its wire to permit the moving of buildings. The expense of such
temporary removal, raising or lowering of wires shall be paid by the person
requesting the same, and the grantee shall have the authority to require such
payment in advance. The grantee shall be given not less than fifteen (15)
working days' advance notice to arrange for such temporary wire changes.
   G.   Tree trimming. The grantee shall have the authority, except when in
conflict with existing township ordinances, to trim any trees upon or
overhanging the public right-of-way so as to prevent the branches of such trees
from coming in contact with system facilities, except that at the option of the
township, such trimming as may be required by the grantee may be done by the
township or under its supervision and direction, at the expense of the grantee.
The grantee shall notify the Township Department of Public Works prior to
trimming any trees in the right-of-way.
   H.   Easements. All necessary easements over and under private property
shall be arranged for by the grantee. This language shall not be interpreted to
in any way impinge on the grantee's right to utilize public rights-of-way and
easements that have been dedicated for compatible uses as provided for in § 621
(a)(2) of the Cable Communications Policy Act of 1984.
§ 82-30.   Erection, removal and common use of poles.
   A.   Prior to the erection of any towers, poles or conduits or the upgrade
or rebuild of the cable communications system under this chapter, the grantee
shall first submit to the township and other designated parties for approval a
concise description of the facilities proposed to be erected or installed,
including engineering drawings, if required, together with a map and plans
indicating the proposed location of all such facilities. No erection or
installation of any tower, pole, underground conduit or fixture or any rebuilds
or upgrading of the cable communications system shall be commenced by any
person until approval therefor has been received from the township; provided,
further, that such approval shall not be unreasonably withheld.
   B.   Where poles already exist for use in serving the township are available
for use by a grantee, the township may require the grantee to use such poles
and structures.
§ 82-31.   Construction reporting requirements.
   A.   Within thirty (30) days of the granting of a franchise pursuant to this
chapter, upon request of the township as specified in the franchise agreement,
a grantee shall provide the township with a written progress report detailing
work completed to date on initial construction, rebuild or upgrading of a cable
television system. Such report shall include a description of the progress in
applying for any necessary agreements, licenses or certifications and any other
information the Township Manager or designee may deem necessary. The content
and format of the report will be determined by the Township Manager and may be
modified at his or her discretion.
   B.   Such written progress reports shall be submitted to the township on a
monthly basis throughout the entire initial construction or rebuild process.
The Township Manager may require more frequent reporting if he or she
determines it is necessary to better monitor the grantee's progress.
   C.   Prior to the commencement of any initial construction, rebuild or
upgrading of a cable television system, the grantee shall produce an
informational document to be distributed to all residents of the area to be
under construction, which shall describe the activity that will be taking
place. The informational document shall be reviewed and approved by the
Township Manager prior to its distribution.
§ 82-32.   Tests and performance monitoring.
   A.   The grantee shall comply with all performance and testing standards
established by the Federal Communications Commission relating to Cable Systems
contained in Subpart K of Part 76 of the Federal Communications Commission's
Rules and Regulations as may, from time to time, be amended.
   B.   Such tests shall be performed by a qualified technician or under the
supervision of a qualified registered professional. A copy of the report shall
be submitted to the township, upon request, within thirty (30) days, describing
test results, instrumentation, calibration and test procedures and the
qualifications of the technician responsible for the tests.
   C.   System monitor test points shall be established at or near the output
of the last amplifier in the longest feeder line, at or near trunk line
extremities. Such periodic tests shall be made at the test points as shall be
required by the FCC and/or the franchise.
   D.   In addition to the performance test reports required herein, a copy of
any performance test reports required by the FCC shall be submitted to the
township, upon request, within thirty (30) days of completion.
   E.   Reports acceptable to the township on any status monitoring system
shall be provided to the township quarterly upon request.
   F.   Whenever there have been complaints made or when there exists other
evidence which, in the judgment of the township, casts doubt on the reliability
or quality of the grantee's system, the township shall have the right and
authority to compel the grantee to promptly test, analyze and report on the
performance of its system. The township may require additional tests, full or
partial repeat tests, different test procedures or tests involving a specific
subscriber's terminal. Reports on such tests shall be delivered to the township
no later than seven (7) days after completion and shall include the following
information: the nature of the complaints which precipitated the special tests;
what system component was tested; the equipment used and procedures employed in
said testing; the results of such tests; and methods by which said complaints
were resolved. Said tests and analyses shall be supervised by a qualified
technician who shall sign all records of the special tests and forward the same
to the township with a report interpreting the results of the tests and
recommending what actions should be taken by the township. All such tests shall
be at the expense of the grantee.
   G.   The township shall have the right to employ qualified consultants and
attorneys if necessary or desirable to assist in the administration of this or
any other section of this chapter or the franchise at its own expense.
ARTICLE VII
Service Provisions
§ 82-33.   Services to subscribers and users.
   A.   Concurrently with the activation of the cable communications system in
the township, the grantee shall provide all services to subscribers as
described in the franchise.
      (1)   The system shall carry the broad categories of programming and
services that may be listed in the franchise. Should the grantee desire to
change the selection of programs or services offered, it shall maintain the
mix, quality and level of services provided over the system. Any such change in
programs or services offered shall comply with the conditions and procedures
contained in the franchise and shall be reported to the township at least
thirty (30) days prior to the proposed implementation. The grantee shall notify
all subscribers, in writing, at least thirty (30) days prior to implementing
any change in the selection of programs or services offered on any tiers or
prior to adding or deleting any channels or changing the channel number for any
station. The grantee shall endeavor to ensure diversity of programming and will
consult with the township regarding the community's needs.
      (2)   Required services.
         (a)   Unless otherwise specified in the franchise agreement, the
grantee shall provide and maintain on such channels the following access
services:
            [1]   Government access channel, which shall be a specifically
designated channel for noncommercial local governmental use and shall be
managed, scheduled and programmed exclusively by the township.
            [2]   Educational channel, if it can be provided without
eliminating current programming, which shall be a specifically designated
channel for noncommercial use by local public and private school authorities
and shall be managed, scheduled and programmed exclusively by them.
         (b)   No educational or government access channel may be assigned,
transferred or leased, in whole or in part.
      (3)   The grantee shall make available leased access channels to assure
that the widest possible diversity of information sources are made available to
subscribers.
         (a)   Such channels shall be specially designated for leased access
use by persons unaffiliated with the grantee, at rates which are in accordance
with the Cable Act.
         (b)   The number of such channels shall be determined by the
provisions of the Cable Communications Policy Act of 1984 or other applicable
federal or state Law.
         (c)   The grantee shall not exercise any editorial control over any
programming provided over such channels, except that the grantee may consider
such content to the minimum extent necessary to establish a fair and reasonable
price for the use of such channels.
      (4)   The grantee shall fully provide the services, facilities and
equipment for public, educational and government access as indicated in the
franchise.
   B.   Emergency override. The grantee shall provide equipment for emergency
override usage as required by federal law.
§ 82-34.   Installations, connections and other grantee services.
   A.   Standard installations. Standard installation shall consist of a drop
not exceeding two hundred (200) feet from a single point or pedestal attachment
to the customer's residence. Service in excess of two hundred (200) feet and
concealed wiring shall be charged on a time-and-materials basis. The grantee
shall apprise the customer of what the costs for such custom installation will
be before installation begins The desire of the subscriber as to the point of
entry into the residence shall be observed whenever possible. The grantee shall
use due care in the process of installation and shall repair any damage to the
subscriber's property caused by said installation. Such restoration shall be
undertaken within no more than ten (10) days after the damage is incurred and
shall be completed as soon as possible thereafter.
   B.   Deposits. Any deposits required by the grantee shall bear interest at
the rate earned by the grantee, if any.
   C.   Antennas and antenna switches. The grantee shall not, as a condition to
providing cable communications service, require any subscriber or potential
subscriber to remove any existing antenna structures for the receipt of over-
the-air television signals. The grantee shall install, upon the request of the
subscriber, an RF or antenna switch where required for the provision of
services provided by the grantee, provided that the subscriber's antenna is
properly grounded.
   D.   Lockout devices. The grantee shall provide to subscribers, as part of
its literature, information concerning the availability of a lockout device for
use by a subscriber.
   E.   Reconnection. The grantee shall restore service to customers wishing
restoration of service, provided that the customer shall first satisfy any
previous obligations owed.
   F.   Free disconnection. Subscribers shall have the right to have basic
subscriber television service disconnected without charge. Such disconnection
shall be made as soon as practicable and in no case later than fifteen (15)
days following notice to the grantee of the same. A refund of unused service
charges shall be paid to the customer within sixty (60) days from the date of
termination of service, in accordance with federal law.
   G.   Billing. The grantee shall not require subscribers to pay for services
more than one (1) month in advance. All bills shall be itemized by level of
service.
   H.   Delinquent accounts. The grantee shall use its best efforts to collect
on delinquent subscriber accounts. In all cases, the grantee shall provide the
customer with at least ten (10) working days' written notice prior to
disconnection.
   I.   Prohibited activities. In the conduct of its business franchised
hereunder, neither the grantee nor its officers, employees or agents shall
directly or indirectly sell, lease, repair, install or maintain television sets
or receivers or antennas; provided, however, that nothing hereunder shall
prohibit the grantee, at customers request from examining or adjusting
customer's receiving set to determine whether reception difficulties originate
in the set or in the grantee's system.
§ 82-35.   Service calls and complaint procedures.
   A.   The grantee shall establish, operate and maintain a business office
readily accessible to township residents and a maintenance and repair facility
for the purpose of receiving inquiries, requests and complaints concerning all
aspects of the construction, installation, operation and maintenance of the
system and for the payment of subscribers' service charges.
   B.   The grantee shall have a listed local telephone number for subscriber
service calls, and such telephone service shall be available twenty-four (24)
hours a day, seven (7) days a week. The grantee shall provide a sufficient
number of telephone lines and telephone staff members to enable subscribers to
reach the grantee without unreasonable delay. The grantee's number shall be
published and made available to subscribers and the general public. The grantee
shall in addition provide a telephone number or numbers to the township and
utility companies to enable the township or the utility companies to reach the
grantee in case of emergency on a twenty-four-hour, seven-days-a-week basis.
All telephone staff shall be adequately trained and will have the capability of
identifying locations and patterns in service problems.
   C.   The grantee shall respond to and resolve subscribers' complaints or
requests for service in connection with repairs and maintenance and
malfunctions of system facilities. The grantee shall respond as quickly as
possible to such complaints and requests, but shall in any case respond within
thirty-six (36) hours. Complaints or requests which may pose a potential health
and safety hazard will be responded to immediately. The township will be copied
on written responses to subscriber complaints on a quarterly basis.
   D.   The grantee shall prepare and file with the township copies of all of
its rules and regulations in connection with the handling of inquiries,
requests and complaints. The grantee shall, by appropriate means, such as a
card or brochure, furnish information concerning the procedures for making
inquiries or complaints, including the name, address and local telephone number
of the local office where complaints are to be addressed and furnish
information concerning the township office responsible for the administration
of the franchise, including but not limited to the address and telephone number
of said office on an annual basis.
   E.   The grantee shall keep full records of service calls in connection with
the system. Such records shall identify the person contacting the grantee and
the person responding on behalf of the grantee, the subject matter of the
contact, the date and time it was received, the resolution of the matter in
question or the action taken by the grantee in connection with the contact and
the date and time thereof and such other information as may be deemed pertinent
by the grantee. These records shall be made available for periodic inspection
by the township, subject to the provision of §
82-39. Summaries of these records shall be filed with the township upon request
at least twice a year, or more frequently at the township's request.
   F.   The grantee shall repair or replace without charge all defective
equipment provided by it to the subscriber; provided, however, that the grantee
may charge a subscriber for service to or replacement of any equipment rendered
inoperable or damaged due to negligence of such subscriber.
   G.   Hearing impaired. The grantee, upon request, and subject to the
availability and economic feasibility of the same, and consistent with federal
law, shall provide a subscriber with equipment designed to enhance reception of
programming with encoded signals for the hearing impaired.
§ 82-36.   Continuity of service.
   A.   It shall be the right of all subscribers to receive continuous,
uninterrupted service insofar as their financial and other obligations to the
grantee are honored, provided that it is technically feasible.
   B.   In the event that a grantee elects to rebuild, modify or sell its
system or the township gives notice of intent to terminate or fails to renew
its franchise, the grantee shall cooperate with the township or new the grantee
or operator in maintaining continuity of service to all subscribers. During
such period, the grantee shall be entitled to the revenues for any period
during which it operates the system.
   C.   Abandonment of system. In the event that the grantee fails to operate
the system for seven (7) consecutive days without prior approval of the
township or without just cause, the township may, at its option, operate the
system or designate an operator until such time as the grantee restores service
under conditions acceptable to the township or a permanent operator is
selected. If the township is required to fulfill this obligation for the
grantee, the grantee shall reimburse the township for all reasonable costs or
damages in excess of revenues from the system received by the township that are
the result of the grantee's failure to perform.
§ 82-37.   Protection of subscriber privacy.
Subscriber privacy will be protected in accordance with federal law.
§ 82-38. Rights of individuals.
   A.   Nondiscrimination required. The grantee shall not deny service, deny
access or otherwise discriminate against subscribers, channel users or general
citizens on the basis of race, color, religion, national origin, age, sex or
physical or mental handicaps, provided that the subscriber shall pay all
applicable fees for the service desired. The grantee shall comply at all times
with all other applicable federal, state and local laws and regulations.
   B.   Information accessibility.
      (1)   Each individual shall have the right to information concerning the
provisions of this chapter and the rules and regulations formulated pursuant to
it by the grantee, agent or entity created hereunder or pursuant to this
chapter. The grantee shall make a copy of this chapter and the franchise
agreement available at its offices during regular business hours.
      (2)   Each individual subscribing to the services of the cable
communications system or leasing channels thereof or using the access channels
shall be provided with a memorandum setting forth all rules and regulations, if
any, specifically outlining such individual rights pertinent to such use. All
rights specifically provided in this section shall be noted.
      (3)   Such information as may herein be prescribed will be made available
to the public and individual subscribers in such form required for
understanding in accordance with federal law.
      (4)   Each document filed or submitted under the provisions of this
chapter or pursuant to it, except those required and designated confidential by
the Federal Communications Commission, is a public document, available for
public inspection and copying at the requestor's expense, at the office of the
grantee or the township during normal business hours. The charge for such
copying shall approximate the cost of mechanical reproduction.
      (5)   Participation by citizens of the township on any cable advisory
board shall be in the manner and form specified by the Township Board of
Commissioners.
ARTICLE VIII
Books, Records and Reports
§ 82-39.   Records and books available to the grantor.
Upon two (2) weeks' prior written notice, the township shall have the right to
inspect, copy or transcribe at any time during normal business hours at the
grantee's office within the franchise territory all records of the grantee
which are required to carry out its regulatory responsibilities hereunder.
§ 82-40.   Reports required.
Except where a different time is specified by this chapter or the franchise
agreement, the grantee shall file with the township, upon request:
   A.   Regulatory communications. All reports required by the Federal
Communications _Commission (FCC), including but not limited to annual proof of
performance tests and results and equal employment opportunity (EEO) reports
and all petitions, applications and communications of all types submitted by
the grantee to the FCC, the Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) or any
other federal or state regulatory commission or agency having jurisdiction over
any matter affecting operation of the grantee's system, shall be submitted
simultaneously to the township by delivery to the Township Secretary, who shall
advise interested township departments of such filing.
   B.   Facilities report. An annual report setting forth the physical miles of
plant construction and plant in operation during the fiscal year shall be
submitted to the township. Such report shall also contain any revisions to the
system as-built maps filed with the township.
   C.   Construction reports. Construction reports shall be sent to the
township thirty (30) days after the franchise is awarded and monthly thereafter
until construction is completed.
   D.   Proof of bonds and insurance. The grantee shall submit to the township
the required performance bond or a certified copy thereof and written evidence
of payment of required premium and all policies of insurance required by this
chapter or certificates evidencing the same.
   E.   Financial and ownership reports. An annual financial report, certified
by the grantee's accounting manager, from the previous calendar year, detailing
sources of gross revenue and the basis for the computation of franchise fees
for the twelve-month period ending December 31.
   F.   Operational reports.
      (1)   An annual report on the system's technical tests and measurements
as set forth herein and in the franchise.
      (2)   An annual summary of programs and services offered by the grantee,
including public, educational, government and leased access.
      (3)   A quarterly summary of activities, including but not limited to
subscriber totals for each category of service offered, including the number of
pay units sold and new services offered.
      (4)   A semiannual summary of service calls received and handled in
addition to any reports required in the franchise.
      (5)   An annual projection of system and service plans.
   G.   Additional reports. The grantee shall prepare and furnish to the
township at the times, and in the form prescribed, such additional reports with
respect to its operation, affairs, transactions or property as may be
reasonably necessary and appropriate to the performance of any of the
regulatory duties of the township in connection with this chapter or the
franchise.
   H.   Confidentiality. Any books and records which the township has the right
to inspect which contain proprietary and/or confidential material of the
grantee shall be clearly marked "CONFIDENTIAL" by the grantee; the township
shall maintain the confidentiality of material so marked. However, subject to
applicable law, the township shall not be required to maintain the
confidentiality of any items required to be delivered to the township under
this chapter for the township's retention. Access to the aforementioned
materials shall not be denied by the grantee on the basis that said materials
contain "proprietary" information.
ARTICLE IX
Theft of Service
§ 82-41.   Tampering with system.
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to make or use or
cause to be made or used any connection, whether physically, electrically,
acoustically, inductively or otherwise, with any wires, cable, conduit,
apparatus or equipment of a cable communication system with intent to enable
himself or others to receive or use any signal without the consent of or
payment to the cable communication system owner. It shall be unlawful for any
person, firm or corporation to willfully tamper with, remove or damage or cause
to be tampered with, removed or damaged any wire, cable, conduit, apparatus or
equipment of a cable communication system without the consent of the cable
communication system owner.
§ 82-42.   Presumptive evidence.
The existence of any of the conditions with reference to wires, cables,
conduits, apparatus or equipment described in §
82-41 above is presumptive evidence that the person receiving or using any
signal by means of such condition has created or caused to be created the
condition so existing with intent to receive or use such signal without payment
to the cable communication system owner.
§ 82-43.   Enforcement.
Nothing in this chapter shall create a duty to any the grantee on the part of
the township or its officers, agents and employees to enforce the provisions of
this chapter.
§ 82-44.   Violations and penalties.
Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of this chapter
shall, in addition to all other legal and equitable remedies, be subject to a
fine or penalty not exceeding six hundred dollars ($600.) for each and every
violation, to be collected as like fines or penalties are now by law
collectible.
ARTICLE X
Miscellaneous Provisions
§ 82-45.   Franchise applications.
Applicants for a franchise shall submit to the township written applications
utilizing the standard format provided by the township, at the time and place
designated by the township for accepting applications and including the
designated application fee.
Chapter 85
DISCLOSURE TO BUYERS IN CERTAIN RESIDENTIAL TRANSACTIONS
§
85-1.   Definitions.
§
85-2.   Disclosure requirements.
§
85-3.   Certification.
§
85-4.   Effect on issuance of building permit; recording deed.
§
85-5.   Violations and penalties.
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Board of Commissioners of the Township of Upper Dublin
5-13-2025 by Ord. No. 23-1386.]
§ 85-1.   Definitions.
AGREEMENT OF SALE — Any agreement, or written instrument, which provides that
title to any property shall thereafter be transferred from one owner or
developer to another owner or developer, and shall include, inter alia, written
leases which contain options to purchase the leased property, and leases which
provide that the lessee of the property shall acquire title thereto after the
payment of a stipulated number of regular rent payments or after a stipulated
period of time.
DEVELOPER — Any person, partnership, association, corporation or fiduciary
having such interest in real property so as to be able to enter into agreements
to sell real property. Whenever used in any clause prescribing or imposing a
penalty, the term “developer” as applied to partnerships and associations shall
mean the partners, or members thereof, and as applied to corporations, the
officers thereof. “Developer” shall also be construed to include the agents
acting on behalf of the owner.
OWNER — Any person, partnership, association, corporation or fiduciary having
legal or equitable title or any interest in any real property. Whenever used in
any clause prescribing or imposing a penalty, the term “owner” as applied to
partnerships and associations shall mean the partners, or members thereof, and
as applied to corporations the officers thereof. “Owner” shall also be
construed to include the agents acting on behalf of the owner.
RESALE PROPERTY — Any building or structure or real estate situated in the
Township of Upper Dublin, Montgomery County, Pennsylvania, that has been
transferred, sold, or otherwise conveyed from an owner or developer to another
owner or developer within the five-year period prior to a proposed transfer of
such land or real estate or dwelling, and: (1) the proposed transfer is the
first conveyance following the subdivision approval of a major subdivision; or
(2) the proposed transfer is a conveyance made as part of the construction of a
home or other building on the lot; or (3) the real estate is an unimproved lot
proposed for residential development/construction; or (4) the building or
structure or real estate is a new residential construction that has not been
previously occupied, and: (a) the proposed buyer has received a one-year or
longer written warranty covering such construction; (b) the dwelling has been
inspected for compliance with the applicable building code or, if there is no
applicable code, for compliance with a nationally recognized model building
code; and (c) a certificate of occupancy or a certificate of code compliance
has been issued for the dwelling.
§ 85-2.   Disclosure requirements.
   A.   The provisions of this article shall relate only to transactions
involving one or more resale properties. Prior to executing an agreement of
sale for any resale property, the potential buyer shall execute a disclosure
statement verifying that the developer and/or owner of the resale property has
provided and explained to the potential buyer all of the information as
required by this article.
   B.   The developer and/or owner shall display a copy of the official
Township-approved subdivision or land development plan, as applicable, in the
office or other place where property sales are transacted, so that the plans
are plainly visible to all potential buyers. The approved subdivision or land
development plans shall include the record plan and all other accompanying
plans approved with the record plan. Furthermore, each potential buyer shall
receive a reduced version of the record plan prior to executing an agreement of
sale.
   C.   The information as set forth hereafter shall be noted on the approved
land development and/or subdivision plans, or summarized in narrative form. The
information shall further be listed on a checklist form for review and
signature by the prospective buyer and for submission to the Township.
Disclosure Checklist
      1.   All common areas such as park land, streets, open space and
stormwater management areas. Any stub streets or streets that may be extended
to adjacent properties.
      2.   All lot lines within the development.
      3.   The zoning classification for the development, including applicable
requirements for principal uses including lot size, yard requirements, building
coverage limits, accessory uses, and height limitations.
      4.   The zoning classifications for all properties adjoining the
development with a description of the uses permitted in each contiguous zoning
district.
      5.   The location of all easements within the development; a description
of the uses and terms of the easements and showing which lots are affected by
these easements; a description of all deed restrictions and covenants; location
of any underground pipelines, stormwater management facilities such as basins
and swales, sanitary sewer easements, water easements, or conservation
easements; the location of any bike paths or other public improvements. The
potential buyer shall also be informed, in writing, as to any maintenance
responsibilities that may be imposed upon the potential buyer if the buyer
purchases the property, and, if any property is encumbered by any easements,
rights-of-way and the like, the potential buyer shall be notified, in writing,
about limitations on planting, paving or use of, construction on, or required
setbacks from any easements and/or right-of-way areas.
      6.   The location of all areas that contain natural resource restrictions
due to wetlands, steep slopes, woodlands, floodplains, and the like, and a
description of the restrictions that apply to those natural resource areas.
      7.   The location of all stormwater management facilities, including
detention/retention basins, best management practices (BMPs), drainage
easements, drainage swales and the path of runoff and, the ownership and
maintenance responsibilities and land use limitations for or associated with
such facilities and easements, including but not limited to impervious coverage
limitations, amended soil maintenance, rain garden or other BMP maintenance.
      8.   Explanation that the Township will require a permit for the erection
or construction of accessory buildings, fences, or building additions.
      9.   A copy of the record plan, the text narrative, and a plot plan for
the lot to be purchased, showing all building setback lines and lot area in
acres and square feet.
      10.   The existence of a homeowners’ association, together with all
documents related to the creation of the homeowners’ association and the duties
and responsibilities of the homeowners’ association.
§ 85-3.   Certification.
   A.   It shall be unlawful for any owner, developer and/or his or her agent
to sell a resale property or any interest therein, unless the owner, developer
or his or her agent shall first deliver to the potential buyer at or prior to
the time of the signing of the agreement of sale a certification of compliance
with all disclosure requirements contained in this article, and, further, the
agreement of sale shall state within its contents, that the owner, developer or
agent certifies it has delivered to the buyer a copy of the disclosure
checklist, a copy of the subdivision plan of lots, a copy of the lot plan for
the resale property, and a copy of the disclosure narrative, as applicable.
   B.   All potential purchasers of properties subject to this article shall
execute the checklist provided above and shall sign a statement to be presented
to the Township prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy. If the
sale is of an unimproved lot, the Township shall receive the disclosure
statement prior to the recording of the new deed to the property.
   C.   The form of the statement to be presented to the Township, by all
potential purchasers subject to this article, shall be as follows:
         I/we, the undersigned, acknowledge that I/we have received from the
seller(s) a copy of the subdivision or land development plan, or text
narrative, as it relates to my/our property and understand the constraints
imposed thereon with regard to my/our property. I/we have further received the
disclosure checklist and understand that signing this disclosure statement does
not release me/us from complying with all requirements of the Township of Upper
Dublin.
         _______________________________
         Purchaser
         _______________________________
         Date
§ 85-4.   Effect on issuance of building permit; recording deed.
No building permit for a resale property shall be issued prior to the execution
of an agreement of sale that complies with the requirements of this article.
Under no circumstances will a deed be recorded unless the seller/developer has
complied with the terms and conditions of this article.
§ 85-5.   Violations and penalties.
Any owner, developer and/or his/her agent who violates the provisions of this
article shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be
sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $500 or undergo imprisonment for not
more than 30 days, or both.
Chapter 86
DISORDERLY CONDUCT
§
86-1.   Definition; unnecessary noise prohibited.
§
86-2.   Prohibited actions.
§
86-3.   Violations and penalties.
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Board of Commissioners of the Township of Upper Dublin
5-13-1986 as Title 7, Ch. 3, of the 1986 Code. Amendments noted where
applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
 
Alarms — See           Nuisances — See
Ch. 57.                  Ch. 158.
Amusement games — See  Parks and recreation areas — See
Ch. 61.                  Ch. 168.
 
§ 86-1.   Definition; unnecessary noise prohibited.
   A.   Disorderly conduct within the meaning of this chapter shall constitute
the making, causing or permitting to be made anywhere in the Township of Upper
Dublin of any unnecessary noises, clamor, din or other sounds tending to
disturb the peace and quiet of the community and the carrying on of any
business, trade, transportation, recreation or amusement at a time, in a place
or in a manner which causes any unnecessary noise or disturbance, and all such
noises and disturbances are hereby prohibited.
   B.   All noises or other sounds shall be considered to be unnecessary and to
constitute disorderly conduct — even though they are no louder than is
customary and are the unavoidable sounds, or noises attendant upon the ordinary
use and occupation of premises or attendant upon the ordinary operation of
performance of business, trade, transportation, recreation or amusement — if
they are made on Sunday or on weekdays during hours other than the usual and
customary hours for such work or activity. Except in cases of emergency, no
person shall carry on any activity at a time or in a manner which causes
unnecessary annoyance or disturbs the peace and quiet of the immediate
neighborhood.
   C.   Unnecessary noises, as used in Subsections A and B above, shall be
determined in accordance with §
158-12 of this Code. [Added 5-13-1997 by Ord. No. 943]
§ 86-2.   Prohibited actions.
[Amended 1-10-1995 by Ord. No. 879; 5-13-1997 by Ord. No. 943]
Without in any manner intending to limit or restrict the generality of the
above definition of and prohibition against disorderly conduct, the following
are hereby declared to constitute disorderly conduct by reason of excessive
noise, when such noise levels attain those proscribed by §
158-12 of this Code:
   A.   The unnecessary sounding of automobile horns, sirens, bells, whistles
or other warning devices. The operators of motor vehicles shall at all times
exercise due care and foresight in their operation and shall not substitute the
sounding of warnings for careful driving and the maintenance of proper control
over their respective vehicles. It is not intended hereby to prohibit the use
of such warning devices in emergencies or at times when in the exercise of good
judgment a prudent operator would use such devices.
   B.   The keeping of dogs, chickens or other animals under such conditions or
in such a manner that, by barking, crowing or otherwise, they disturb the peace
and quiet of the immediate neighborhood.
   C.   The operation of radios, stereos or high-fidelity record players, juke
boxes or other mechanical instruments or singing, shouting or playing of
musical instruments in a manner and at a time which is generally considered to
be inappropriate and which unnecessarily disturbs the peace and quiet of the
immediate neighborhood.
   D.   The loading and unloading and delivery of merchandise or commercial
products at a time of the day or night which unnecessarily disturbs the peace
and quiet of the immediate neighborhood.
   E.   The discharging on or across the streets or highways of air guns,
spring guns, rifles or firearms of any kind or character whatsoever.
   F.   Loafing, loitering, lounging or congregating on the street corners or
in front of any place of business in the township.
   G.   Acting in and about the streets or other public places of the township
in a noisy, loud, boisterous and unseemly manner, or in such manner as to
disturb the peace and quiet of the community.
§ 86-3.   Violations and penalties.
[Amended 8-9-1988 by Ord. No. 753; 1-10-1995 by Ord. No. 879]
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of
the offense of disorderly conduct and, upon conviction thereof in a summary
proceeding, shall be sentenced to pay the cost of prosecution and a fine not
exceeding one thousand dollars ($1,000.).
Chapter 91
DUMPING
§
91-1.   Deposit prohibited.
§
91-2.   Hazardous fluids.
§
91-3.   Exceptions.
§
91-4.   Violations and penalties.
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Board of Commissioners of the Township of Upper Dublin
5-13-1986 as Title 5, Ch. 3, of the 1986 Code. Amendments noted where
applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
 
Littering — See             Solid waste — See
Ch. 145.                      Ch. 203.
Property maintenance — See
Ch. 180.
 
§ 91-1.   Deposit prohibited.
[Amended 9-14-2004 by Ord. No. 1142]
No paper, trash, rubbish, ashes, junk, waste, discarded materials, pollutant or
refuse of any kind shall be thrown, deposited, discharged or dumped in or on
any ravine, ditch, gutter, swale, storm drain, storm sewer or watercourse; or
any highway, road, street, avenue, lane, alley, sidewalk or footpath in the
Township of Upper Dublin; nor on any public place or private property, vacant
or occupied, within the limits of the Township of Upper Dublin.
§ 91-2.   Hazardous fluids.
The spillage or release of gasoline, oil (including fuel oil), kerosene and
other hazardous or noxious fluids shall, for the purpose of this chapter,
constitute dumping.
§ 91-3.   Exceptions.
[Amended 1-10-1995 by Ord. No. 879]
Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to prohibit municipal dumps or
recycling facilities maintained by the Township of Upper Dublin, or a
reasonable accumulation of ashes or rubbish on private property by the owner
thereof.
§ 91-4.   Violations and penalties.
[Amended 7-12-1988 by Ord. No. 751]
   A.   Any owner, occupant, tenant, person, firm, association or corporation
who shall violate any of the provisions of this chapter or who shall fail to
comply with the conditions or requirements of any permit granted in accordance
with the provisions of this section of this chapter shall, upon conviction
thereof, be liable to pay a fine or penalty of $1,000 for each and every
offense and shall remove the paper, trash, rubbish, ashes, junk, waste,
discarded materials, pollutant or refuse from the township. Additionally, all
costs of cleanup incurred by the township shall be assessed to and paid by the
violator. [Amended 9-14-2004 by Ord. No. 1142]
   B.   A new and separate offense shall be deemed to have been committed for
each day that said violation exists. All fines and penalties imposed by this
chapter are recoverable by summary proceedings before any District Justice in
the Township of Upper Dublin, and all suits or actions of law instituted for
the recovery thereof are to be in the name and for the use of the Township of
Upper Dublin, against which offense is committed, and, upon recovery thereof,
all such fines and penalties are to be paid into the Treasury of the township.
1
1. Editor's Note: The former third unnumbered paragraph of original Sec. 1.03,
which provided for imprisonment and which immediately followed this subsection,
was deleted 1-10-1995 by Ord. No. 879.
Chapter 99
EROSION, SEDIMENTATION AND GRADING
§
99-1.   Short title.
§
99-2.   Purposes.
§
99-3.   Scope.
§
99-4.   Definitions.
§
99-5.   Grading permit.
§
99-6.   Grading plans.
§
99-7.   Erosion and sedimentation control plan.
§
99-8.   General grading requirements.
§
99-9.   Inspections.
§
99-10.   Responsibility.
§
99-11.   Performance security.
§
99-12.   Permit expiration and renewal.
§
99-13.   Amendment of plans and additional conditions.
§
99-14.   Violations.
§
99-15.   Exceptions to requirements.
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Board of Commissioners of the Township of Upper Dublin
11-9-2022, by Ord. No. 22-1378.]
§ 99-1.   Short title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the “Upper Dublin Township
Erosion, Sedimentation, and Grading Ordinance, “implementing the Pennsylvania
Clean Streams Law, 35 P.S. §§ 691.1 et seq., the Department of Environmental
Protection Chapter 102 (Erosion Control) regulations, 25 Pa. Code 102.1 et
seq., the Pennsylvania Stormwater Management Act (Act 167 of 1978), the First
Class Township Code, 53 P.S. §§ 55101 et seq., and Article I, Section 27 of the
Pennsylvania Constitution.
§ 99-2.   Purposes.
The purposes of this chapter are to protect property and promote the public
welfare by regulating the modification of the natural terrain, controlling the
alteration of drainage patterns, and requiring erosion and sediment control
measures.
§ 99-3.   Scope.
From and after the effective date of this chapter, any development or
improvement of property, including any activity requiring a permit under §
99-5 herein, shall be in conformity with this chapter. In the event of a
conflict between this chapter and any other statute, ordinance, or regulation,
the strictest statute, ordinance, or regulation shall take precedence.
§ 99-4.   Definitions.
Unless specifically defined below, words and phrases used in this chapter shall
be interpreted to have common English usage, to give effect to the purposes set
forth in §
99-2 above, and to provide reasonable application of this chapter. As used in
this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated, unless a
different meaning clearly appears from the context:
ALLUVIAL SOILS — Soils, developed from transported and relatively recently
deposited material (alluvium), characterized by a weak modification (or none)
of the original material by soil-forming processes.
AREA OF DISTURBANCE — The outermost limit of the area within a property where
one or more of the following will occur: 1) grading, including excavation,
fill, vegetation or topsoil removal, tree and stump removal; 2) construction,
including buildings, structures, walls, paving, stone and gravel areas,
accessory uses, utility installation, stormwater management facilities,
equipment or material storage; and, 3) erosion control, including silt fence,
topsoil stockpile areas, construction entrances, drainage features, equipment
access. Any area not included in the area of disturbance may not be disturbed
in connection with a permitted project.
BEDROCK — The solid, undisturbed rock in place either at the ground surface or
beneath surface soil deposits.
BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES — Procedures and measures pertaining to earth
disturbances/construction activities that are intended to minimize water
pollution; increase water quality; retain valuable topsoil; prevent erosion and
sedimentation; and control rate of runoff from storm events.
BORROW PIT — An open pit from which soil is excavated as a single incident for
use at a single construction site.
BUILDING PERMIT — A permit issued by the Codes Department pursuant to the
provisions of
Chapter 73, Building Construction, for the construction, erection or alteration
of a structure or building.
CUT — The removal of soil or rock from its natural or predevelopment location.
DEVELOPMENT — Any subdivision or land development or any alteration of land not
for agricultural or conservation purposes that includes earthmoving, cutting,
filling or stripping, including but not limited to road construction, utility
installation - public or private, residential, commercial or industrial
facility construction, mining, quarrying and water resource management.
EARTHMOVING — Any activity by which soil or bedrock is cut into, quarried,
displaced, relocated, or used as fill.
EROSION —
   (1)   The wearing away of the soil, bedrock, and/or land surface by running
water, wind, ice, chemical or other geological agents.
   (2)   Detachment and movement of soil or rock fragments by water, wind, ice,
or gravity.
EROSION AND SEDIMENT CONTROL PLAN — A plan indicating the specific measures and
sequencing to be used in controlling sediment and erosion on a development site
both during and after construction.
EXCAVATION — Any act by which earth, sand, gravel, rock or any other similar
material is cut into, dug, quarried, uncovered, removed, displaced, relocated
or bulldozed, and shall include the conditions resulting therefrom.
EXISTING GRADE — The vertical elevation of the ground surface prior to
earthmoving.
FILL — A deposit of soil or other materials placed by people.
FINISHED GRADE — The final vertical elevation of the ground after development.
GRADE —
   (1)   The slope of a road, channel, or natural ground.
   (2)   The finished surface of a roadbed, top of embankment, or bottom of
excavation; any surface prepared for the support of construction like paving or
laying a conduit.
   (3)   To finish the surface of a roadbed, top of embankment, or bottom of
excavation.
GRADING PERMIT — The permit required to be issued prior to the disturbance of
the topography and vegetation of land in connection with the conduct of
activities regulated by this chapter.
IMPROVEMENT — Alteration of private property to include building, structures
including decks, accessibility features, paving, concrete or stone areas,
drainage systems, repairs to such items, whether temporary or permanent.
NATURAL GROUND SURFACE — The ground surface in its original state before any
earthmoving or stripping of vegetation.
PARCEL — All contiguous land under single and separate ownership.
PERMANENT VEGETATION — Ground cover establishing a 75% vegetated cover to
control soil erosion satisfactorily and to survive severe weather conditions.
PERMIT — A grading permit.
PERMITTEE — Any person to whom a grading permit is issued or to whom a site
plan approval is granted.
PERSON — Any individual, corporation, partnership, joint venture,
unincorporated association, municipal corporation or agency within the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania or any combination thereof.
RUNOFF (HYDRAULICS) — That portion of irrigation water, rainfall, snowmelt, or
other precipitation upon a drainage area or watershed that is discharged from
the area in watercourses, sheet flows, absorption, etc. Types of runoff include
surface runoff, groundwater runoff, and seepage.
SEDIMENT — Solid material, both mineral and organic, that is in suspension in,
is being transported by, or has been moved from its site of origin by air,
water, gravity, or ice and has come to rest on the earth’s surface either above
or below water level.
SEDIMENTATION — The process by which sediment is deposited.
SITE — Any lot, parcel, or combination of contiguous lots or parcels of land
under single and separate ownership where earthmoving, filling or stripping is,
was, or will be performed.
SLOPE — Degree of deviation of a surface from the horizontal usually expressed
in percent or degrees.
SOIL — All earth material of whatever origin that overlies bedrock.
SOIL DRAINAGE — A condition of the soil, referring to the frequency and
duration of periods when the soil is free of saturation.
STRIPPING — Any activity which removes the vegetative surface cover, including
tree removal; and the clearing and storage or removal of topsoil.
TEMPORARY STREAM CROSSING — A temporary structural span installed across a
flowing watercourse for use by construction traffic. Such structures include,
but are not limited to, bridges, round pipes and pipe arches and must meet all
local, county, state, and federal requirements.
TOPOGRAPHY — The physical features of a site, place or region.
TOWNSHIP — The Township of Upper Dublin.
VEGETATION — The plants located on a site or in an area or region.
WATERCOURSE — Any natural or artificial river, stream, swale, channel, gully,
ravine, drain or culvert in which waters flow continuously or intermittently,
having a defined bed and banks.
§ 99-5.   Grading permit.
   A.   The following activities require a grading permit:
      (1)   Modifying, disturbing, blocking, diverting or otherwise adversely
affecting the natural overland or subsurface flow of water.
      (2)   Construction, erection, modification or installation of any
drainage dam, ditch, culvert, drain pipe, bridge or any other structure or
obstruction affecting the drainage of any parcel.
      (3)   Paving, cutting, filling, stripping, excavating, grading or
regrading of any parcel unless specifically excluded by Subsection B. below.
      (4)   Disturbing, in excess of 100 square feet, the natural ground
surface, soil, or vegetation upon any parcel, unless exempted pursuant to
Subsection B.
      (5)   Construction or improvement of a property with any of the
following:
         (a)   Buildings.
         (b)   Structures.
         (c)   Decks that are more than 24 inches above finished grade.
         (d)   Sheds larger than 80 square feet.
         (e)   Driveway, walkway or patio replacement, repair or enlargement.
         (f)   Pools (above-ground and in-ground).
         (g)   Retaining walls or freestanding walls.
         (h)   Demolition of improvements or existing features to the extent
regrading, fill or excavation is part of the project.
   B.   The following activities require no grading permit:
      (1)   Gardening for home consumption or personal use on any parcel.
      (2)   Agricultural operations operated in accordance with a conservation
plan or erosion and sedimentation control plan found adequate by the Montgomery
County Conservation District, but not including sod farming.
      (3)   Forest management operations that follow guidelines established by
the Department of Environmental Protection in “Soil Erosion and Sedimentation
Control Guidelines for Forestry”; that are operating under an erosion control
plan approved by Montgomery County Conservation District; and that comply with
the Township Zoning Ordinance.
      (4)   Any emergency activity immediately necessary for the protection of
life, property, or natural resources.
      (5)   Work in a public street or alley or in a Township park, playground
or recreation area or on other public property.
      (6)   The depositing of rubbish or other material at any dump operated by
the Township.
      (7)   Improvements that meet the following criteria:
         (a)   Area of disturbance is less than 500 square feet;
         (b)   Area of disturbance is more than 50 feet from any adjacent
property line;
         (c)   Area of disturbance is completely within a rear yard of a lot;
and
         (d)   Area of disturbance does not include any government-regulated
resource, including floodplain, wetlands, steep slopes, riparian buffer, or
easements.
   C.   Application for grading permit.
      (1)   Any person proposing to engage in an activity requiring a grading
permit shall apply for a permit by submitting a complete grading permit
application (attached to Ordinance 22-1378 as Appendix A and incorporated
herein by reference as if set out in full).
      (2)   The grading permit application shall be accompanied by a fee
established in the Township’s Schedule of Fees.
      (3)   All applications must be accompanied by an erosion and sediment
control plan as described in §
99-6 below.
      (4)   All applications filed regarding any earthmoving or stripping
activities on any commercial, industrial, and/or institutional lot; on any
residential lot where earthmoving activities in excess of 1,000 square feet are
proposed; or where, in the opinion of the Township Engineer, the lot features
such as slope, soils, or other natural resources require special consideration
of the earthmoving activities, shall be accompanied by a grading plan as
provided in §
99-7 below.
      (5)   A separate application shall be required for each grading project.
   D.   Issuance of permits. Upon the approval of the required plans and/or
applications by the appropriate Township official/employee, the Township
Engineer shall issue the necessary grading permit(s). No grading permit shall
be issued until all the plans and applications required to be submitted by this
chapter for all the proposed earthmoving or stripping activities have been
reviewed and approved by the appropriate Township official/employee as set
forth in this chapter and required fees have been paid.
   E.   Standards for issuance of grading permit.
      (1)   Notwithstanding any provision of this chapter or any condition of
the grading permit, the permittee is responsible for the prevention of damage
to other people or property that may be affected by the earthmoving or
stripping activity.
      (2)   No person shall modify, cut, fill, excavate, pave, strip, grade, or
regrade land in any manner that endangers or damages any adjoining street,
alley, or any other public or private property. Any earthmoving activity
conducted adjacent to a property or street line shall support and protect the
adjoining property from settling, cracking, erosion, sediment, flooding, or any
other physical damage or personal injury that might result.
      (3)   No person shall deposit, place, throw, or cause to be deposited,
placed or thrown any debris or other material in any drainage structure or
watercourse so as to obstruct the free flow of water.
      (4)   No person shall fail to adequately maintain, in good operating
order, any drainage facility on the site. All drainage ditches, culverts, drain
pipes, drainage structures, and watercourses shall be kept open and free-
flowing at all times.
      (5)   The owner of any property upon which any work has been done
pursuant to a grading permit granted under this chapter shall continuously
maintain and repair all graded surfaces, anti-erosion devices, retaining walls,
drainage structures, pipes, culverts and other protective devices, plantings
and ground cover, installed or completed.
      (6)   All graded surfaces shall be permanently seeded, sodded, planted,
and/or otherwise protected from erosion immediately upon completion of the
earthmoving activities upon that surface, weather permitting, and shall be
tended and/or maintained until growth is well established. The disturbed area
and duration of exposure shall be kept to a minimum using temporary, erosion
and sediment control measures immediately, as outlined in the “Erosion and
Sediment Control Handbook, Montgomery County, Pennsylvania.”
      (7)   Precautions shall be taken to prevent the unnecessary removal of
trees. All trees in areas where slopes exceed three to one shall be protected
with suitable tree wells, unless the necessity for removal is established. Any
grading around trees or any removal of trees must comply with the Township’s
Zoning Ordinance and Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance.
      (8)   The permittee shall provide adequate provisions for dust control
measures. Any such measures must be deemed acceptable by the Township Engineer.
      (9)   All plans and specifications submitted for a grading permit shall
include provisions for both interim (temporary) and ultimate (permanent)
erosion and sediment control. The design, installation and maintenance of
erosion and sediment control measures shall be accomplished in accordance with
standards and specifications established by the Montgomery County Soil
Conservation District as adopted from standards and specifications of the
United States Soil Conservation Service, and as outlined in the “Erosion and
Sediment Control Handbook, Montgomery County, Pennsylvania.”
      (10)   In connection with site grading for roads, driveways, building
areas or other site improvements, the lateral extent of cut or fill areas shall
not be more than 30 feet beyond the top of slope in fills or the toe of slope
in cuts, or extend closer than 50 feet to the bank of any watercourse, lake,
pond, or wetland.
      (11)   Wherever fill material is to be used, the person, firm, or
corporation using such fill shall be responsible for testing to determine its
dry density as per ASTM D1556. The density of each layer shall be not less than
95% of maximum density as determined by ASTM D1557.
         (a)   Inspection procedure shall follow the general procedure as
stated in §
99-10 below.
         (b)   Compaction test reports shall be kept on file at the site and
are subject to review at all times.
         (c)   Degree of compaction required shall be determined by the
Township Engineer following the guidelines listed in this section.
      (12)   If load-bearing fill is proposed, a soils investigation report
shall be submitted which shall consist of test borings, laboratory testing and
engineering analysis to correlate surface and subsurface conditions with the
proposed grading plan. The report shall include data regarding the nature,
distribution and supporting ability of existing soils and rocks on the site,
conclusions, and recommendations to ensure stable soil conditions and
groundwater control, as applicable. The Township may require such supplemental
reports and data as is deemed necessary by the Township Engineer.
   F.   All permits shall require the permittee to:
      (1)   Notify the Township Engineer within 48 hours of commencing any
earthmoving or stripping activity;
      (2)   Notify the Township Engineer of the completion of any control
measures within three days after their installation;
      (3)   Obtain permission from the Township in accordance with this chapter
prior to modifying the erosion and sedimentation control plan;
      (4)   Install all control measures as identified in the approved erosion
and sedimentation control plan prior to starting any earthmoving activities;
      (5)   Maintain all road drainage systems, stormwater drainage systems,
control measures and other facilities identified in the erosion and
sedimentation control plan;
      (6)   Repair any siltation or erosion damage to adjoining properties,
surfaces, and drainage ways resulting from earthmoving or stripping;
      (7)   Inspect the erosion and sedimentation control measures after each
rain of one-half inch or more and at least once each week and make needed
repairs;
      (8)   Allow the Township Engineer or other Township official to enter the
site for the purpose of inspecting compliance with the erosion and
sedimentation control plan or for performing any work necessary to bring the
site into compliance with the erosion and sedimentation control plan;
      (9)   Keep a copy of the erosion and sedimentation control plan on the
site;
      (10)   Provide, until the problem is corrected, additional stabilizing
measures to slopes that, in the judgment of the Township Engineer, are found to
be eroding excessively within one year of construction. Once such slopes are
stabilized by the additional measures, the permittee is responsible for
providing further additional stabilizing measures if the slopes continue to
erode excessively within one year of the installation of the additional
measures.
§ 99-6.   Grading plans.
Activities that require a grading permit must file a grading plan. The grading
plan must include the following information:
   A.   A site plan (plot plan) drawn at a suitable scale of not less than one
inch equals 50 feet and contour intervals of no more than one foot prepared by
a registered professional land surveyor or engineer, licensed in the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania showing all of the following:
      (1)   A valid boundary line survey of the site including lot lines,
monuments/pins/markers, and setback lines; existing and proposed contours;
existing vegetation; soil types and conditions; watercourses; affected
watersheds; and other natural features.
      (2)   Erosion and sedimentation control measures, high points, drainage
arrows, drainage swales, and the limits of disturbance.
      (3)   Existing and proposed features surrounding the site that are of
importance to the proposed development.
      (4)   First floor and garage elevations.
      (5)   Existing and proposed building/structure locations, wells,
wastewater treatment systems, sanitary laterals, water supply pipes, storm
sewers, inlets, manholes, basement drains, sump pump drains, utility boxes,
walls, fences, berms, underground utilities, and all other man-made structures/
features.
      (6)   Elevations at lot corners, and exterior grade at each corner of
each building.
      (7)   All earthmoving and stripping changes to the site, including cuts,
fills, structures, paving, utilities, vegetation and top soil proposed to be
stripped, and cut/fill balance.
      (8)   North arrow.
      (9)   Street trees and existing trees to be removed.
      (10)   Driveway openings and slopes, driveway turnarounds and parking
areas, depressed curb length, and driveway configurations from garage or
parking area to street.
      (11)   Sidewalk and pedestrian trail locations.
      (12)   Easements, covenants, equitable servitudes, and deed restrictions.
   B.   A stormwater management plan prepared in accordance with Upper Dublin
Township Stormwater Management Ordinance.
   C.   A statement, signed and sealed by a registered professional land
surveyor or engineer, licensed in the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania indicating
that, to the best of his/her knowledge and belief, the proposed grading
activities shall not significantly increase stormwater runoff to, and/or
otherwise adversely impact, downstream properties except as may be part of an
approved stormwater runoff collection and management plan.
§ 99-7.   Erosion and sedimentation control plan.
An erosion and sedimentation control plan shall be submitted with all grading
permit applications, the erosion and sedimentation control plan shall show how
the erosion and sediment resulting from the earthmoving and stripping
activities will be controlled. Any proposed erosion and sedimentation control
measures to be used during construction shall strictly conform to the standards
and specifications of the Montgomery County Conservation District, all Township
Codes, and the Township’s Engineering and Construction Standards, Improvement
Procedures (“ECSIP”), as amended from time to time. (The ECSIP is found at
Appendix “B” which is attached to Ordinance 22-1378 and incorporated herein by
reference as if set out in full).
   A.   An erosion and sedimentation control plan shall include the following:
      (1)   The amount of site alteration proposed and all proposed erosion and
sedimentation control measures.
      (2)   A construction schedule indicating the anticipated starting and
completion dates of the development sequence; the expected date of completion
of construction of each protective measure provided for in the erosion and
sediment control plan and the stormwater management plan; the sequence of
earthmoving activities; and the time of exposure of each area prior to
completion of such measures.
      (3)   Provisions for maintenance of control facilities, including
operation and maintenance agreements, easements, and estimates of the cost of
maintenance.
      (4)   Seeding mixtures and rates, types of sod, method of seedbed
preparation, expected seeding dates, type and rate of lime and fertilizer
application, and kind and quantity of mulching for both temporary and permanent
vegetative control measures. See Appendix “C” (attached to Ordinance 22-1378
and incorporated herein by reference as if set out in full).
      (5)   Identification of the person(s) or entity(ies) which will have
legal responsibility for maintenance of the erosion and sedimentation control
structures and measures after development is completed.
   B.   Any erosion and sedimentation control plan shall incorporate the
following erosion and sediment control practices and principles:
      (1)   Development shall reflect the topography and soils of the site so
as to create the least potential for erosion. The smallest practical area of
land shall be exposed for the shortest practical time during development.
      (2)   Stripping of vegetation, regrading, or other earthmoving activities
shall be completed in a way that will minimize erosion and resulting
sedimentation. Wherever feasible, natural vegetation shall be retained,
protected, and supplemented.
      (3)   Cut and fill operations shall be kept to a minimum. In the design
of cut and fill slopes, consideration must be given to the length and steepness
of the slope, the soil type, upslope drainage area, groundwater conditions and
other applicable factors. Areas of steep slopes where high cuts and fills may
be required shall be avoided wherever possible. Where unavoidable, cuts and
fills on steep slopes must be immediately seeded, and natural contours must be
followed as closely as possible.
      (4)   The disturbed earthen area and the duration of exposure shall be
kept to a practical minimum. All disturbed soils and topsoil stockpile areas
shall be stabilized as quickly as possible and, if necessary, seeded and
mulched immediately. Any stockpile areas located on sloping ground or near
waters of the Commonwealth shall be enclosed with silt fencing.
      (5)   Procedures for protecting soils or geologic structures with water
supply potential from contamination by surface water or other disruption by
earthmoving activity must be established to the satisfaction of the Township.
      (6)   Sediment basins, debris basins, desilting basins, silt traps or
filters shall be installed and maintained to remove sediment from runoff waters
from land undergoing development. All runoff from the site shall be collected
and diverted to these facilities for the removal of sediment. Sedimentation in
the runoff water shall be trapped and filtered by these facilities until the
disturbed area is stabilized to the satisfaction of the Township Engineer.
      (7)   All plans, wherein a sump pump or basement drain is proposed to be
installed, shall provide for discharge of the sump pump/drain to a natural
watercourse, drainage swale, stormwater easement, storm sewer system, or open
space area. No sump pump or basement drain discharge shall be permitted to a
grassed lawn area of residential or non-residential buildings, unless such area
is part of a stormwater easement or drainage swale.
      (8)   Provisions shall be made to minimize any runoff caused by changed
soil and surface conditions during and after development. All drainage
facilities shall be designed to carry surface water in such a manner as to
prevent erosion or overflow. Drainage facilities shall be designed and
constructed to withstand the expected velocity of flow from a ten-year
frequency storm without erosion. Stabilization adequate to prevent erosion must
also be provided at the outlets of all pipes and paved channels.
      (9)   Natural vegetation shall be retained, protected, and supplemented
wherever possible. Permanent vegetation shall be established on denuded areas
not otherwise permanently stabilized. Permanent vegetation and related
structures shall be installed as soon as practical. Permanent vegetation shall
not be considered established until a ground cover is achieved that is mature
enough to control the soil erosion satisfactorily and to survive severe weather
conditions to the Township Engineer’s satisfaction.
      (10)   Permanent or temporary soil stabilization must be applied to
denuded areas within one day after final grade is reached on any portion of the
site. Soil stabilization must also be applied immediately to denuded areas
which may not be at final grade but will remain dormant (undisturbed) for
longer than one day.
      (11)   Properties adjacent to the site of a land-disturbing activity
shall be protected from sediment disposition by preserving a well-vegetated
buffer strip around the lower perimeter of the land-disturbing activity; by
installing perimeter controls such as sediment barriers; filters, dikes,
interceptor drains or sediment basins; or by a combination of such measures.
         (a)   Vegetated buffer strips may not be used alone except where only
runoff in sheet flow is expected.
         (b)   Buffer strips shall be at least 20 feet in width and shall
contain preexisting, permanent vegetation, excluding trees and shrubs that
cover 95% of the ground within the buffer strip.
         (c)   If at any time, the Township Engineer finds that a vegetated
buffer strip alone is ineffective in preventing sediment movement onto adjacent
property, additional perimeter controls must be provided by the permittee or
then-owner of the property within a time period specified by the Township
Engineer.
      (12)   In the design of erosion control facilities and practices,
aesthetics and the requirements of continuing maintenance shall be considered.
   C.   The selection of erosion and sedimentation control measures shall be
based on assessment of the probable frequency of climatic and other events
likely to contribute to erosion, on an evaluation of the risks, costs and
benefits involved and in accordance with best management practices.
§ 99-8.   General grading requirements.
All earthmoving and/or stripping activities and/or building construction
wherein stripping, excavation, placement of fill, and/or grading activities are
performed shall conform to the following general requirements:
   A.   All erosion and sedimentation control measures shall be installed per
the approved plan prior to any earthmoving and/or stripping activities.
      (1)   Earthen structures such as dams. Dikes and diversions must be
seeded and mulched immediately after installation.
      (2)   All stormwater management basins shall be constructed, functional,
and stabilized prior to any additional site activity. An as-built plan of the
facility prepared by a registered professional land surveyor or engineer,
licensed in the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, shall be submitted to the
Township for review to verify adequate stage/storage capacity prior to
commencement of other site activity.
      (3)   All temporary and permanent erosion and sedimentation control
measures must be maintained and repaired as needed to assure continued
performance of their intended functions.
      (4)   Each and every person, corporation, or other entity performing
grading and/or building activities shall be responsible for installing and
maintaining erosion and sedimentation control measures until the site is
stabilized to the satisfaction of the Township Engineer.
      (5)   The continuation of adequate topsoil on the land within the
Township is considered necessary for the general welfare of the Township in the
future development thereof. Thus the permanent removal of topsoil from the land
within the Township shall be prohibited. This prohibition shall not be
construed to prohibit an owner of land in removing topsoil for the purpose of
construction of a building and the regarding of the land surrounding the
building following construction; provided, however, that upon completion of
construction there remains an average depth of six inches of topsoil per lot.
   B.   No excavation or fill shall be made with a slope steeper than three
horizontal to one vertical, except under both of the following conditions:
      (1)   The material is sufficiently stable to sustain a steeper slope. A
sealed, written statement to that effect from an engineer licensed in the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania shall be submitted to the Township Engineer. The
statement shall affirm that the site has been inspected and the deviation from
the slope restriction shall not result in injury to persons or damage to
property. A detail of the treatment of the slope (proposed grade, seeding,
erosion protection, etc.) shall be submitted with the application. All such
slopes shall be peg-sodded or seeded and covered with jute matting or similar
material.
      (2)   A concrete, masonry, or other approved retaining wall constructed
in accordance with acceptable engineering practice is provided to support the
slope of the excavation or fill.
   C.   The Township Engineer may require an excavation to be made with a cut
face flatter in slope that three horizontal to one vertical if he/she finds the
material in which the excavation is to be made is unusually subject to erosion,
or if other conditions exist which make such flatter cut slope necessary for
stability and safety.
   D.   Excavations shall not extend below the angle of repose or natural slope
of the soil under the nearest point of any footing or foundation of any
building or structure unless such footing or foundation is first properly
underpinned or protected against settlement.
   E.   Whenever a fill is to be made of materials other than clean soil or
earth, the grading permit shall be subject to the following additional
limitations and requirements:
      (1)   The fill shall be completed within a reasonable length of time; the
said time limit is to be determined by the Township Engineer and to be
specified on the grading permit.
      (2)   Clean soil or earth shall be placed over the top and exposed
surfaces of the fill to a depth sufficient to effectively conceal all
materials, other than clean soil or earth, within the fill. Where the Township
Engineer may require, clean soil or earth shall be placed over the top and
exposed surfaces of the fill to a depth sufficient to conceal all materials at
the end of each day’s operations.
   F.   Drainage: Adequate provisions shall be made to prevent stormwater and
surface waters from damaging the cut face of an excavation or the sloping
surface of a fill. All excavations and fills shall be made in accordance with
Chapter 206, Stormwater Management. Slopes of more than ten feet in vertical
height shall be separated by level berms of at least four feet in width. Berm
ditches shall be constructed where necessary to prevent erosion. All drainage
provisions shall be of such design as to carry stormwater and surface waters to
the nearest practical stormwater facility or natural watercourse approved by
the Township Engineer as a safe place to deposit and receive such waters. The
Township Engineer may require such drainage structures or pipes to be
constructed or installed which, in his/her opinion, are necessary to prevent
erosion damage and to satisfactorily carry off surface waters.
   G.   All lots, tracts, or parcels shall be graded to provide positive
drainage away from buildings and dispose of it without ponding, except where
ponding (detention basins, swales, etc.) is part of the stormwater management
plan for the site.
   H.   In no case shall grading be completed in such a manner as to divert
water onto the property of another landowner unless part of a stormwater
management plan.
      (1)   The top or bottom edge of slopes shall be at least three feet from
property of right-of-way lines or streets in order to permit the normal
rounding of the edge without encroaching on the abutting property. At property
lines where walls or slopes are steeper than one to one and six feet or more in
height, they shall be protected by a substantial fence three feet or more in
height.
      (2)   The owner of a property shall be responsible to protect and clean
up lower properties of silt and debris washing from his/her property as a
result of the regarding of his/her property.
      (3)   In order to prevent the denuding of the landscape, wherever
practicable, large trees and other natural features constituting important
physical, aesthetic and economic assets to existing or impending suburban
development shall be preserved.
      (4)   In all zoning districts, for those portions of sites having slopes
greater than 10%, based upon contour lines measured at vertical intervals of
two feet, the following standards shall apply for all proposed uses:
         (a)   Ten percent to 15%: No more than 40% of the total area of such
portions shall be regraded and/or stripped of vegetation.
         (b)   Fifteen percent to 25%: No more than 30% of the total area of
such portions shall be regarded and/or stripped of vegetation.
         (c)   Twenty-five percent or more: No more than 15% of the total area
of such portions shall be regraded and/or stripped of vegetation.
   J.   No person shall block, impede the flow of, alter, construct any
structure, deposit any material or thing, or perform any work that will affect
the normal or flood flow in any watercourse without having obtained prior
approval from the Township and/or Department of Environmental Protection,
whichever is applicable.
   K.   Each person that makes any surface changes to the site shall be
required to:
      (1)   Collect on-site surface runoff and control it to a point of
discharge into the drainage area watercourse, stormwater easement, or storm
sewer system.
      (2)   Control existing off-site runoff draining through the property by
designing it to discharge to the watercourse of the drainage area, stormwater
easement, or storm sewer system.
      (3)   Ensure that all on-site and off-site runoff is collected and
diverted to sediment basins, debris basins, desilting basins, silt traps or
filters for the removal of sediment until all disturbed areas are stabilized to
the satisfaction of the Township.
   L.   Adequate provision shall be made to prevent surface water from damaging
the cut face of excavation and the sloping surfaces of fills.
   M.   Concentration of surface water runoff shall be permitted only in
watercourses or detention basins. All drainage facilities shall be constructed
to carry surface water in such a manner as to prevent erosion or overflow. All
storm sewer inlets that are made operable during construction shall be
protected so that sediment-laden water will not enter the conveyance system
without first being filtered or otherwise treated to remove sediment.
   N.   Construction vehicles are to be kept out of watercourses, wetlands, and
other bodies of water. Where in-channel work is necessary, permits from
regulatory agencies must be secured and provided to the Township and
precautions must be taken to stabilize the work area during construction to
minimize erosion. The channel, including bed and banks, must be restabilized
immediately after in-channel work is completed.
   O.   Where a watercourse must be crossed by construction vehicles during
construction, a temporary stream crossing must be provided.
   P.   Sediment barriers shall be properly installed with silt fencing
trenched and hay bales staked.
   Q.   During all earthmoving and/or stripping operations, necessary measures
for dust control must be exercised. Wherever construction vehicle access routes
intersect paved public streets, provisions must be made to minimize the
transport of sediment onto the paved surfaces by runoff or vehicle tracking,
including but not limited to, the installation of tire cleaning areas at each
point of access to the site. These tire cleaning areas shall be constructed of
AASHTO #1 stone, and each shall be at least 50 feet in length. Where sediment
is transported onto a public street, the permittee shall clean the street
immediately. Sediment shall be removed from roads by shoveling or sweeping and
then transported to a sediment control area.
   R.   No grading equipment shall be permitted to be loaded, unloaded, or
stored on a public street. No grading equipment shall be permitted to travel on
or across a public street unless licensed for operation on public
thoroughfares.
   S.   The construction of underground utility lines involving installation,
maintenance or repair that disturbs more than 1,000 square feet shall be
subject to the following criteria:
      (1)   No more than 200 feet of trench is to be opened at one time.
      (2)   Where consistent with safety and space considerations, excavated
material is to be placed on the uphill side of trenches.
      (3)   Trench dewatering devices shall discharge in a manner that will not
adversely affect flowing streams, drainage systems or off-site property.
   Individual service connections, telephone and electric lines and underground
public utility lines under existing hard-surfaced roads, streets or sidewalks
are exempt from the above requirements, provided that such land-disturbing
activity is confined to the area which is hard-surfaced.
   T.   All temporary erosion and sediment control measures shall be disposed
of within 30 days after final site stabilization is achieved, unless otherwise
authorized by the Township Engineer. Trapped sediment and other disturbed soil
areas resulting from the disposition of temporary measures shall be permanently
stabilized to prevent further erosion and sedimentation.
   U.   Before granting occupancy permits for buildings, building lots shall be
finish graded so that drainage will not be concentrated onto adjacent lots.
Building lots must also be seeded or mulched. If it is not possible to
establish lawns due to the season of the year, or if exposed areas will result
in excess runoff onto adjoining properties because of the lack of ground cover,
the Township Engineer may require extra mulching, the installation of silt
barriers, and/or the construction of temporary sedimentation basins to control
excess runoff, in addition to a vegetation escrow to secure establishment of
ground cover.
   V.   First floor certifications. Construction of any structure requiring a
grading plan under this chapter shall not continue past the foundation stage
until the owner/builder has submitted certification that the first floor and
garage floor elevations of the proposed structure conforms to the plans
submitted with the grading permit application. The certification shall be
submitted to the Township Code Official on a form approved by the Township and
shall be signed and sealed by the responsible Registered Professional Land
Surveyor or Engineer, licensed in the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania. See
Appendix “D” (which is attached to Ordinance 22-1378 and incorporated herein by
reference as if set out in full).
§ 99-9.   Inspections.
   A.   The Township Engineer or Code Official shall make inspections as
hereinafter required and shall either approve that portion of the work
completed or shall notify the permittee in what manner or manners, if any, the
work fails to comply with the grading plan or the erosion and sedimentation
control plan, as approved. All plans, reports, and schedules required by and
approved under this chapter shall be maintained at the site during progress of
the work.
      (1)   To obtain inspections, the permittee shall notify the Township
Engineer or Code Official at least two working days before completion of:
         (a)   Stripping and clearing.
         (b)   Rough grading.
         (c)   Final grading.
         (d)   Final landscaping.
      (2)   If stripping, clearing, grading and/or landscaping are to be done
in phases or areas, the permittee shall give notice and request inspection at
the completion of each of the above work stages in each phase or area.
      (3)   Notification of the results of the inspection shall be given, in
writing, at the site.
   B.   The permittee shall make regular inspections of all erosion and
sedimentation control measures in accordance with the inspection schedule
outlined on the approved erosion and sedimentation control plan. The purpose of
such inspection will be to determine the condition and need for replacement or
repair of in-place control measures; the overall effectiveness of the plan; and
the need for additional control measures.
      (1)   All inspections shall be documented in written form and submitted
to the Township Engineer at the time interval specified in the erosion and
sedimentation control plan.
   C.   A final inspection shall be conducted by the Township Engineer to
certify compliance with this chapter. Satisfactory compliance with this chapter
shall be necessary before issuance of a use and occupancy permit.
   D.   The permittee shall bear all costs of inspections required or permitted
hereunder and shall deposit with the Township such sum as the Board of
Commissioners shall determine, to guarantee payment of the costs of such
inspections. The costs of inspections shall be in accordance with the
established schedule of fees and collection procedure for matters pertaining to
this chapter.
§ 99-10.   Responsibility.
The permittee shall not be relieved of responsibility for damage to persons or
property otherwise imposed by law, and the Township or its officials will not
be made liable for this damage, by:
   A.   The issuance of a grading permit in accordance with this chapter or
other applicable laws;
   B.   Compliance with the provisions of a permit or with conditions attached
to it;
   C.   Failure of Township officials to observe or recognize hazardous or
unsightly conditions; or
   D.   Failure of Township officials to deny or to recommend denial of a
permit.
§ 99-11.   Performance security.
Before the issuance of a grading permit for a project that exceeds 2,000 square
feet in area of disturbance, the applicant shall deposit with the Township
financial security in an amount sufficient to cover the cost of all erosion and
sedimentation control measures and other conditions specified in the permit,
within the time specified by this chapter, or within any extension thereof
granted by the Township Engineer. The amount of such financial security shall
be equal to 110% of the cost of the work for which the security has been
provided. The form of financial security, the method of cost calculation and
the release of the posted security shall be in conformity with those provisions
set forth in the Township Subdivision and Land Development
Chapter 212 with respect to public improvement guaranties.
§ 99-12.   Permit expiration and renewal.
Every grading permit issued hereunder shall expire at the end of six months
from the date of issuance. The permittee shall fully perform and complete all
of the work required to be done within the time limit specified in the permit.
If the permittee shall be unable to complete the work within the specified
time, he/she shall, within 30 days prior to expiration of the permit, present
in writing to the Township, a request for an extension of time, setting forth
therein the reasons for the requested extension. If, in the discretion of the
Township Engineer, such an extension is warranted, the Township Engineer may
grant additional time for the completion of the work. Where the Township
Engineer determines that the extension of time will require a substantial
modification of the erosion and sedimentation control plan and/or grading plan,
any extension of a permit shall be subject to approval of such revised plans in
accordance with the applicable procedure of this chapter.
§ 99-13.   Amendment of plans and additional conditions.
   A.   Amendments of the erosion and sedimentation control plan or grading
plan shall be submitted to the Township and shall be processed and approved or
disapproved in the same manner as the original plans. Field modifications of a
minor nature may be authorized by the Township Engineer and/or Code Official by
written authorization to the permittee.
   B.   If at any stage of the earthmoving and/or stripping activities, the
Township Engineer determines by inspection that the nature of the site is such
that further work authorized by an existing grading permit is likely to imperil
any property, public way, watercourse or drainage structure, the Township
Engineer may require, as a condition of allowing the work to continue,
reasonable special precautions be taken to avoid the likelihood of such peril.
Special precautions may include, but shall not be limited to, a more level
exposed slope; construction of additional drainage facilities; berms;
terracing; compaction; cribbing; installation of plant materials for erosion
control; and/or recommendations of a registered soils engineer and/or
engineering geologist regarding requirements for further work.
   C.   Where it appears that storm damage may result from incomplete grading
of any site, work may be stopped and the permittee required to install
temporary structures or take such other measures as may be necessary to protect
adjoining property or public safety. On a site of at least one acre or where
unusual site conditions prevail, and on all stream crossing projects, the
Township Engineer may specify the time of start of grading and time of
completion or may require that the operations be conducted in specific stages
to ensure completion of protective measures prior to the advent of seasonal
rains.
§ 99-14.   Violations.
   A.   Penalties. Any person who shall violate any provision of this chapter
shall be issued a summons and, upon conviction, the person, firm or corporation
violating any provision of this chapter shall be sentenced to pay a fine of not
more than $1,000, nor less than $500, plus all court costs, including
reasonable attorney’s fees incurred as a result of the prosecution. Each day
that a violation of this chapter continues shall constitute a separate offense.
   B.   Remedy of violation. In addition to the penalties as set forth in
Subsection A. above, any property subjected to earthmoving or stripping
activities performed in violation of this chapter shall be restored to its
previous condition, including replacement of excavated earth, removal of
illegally placed fill, and restoration of grades and planting. In order to
enforce this section the Township Solicitor may seek injunctive relief in
accordance with the rules of civil procedure.
   C.   Revocation or suspension of permit. Any permit issued under this
chapter, including those issued through approval of subdivision and land
development plans, may be revoked or suspended by the Board of Commissioners,
after notice to the permittee for:
      (1)   Failure to carry out the erosion and sedimentation control measures
described in the application and/or accompanying plans at the times specified
in the erosion and sedimentation control plan’s construction schedule or within
any extension that may be granted by the Township.
      (2)   Violation of any other condition of the grading permit.
      (3)   Failure to carry out the erosion and sedimentation control measures
described in the application and/or accompanying plans in a reasonable and
workmanlike manner.
      (4)   Violation of any provision of this chapter or any other applicable
law, ordinance, rule, or regulation relating to the earthmoving and/or
stripping activities.
      (5)   The existence of any condition or the doing of any acts
constituting or creating a nuisance, hazard or endangering human life or the
property of others, including, without limitation, the discharge of sediments
from the site or the failure of the control to prevent accelerated erosion or
waterborne sediment from leaving the site of construction.
   D.   Nonconforming work. If at any stage of construction, the earthmoving
and/or stripping activities do not conform to the grading permit to the
accompanying plans and specifications, including modifications thereof; or for
any violation of this chapter, a written notice to comply shall be given to the
permittee. Such notice shall set forth the nature of corrections required and
the time within which corrections shall be made.
      (1)   Upon failure to comply within the time specified, the permittee
shall be considered in violation of this chapter and shall be subject to the
following penalties and sanctions:
         (a)   The Township, upon recommendation of the Township Engineer and
following hearings thereon, may revoke or suspend the subdivision and land
development approval pursuant to which the work is being done, thereby
prohibiting the conveyance of any lot in the subdivision.
         (b)   The revocation of any building permit issued to the offending
permittee that has been issued pursuant to the grading permit and accompanying
plans.
         (c)   A prohibition on the issuance of any further building permits
for any lots.
         (d)   The financial security, if any, shall be forfeited and penalties
shall be imposed under Subsection A. above.
      (2)   The above-referenced sanctions shall be specified in the notice to
comply provided above. Any and all remedies are cumulative, and the exercise of
one shall not prohibit the exercise of any other remedies contained in either
this subsection, this chapter, or other applicable ordinances.
      (3)   In the case of any paving, filling, stripping, grading or
regrading; any disturbing, modifying, blocking or diverting the natural
overland subsurface flow of stormwater; or any construction, erection and
installation of any dam, ditch, culvert, drainpipe, bridge or any other
structure or obstruction affecting the drainage of any parcel in violation of
this chapter or any regulations made pursuant thereto, the proper Township
authorities, in addition to other remedies provided by law, may institute any
appropriate action or proceedings to prevent such unlawful activity; to
restrain, correct or abate such violation; to prevent the use of the applicable
premises; or to prevent any illegal act, conduct, business or use in or about
such premises. In addition, upon the failure of any permittee to complete the
control measures specified in the application, the Township may, after revoking
such permit, proceed to complete such measures itself and recover the cost
thereof from the permittee or its surety, and may file a municipal lien
therefore.
§ 99-15.   Exceptions to requirements.
   A.   If compliance with this chapter imposes severe hardship upon the
applicant (i.e., the applicant cannot develop the property as zoned), she/he
may apply to the Township for relief, which if granted, shall be the minimum
necessary to permit reasonable use of the site. Endeavoring to obtain approval
for as many units as possible shall not be considered a determining factor in
the Township’s evaluation of whether there is a severe hardship. The Board of
Commissioners may, in accordance with the following procedures, authorize
exceptions to any of the requirements and regulations set forth in this
chapter.
   B.   Application for any exception shall be made by a verified petition of
the applicant, stating fully the grounds of the petition and the facts relied
upon the applicant. Such petition shall be filed with the grading permit
application. In order for the petition to be granted, it shall be necessary
that the Board of Commissioners find all the following facts with respect to
the land referred to in the petition:
      (1)   That the site is of such shape or size or is affected by such
physical conditions or is subject to such title limitations of record that is
impossible or impractical for the applicant to comply with all the requirements
of this chapter;
      (2)   That the exception is necessary to prevent unreasonable and
unnecessary hardship;
      (3)   That such unnecessary hardship was not created by applicant;
      (4)   That the granting of the exception will not be detrimental to the
public welfare or injurious to other property in the vicinity of the subject
property; and
      (5)   That the exception, if granted, will represent the minimum
exception necessary to afford relief to the applicant.
Chapter 110
FEES
§
110-1.   [Reserved].
§
110-2.   [Reserved].
§
110-3.   [Reserved].
§
110-4.   [Reserved].
§
110-5.   [Reserved].
§
110-6.   [Reserved].
§
110-7.   [Reserved].
§
110-8.   [Reserved].
§
110-9.   [Reserved].
§
110-10.   [Reserved].
§
110-11.   [Reserved].
§
110-12.   [Reserved].
§
110-13.   [Reserved].
§
110-14.   [Reserved].
§
110-15.   [Reserved].
§
110-16.   [Reserved].
§
110-16.1.    [Reserved].
§
110-17.   [Reserved].
§
110-18.   [Reserved].
§
110-19.   [Reserved].
§
110-20.   [Reserved].
§
110-21.   [Reserved].
§
110-22.   [Reserved].
§
110-23.   [Reserved].
§
110-24.   [Reserved].
[HISTORY: “Fees,” adopted by the Board of Commissioners of the Township of
Upper Dublin 5-13-1986 as Title 2, Ch. 1, of the 1986 Code; amended in its
entirety 1-10-1995 by Ord. No. 879. Subsequent amendments noted where
applicable. Repealed in its entirety and replaced by Ch. A265, “Fee Schedule,”
7-9-2024 by Ord. No. 24-1392.]
§ 110-1.   [Reserved]. [“Alarms,” amended 2-13-2018 by Ord. No. 18-1340, §2;
repealed 7-9-2024 by Ord. No. 24-1392]
§ 110-2.   [Reserved]. [“Animals,” amended 2-13-2018 by Ord. No. 18-1340, §2;
repealed 7-9-2024 by Ord. No. 24-1392]
§ 110-3.   [Reserved]. [“Building construction,” amended 1-12-2010 by Ord. No.
10-1226, § 1; 2-8-2011 by Ord. No. 11-1237, § 1; 5-13-2014 by Ord. No. 14-1289,
§ 1; 2-13-2018 by Ord. No. 18-1340, §2; 6-15-2021 by Ord. No. 21-1370, § 1;
repealed 7-9-2024 by Ord. No. 24-1392]
§ 110-4.   [Reserved]. [“Basic housing fees,” amended 12-10-2002 by Ord. No.
1099; 6-12-2003 by Ord. No. 1109; 1-12-2010 by Ord. No. 10-1226, § 2; 5-13-2014
by Ord. No. 14-1289, § 5; repealed 7-9-2024 by Ord. No. 24-1392]
§ 110-5.   [Reserved]. [“Excavation permits,” amended 12-10-2002 by Ord. No.
1099; 9-14-2004 by Ord. No. 1143; 1-12-2010 by Ord. No. 10-1226, § 3; 2-8-2011
by Ord. No. 11-1237, § 2; 5-13-2014 by Ord. No. 14-1289, § 4; repealed 7-9-2024
by Ord. No. 24-1392]
§ 110-6.   [Reserved]. [“Peddling and soliciting”, amended 3-9-1999 by Ord. No.
991; Repealed 1-12-2010 by Ord. No. 10-1226, § 4; Added 1-13-2015 by Ord. No.
15-1297, § 2; repealed 7-9-2024 by Ord. No. 24-1392]
§ 110-7.   [Reserved]. [“Junkyard permit fees,” repealed 7-9-2024 by Ord. No.
24-1392]
§ 110-8.   [Reserved]. [“Nuisances,” repealed 7-9-2024 by Ord. No. 24-1392]
§ 110-9.   [Reserved]. [“Plumbing,” amended 1-12-2010 by Ord. No. 10-1226, § 5;
5-13-2014 by Ord. No. 14- 1289, § 2; 2-13-2018 by Ord. No. 18-1340, §2;
repealed 7-9-2024 by Ord. No. 24-1392]
§ 110-10.   [Reserved].1 [“Property Maintenance,” added 1-12-2010 by Ord. No.
10-1226, § 6; Repealed 2-9-2010 by Ord. No. 10-1228, § 2]
§ 110-11.   [Reserved]. [“Garbage and refuse collection,” repealed 7-9-2024 by
Ord. No. 24-1392]
§ 110-12.   [Reserved]. [“Streets and sidewalks,” amended 1-12-2010 by Ord. No.
10-1226, § 7; 5-13-2014 by Ord. No. 14-1289, § 3; repealed 7-9-2024 by Ord. No.
24-1392]
§ 110-13.   [Reserved]. [“Subdivision and land development,” amended 9-9-1997
by Ord. No. 948; amended 1-12-2010 by Ord. No. 10-1226, § 8; 5-13-2014 by Ord.
No. 14-1289, § 6; 7-14-2015 by Ord. No. 15-1306, § 1; repealed 7-9-2024 by Ord.
No. 24-1392]
§ 110-14.   [Reserved] [“Swimming pools,” amended 1-12-2010 by Ord. No. 10-
1226, § 9; repealed 2-13-2018 by Ord. No. 18-1340, §2]
§ 110-15.   [Reserved]. [“Realty tax certification fee,” amended 9-13-2016 by
Ord. No. 16-1324; repealed 7-9-2024 by Ord. No. 24-1392]
§ 110-16.   [Reserved] [“Well permits,” repealed 2-13-2018 by Ord. No. 18-1340]
§ 110-16.1.   [Reserved]. [“Watercourses,” added 3-9-2003 by Ord. No. 1120;
amended 9-14-2004 by Ord. No. 1140; repealed 7-9-2024 by Ord. No. 24-1392]
§ 110-17.   [Reserved]. [“Zoning,” amended 9-9-1997 by Ord. No. 948; 3-9-1999
by Ord. No. 989; 4-11-2000 by Ord. No. 1028; 10-14-2008 by Ord. No. 1205, § 3;
1-12-2010 by Ord. No. 10-1226, § 10; 5-13- 2014 by Ord. No. 14-1289, § 7; 3-10-
2015 by Ord. No. 15-1301, § 1; 2-13-2018 by Ord. No. 18-1340, §2; repealed 7-9-
2024 by Ord. No. 24-1392]
§ 110-18.   [Reserved]. [“Returned payments,” repealed 7-9-2024 by Ord. No. 24-
1392]
§ 110-19.   [Reserved].  [“Police, special duty” amended 1-12-2010 by Ord. No.
10-1226, § 11; repealed 7-9-2024 by Ord. No. 24-1392]
§ 110-20.   [Reserved]. [“Noise variance permit,” added 5-13-1997 by Ord. No.
943; repealed 7-9-2024 by Ord. No. 24-1392]
§ 110-21.   [Reserved]. [Added 9-9-1997 by Ord. No. 948; Repealed 1-12-2010 by
Ord. No. 10-1226, § 12]
§ 110-22.   [Reserved]. [“Stormwater management,” added 7-14-1998 by Ord. No.
973; amended 5-13-2014 by Ord. No. 14-1289, § 8; repealed 7-9-2024 by Ord. No.
24-1392]
§ 110-23.   [Reserved]. [“Tattooing and body piercing,” added 12-9-2003 by Ord.
No. 1121; repealed 7-9-2024 by Ord. No. 24-1392]
§ 110-24.   [Reserved]. [“Property maintenance,” added 2-9-2010 by Ord. No. 10-
1228, § 2; amended 2-13-2018 by Ord. No. 18-1340, §2; repealed 7-9-2024 by Ord.
No. 24-1392]
Chapter 117
FIRE PREVENTION
§
117-1.   (Reserved)
§
117-2.   (Reserved)
§
117-3.   (Reserved)
§
117-4.   (Reserved)
§
117-5.   Definitions
§
117-6.   Hazardous substances.
§
117-7.   Fire protection equipment; sprinkler and standpipe systems.
§
117-8.   Enforcement.
§
117-9.   Key lock box systems.
§
117-10.   Outside cooking using charcoal or propane-fired equipment.
§
117-11.   Fire hydrant regulations.
§
117-12.   Parking in fire zone.
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Board of Commissioners of the Township of Upper Dublin
during codification 1-10-1995 by Ord. No. 882 (see
Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II). Amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
 
Emergency Services Board - See  Burning - See
Ch. 11.                         Ch. 79.
Fire Board - See                Fees - See fee schedule.
Ch. 18.
Alarms - See                    Insurance - See
Ch. 57.                         Ch. 132, Art. I.
Brush, grass and weeds - See    Littering - See
Ch. 69.                         Ch. 145.
Building construction - See     Property maintenance - See
Ch. 73.                         Ch. 180.
 
§ 117-1.   (Reserved) 1
1. Editor's Note: Former §
117-1, Adoption of standards, was repealed 6-15-2004 by Ord. No. 1132. See now
Ch. 73, Art. III, Uniform Construction Code.
§ 117-2.   (Reserved) 2
2. Editor's Note: Former §
117-2, Amendments, was repealed 6-15-2004 by Ord. No. 1132.
§ 117-3.   (Reserved) 3
3. Editor's Note: Former §
117-3, Establishment of limits, was repealed 6-15-2004 by Ord. No. 1132.
§ 117-4.   (Reserved) 4
4. Editor's Note: Former §
117-4, Affect on prior actions and rights, was repealed 6-15-2004 by Ord. No.
1132.
§ 117-5.   Definitions
[Added 11-11-1997 by Ord. No. 958; amended 1-12-1999 by Ord. No. 985]
Unless otherwise expressly stated, the following words and phrases shall be
construed throughout this chapter to have the meanings indicated below:
   ABATE OR ABATEMENT — The removal and disposal of hazardous substances or
substances that are potentially dangerous to the public health and welfare at
large, in accordance with applicable federal, state or local laws or
regulations and in such a way as to prevent damage to persons, property or the
environment, or danger to the public health, safety and welfare, and shall
include, but not be limited to, actions necessary to monitor, assess and
evaluate such danger or damage.
   DEPOSIT — Any spilling, leaking, pumping, pouring, emptying, discharging,
injecting, escaping, leaching, dumping or disposing.
   EMERGENCY SERVICES BOARD — Representatives serving in an advisory capacity
to the Upper Dublin Board of Commissioners pursuant to the Pennsylvania
Emergency Management Services Code, as amended, 35 Pa.C.S.A. § 7101 et seq. or
any more recent amendment thereto, and pursuant to the provisions of the Upper
Dublin Township Code,
Chapter 11, with responsibilities including the preparation and maintenance of
an emergency management plan for the Township of Upper Dublin.
   HAZARDOUS SUBSTANCE — Includes any solid, liquid or gas that has a degree of
hazard rating in health, flammability or reactivity of 2, 3, or 4 as ranked by
NFPA 704, 1987 Edition, or future equivalent publications published for the
National Fire Protection Association and/or flammable, combustible or corrosive
liquid; poisonous, toxic, radioactive, oxidizing or explosive material;
flammable solid or unstable (reactive) chemical as defined in the most recent
BOCA Fire Prevention Code Edition adopted by this Code.
   HIGH-HAZARD OCCUPANCY BUILDING — A building or structure used for the
storage, manufacture or processing of highly combustible or explosive products
or materials which are likely to bum with extreme rapidity or which may produce
poisonous fumes or explosions; storage or manufacture involving highly
corrosive, toxic or noxious alkalis, acids or other liquids or chemicals
involving flame, fumes, vapors or explosive, poisonous, irritant or corrosive
gases; and the storage or processing of any materials involving explosive
mixtures of dust or which result in the division of matter into fine particles
subject to spontaneous ignition. This includes but is not limited to buildings
classified as Use Group H in the BOCA National Building Code.
   INDUSTRIAL ACCIDENT — Any incident that occurs from the storage,
transportation, use, manufacturing, processing or discharging of any substance
potentially dangerous to the public health and welfare at large, including a
hazardous substance, that necessitates:
   A.   Intervention by the Upper Dublin Township Police Department, Fire
Department or any of the emergency agencies or services which may assist Upper
Dublin Township, including but not limited to fire companies or rescue squads
operating in Upper Dublin Township or the Upper Dublin Township Emergency
Services Board or emergency response agencies employed by Upper Dublin
Township.
   B.   The need for clean-up and/or abatement measures and any related
services to be performed by township employees, emergency agencies or services,
resulting in expense to the township.
   NATIONAL FIRE PROTECTION ASSOCIATION NO. 13—The Standard of the National
Fire Protection Association for the Installation of Sprinkler Systems.
   NATIONAL FIRE PROTECTION ASSOCIATION NO. 13D—The Standard of the National
Fire Protection Association for the Installation of Residential Sprinkler
Systems.
   NATIONAL FIRE PROTECTION ASSOCIATION NO. 14—The Standard of the National
Fire Protection Association for the Installation of Standpipe and Hose Systems.
   PERSON—An individual, firm, corporation, association, partnership, joint
venture or other private or commercial entity.
   PUBLIC THOROUGHFARE—State, county or township bridges, highways, streets and
navigable waterways or any other roadway or watercourse owned by a governmental
unit or trafficway as defined in the Pennsylvania Motor Vehicle Code. 5
   RESPONSIBLE PERSON—The person who owns or leases the premises on which an
industrial accident or hazardous substance deposit occurs shall be responsible
for abatement of the same and shall bear all related costs, including
administrative costs and attorneys fees. In the event that an industrial
accident or hazardous substance deposit occurs during transportation on a
public thoroughfare or during a delivery, the person who owns or has custody or
control of the vehicle transporting the hazardous or potentially dangerous
substance shall be jointly responsible and jointly bear all costs related to
the abatement of such incident with the person who owns or has custody of the
hazardous or potentially dangerous substance involved in the industrial
accident or hazardous deposit.
5. Editor’s Note: See 75 Pa.C.S.A. § 101 et seq.
§ 117-6.   Hazardous substances.
[Added 11-11-1997 by Ord. No. 958; amended 1-12-1999 by Ord. No. 985]
For any hazardous substances, the following shall apply:
   A.   Abatement.
      (1)   By responsible person. Except in case of an emergency or imminent
danger to the public health, safety or welfare, the Fire Marshal, Assistant
Fire Marshal or Code Enforcement Officer shall serve notice upon the
responsible person. The notice shall sufficiently describe the condition found
and shall require the abatement thereof within 10 days of the mailing of the
notice. If the responsible person cannot be located, it shall be sufficient to
forward notice to the responsible person’s last known address and to post a
copy of such notice at the site of the industrial accident or hazardous
substance deposit.
      (2)   By township. Should any responsible person fail, neglect or refuse
to abate such industrial accident or hazardous substance deposit to the
satisfaction of the township’s Emergency Management Coordinator or his
designee, or if the township’s Emergency Management Coordinator or his designee
shall determine that the nature of the condition poses an immediate threat to
the public health, safety and welfare, and the responsible person is unable or
unwilling to take immediate steps to abate such condition, the township shall
act to abate said hazardous substance deposit or industrial accident, and any
cost of abatement incurred by the township shall be paid by the responsible
person.
   B.   Cost.
      (1)   In the event that any person undertakes, either voluntarily or upon
order of the Upper Dublin Township Emergency Services Board, Fire Marshal or
other township officials, to clean up or abate the effects of an industrial
accident or hazardous substance deposit, the Upper Dublin Township Emergency
Services Board or other township officials may take such action as is necessary
to supervise or verify the clean up or abatement. Liability to the township for
all costs incurred as a result of such supervision or verification shall be
upon the responsible person in accordance with the provisions above.
      (2)   For the purpose of this section, costs related to abatement of an
industrial accident or hazardous substance deposit shall include, but are not
limited to, the following: expenses incurred by police, fire and/or emergency
medical services; actual labor costs of Upper Dublin Township personnel,
including benefits and administrative overhead; costs of consultants or others
preparing reports concerning the incident; costs of equipment operations; costs
of materials obtained directly by the township; cost of any contractual labor
and materials for clean up and/or abatement; engineering costs, attorneys’ fees
and all costs imposed upon the Township of Upper Dublin connected with the
industrial accident.
      (3)   The costs shall be determined by the Township Manager or his
designee.
      (4)   Such costs for all services rendered in the abatement, clean up,
supervision or verification of an industrial accident or hazardous substance
deposit shall be due and payable directly to the township through the office of
the Upper Dublin Township Finance Director within 30 days from the date on
which the township issues an invoice for such costs.
      (5)   In the event of a refusal or failure to pay the bill for said costs
within 30 days of said billing, the township may file a municipal claim for
such costs and expenses, together with a penalty of 10%, in the manner provided
by law for the collection of municipal claims.
§ 117-7.   Fire protection equipment; sprinkler and standpipe systems.
[Added 1-12-1999 by Ord. No. 985; amended 2-12-2013 by Ord. No. 13-1268, §§ 1,
2]
   A.   All new construction shall be equipped with full fire sprinkler systems
per the appropriate National Fire Protection Association (NFPA) standard.
[Amended 4-11-2000 by Ord. No. 1028; 2-12-2013 by Ord. No. 13-1268]
   B.   Existing buildings. An existing building or occupancy which, if newly
constructed, would be required to have a full fire sprinkler system installed
shall have such a system installed and maintained throughout the building under
the following circumstances: [Amended 4-11-2000 by Ord. No. 1028]
      (1)   If 50% or more of the interior walls and/or partitions thereof have
been removed during remodeling, rehabilitation or alteration.
      (2)   If the building area or the occupancy’s area of operation for a
particular use increases by 50% or more from the area of the building or
occupancy existing as of the date of adoption of this section through the
acquisition of additional property, expansion, remodeling, rehabilitation or
alteration. Except, in single-family and two-family dwellings, only the
expanded area is required to be fully sprinklered.
      (3)   If the occupancy is changed to any one or more of the following:
         (a)   High-hazard occupancy buildings.
         (b)   Hospitals and medical facilities.
         (c)   Nursing homes, life care complexes, personal care facilities and
senior assisted living residences.
         (d)   Bowling alleys.
         (e)   Educational buildings and dormitories.
         (f)   All enclosed and/or underground parking garages.
         (g)   Hotels and motels.
         (h)   Apartment buildings.
         (i)   Churches, chapels, synagogues and other places of worship.
         (j)   Motion-picture theaters and buildings used for theatrical,
operatic or musical performances.
         (k)   Buildings used as places of public assembly, designed for the
gathering of 50 or more persons for purposes such as civic, social or religious
functions, recreation and/or food or drink consumption.
         (l)   Day-care centers.
   C.   Full fire sprinkler systems must be maintained in good working
condition at all times in all required buildings. If the system is shut down
for repairs or for any other reason, the Fire Marshal’s office will be notified
immediately. An approved fire watch may be required until the system is back in
service.
   D.   Sprinkler system connection. All sprinkler intake system connections
shall be five-inch Stoertz fittings.
   E.   Residential sprinkler systems. Sprinkler systems shall be installed and
maintained in single-family and two-family residences in accordance with the
standards set forth in the National Fire Protection Association No. 13D.
   F.   Dry standpipe sprinkler systems. Dry standpipe fire lines shall be
installed and maintained in new and existing buildings up to 50 feet in height
and in underground parking garages, in accordance with the BOCA Basic/National
Building Code as adopted in
Chapter 73 of the Township of Upper Dublin Code and the standards set forth in
the National Fire Protection Association No. 14; provided, however, that dry
standpipe fire lines shall not be required in the following:
      (1)   Single-family dwellings.
      (2)   Two-family dwellings.
      (3)   Buildings with wet standpipes.
   G.   Wet standpipe sprinkler systems. Approved wet standpipe systems shall
be installed in buildings exceeding 50 feet in height. However, the Fire
Marshal may require wet standpipe systems in buildings up to 50 feet in height
if, in the Fire Marshal’s opinion, there is a distinct hazard to life or
property. Wet standpipes shall be installed in accordance with standards set
forth in National Fire Protection Association No. 14; provided, however, that
wet standpipe fire lines shall not be required in the following:
      (1)   Single-family dwellings.
      (2)   Two-family dwellings.
   H.   Location and size of sprinkler heads, valves, pipes and water supply.
The location and size of sprinkler heads, pipes and other fire-extinguishing
equipment, appliances and devices shall comply with the standards set forth in
the National Fire Protection Association No. 13. Such equipment shall be
connected to an adequate water supply as determined by a NICET Level 3 or Level
4 technician and the Fire Marshal.
   I.   Before any full fire sprinkler systems, standpipes or hydrants are
installed or altered, detailed plans thereof shall be submitted to and
approved, in writing, by a NICET Level 3 or Level 4 technician, and thereafter
said plans shall be submitted to and approved, in writing, by the Fire Marshal.
Prior to review of said plans and approval by the Fire Marshal, review fees
shall be paid as set forth in the Township fee schedule. All sprinkler plans
shall be hydraulically designed. All flow test information shall include the
date and time of the test. Nothing contained herein shall be construed to
prevent the installation of types of full fire sprinkler systems other than
those specified herein where such system is approved, in writing, by a NICET
Level 3 or Level 4 technician and the Fire Marshal. [Amended 3-9-1999 by Ord.
No. 989]
      (1)   When, in the opinion of the Fire Marshal, any plan submitted for
review constitutes or is in need of such a level of advanced design or
engineering criteria to accomplish the purposes of these regulations, the Fire
Marshal may require an engineering design analysis to be provided by the owner,
developer, architect, engineer or submitting person.
      (2)   The cost of such an engineering design analysis shall be the
responsibility of the owner, developer, architect, engineer or submitting
person.
      (3)   The required engineering design analysis shall provide a complete
and documented report as to the compliance of the proposal with the required
features and measures of fire protection.
      (4)   The required engineering design analysis shall be prepared by and
shall bear the seal of a registered fire protection engineer.
   J.   Exemptions. Nothing herein contained shall be construed to require the
installation of automatic sprinkler and/or standpipe systems in:
      (1)   Safe deposit or other vaults.
      (2)   Detached buildings ancillary or accessory to a residence having a
building area under 1,000 square feet, provided the ancillary or accessory
building is constructed pursuant to the current version of the International
Residential Code as adopted by the Township under
Chapter 73 of the Township Code, and the ancillary or accessory building under
1,000 square feet remains non-habitable.
      (3)   Rooms or buildings used for the sale, manufacture or storage of
aluminum powder, calcium carbide, calcium phosphate, metallic sodium, potassium
quicklime, magnesium powder, sodium peroxide or like substances to which the
application of water will cause or increase the fire hazard.
      (4)   Any other location where the installation of such equipment may, as
determined by the Township, increase the hazard to life or property or for any
other reason be impractical due to existing conditions.
[Amended 2-12-2013 by Ord. No. 13-1268]
   K.   Detailed requirements for dry standpipes. Detailed requirements for dry
standpipes shall be as follows:
      (1)   Class of system: dry.
      (2)   Number and location of risers: one riser per fire tower.
      (3)   Number and location of outlets: one outlet valve at each floor
level, including the basement and subbasement, located in each fire tower and
at each exit on every level of an underground garage. Roof outlets may be
required by the Fire Marshal.
      (4)   All outlets shall be two-and-one-half-inch National Standard Thread
(NST) male couplings with a reducer to one-and-one-half-inch NST and a thread
protective cap. All standpipe risers shall be interconnected at their base.
This requirement is for new and existing buildings. Existing buildings have 18
months from date of adoption to comply with this regulation.
      (5)   The number and location of the Fire Department siamese connections
shall be located approximately two feet above ground level or as otherwise
directed by the Fire Marshal.
      (6)   Each Fire Department connection shall be provided with a
conspicuous, durable and permanently legible sign reading “Dry Standpipe and
Fire Department Use Only.”
      (7)   The Fire Department connections shall be five-inch Stoertz fittings
equipped with thread protector caps and chains or other type caps approved by
the Fire Marshal.
   L.   Detailed requirements for wet standpipes. Detailed requirements for wet
standpipes shall be as follows:
      (1)   Class of system: wet, Class II.
      (2)   Number and location of risers: The number of hose stations in each
building and each section of a building divided by fire walls shall be such
that all portions of each story of the building are within 30 feet of a nozzle
when attached to not more than 100 feet of hose. Equipment shall be so arranged
as to permit directing the discharge from the nozzle into all portions of
important enclosures, such as closets and like enclosures.
      (3)   Number and location of outlets: one outlet valve at each floor
level, including the basement and subbasement, located in each fire tower and
at each exit on every level of an underground garage. Roof outlets may be
required by the Fire Marshal.
      (4)   All outlets shall be two-and-one-half-inch National Standard Thread
(NST) male couplings with a reducer to one-and-one-half-inch NST and a thread
protective cap. All standpipe risers shall be interconnected at their base.
   M.   Fire protection equipment. In all buildings under construction in which
standpipes are required, stairways and standpipes shall be carried up as the
construction progresses in such a manner that they will always be ready for
Fire Department use at the topmost floor that has been installed. In addition,
the siamese connection and each hose outlet must be provided with an
illuminated red light during the hours of darkness, and all stairways must be
illuminated.
   N.   The building owner shall annually certify in writing to the Township
Fire Marshal that the automatic sprinkler system has been tested and maintained
in accordance with the procedure of National Fire Protection Association
Standard No. 25, Testing and Maintenance of Water Based Fire Protection
Systems. Additionally, certification is required in writing to the Fire Marshal
whenever any work on the sprinkler system is performed. Any person servicing,
testing or maintaining any sprinkler system must have adequate knowledge of the
operations of sprinkler equipment and be approved by the Fire Marshal.
§ 117-8.   Enforcement.
[Added 11-11-1997 by Ord. No. 958; amended 1-12-1999 by Ord. No. 985]
   A.   Conflicting provisions. Whenever the requirements of this section are
in conflict with other requirements of the Code of Upper Dublin Township or the
Emergency Management Plan adopted by the Township of Upper Dublin, the most
restrictive, or those imposing the higher standard, shall govern.
   B.   Violations and penalties. Any person who shall violate any of the
provisions of this chapter or fail to comply with any order issued pursuant
hereto shall be liable, upon conviction, for a fine not to exceed the maximum
fine permitted by statute, for each and every offense, in the discretion of the
District Justice, together with the costs of prosecution in each case. Once a
person has been notified by the township that he is in violation of the
provisions of the chapter, each day that he shall continue such violation after
such notification shall constitute a separate offense punishable by a like fine
or penalty.
§ 117-9.   Key lock box systems.
[Added 10-10-2000 by Ord. No. 1046]
   A.   Commercial, industrial or institutional buildings protected by an alarm
system, central station protective system or automatic sprinkler system, or
such structures that are secured in a manner that restricts access during an
emergency, shall be equipped with a key lock box at or near the main entrance
or such other location required by the Fire Marshal.
   B.   All newly constructed buildings subject to this section shall have the
key lock box installed and operational prior to the issuance of an occupancy
permit. All buildings in existence on the effective date of this section and
subject to this section shall have one year from the effective date of this
section to have a key lock box installed and operational.
   C.   The Fire Marshal shall designate the type or types of key lock box to
be implemented within the township and shall have the authority to require all
buildings to use the designated system. The Fire Marshal, the Fire Department
of Upper Dublin Township and the Police Department of Upper Dublin Township
shall be the only entities permitted to possess the key to the key lock box.
   D.   The owner or tenant of a building required to have a key lock box
shall, at all times, keep the following items in the key lock box:
      (1)   Keys to locked points of egress, whether on the interior or
exterior of such building.
      (2)   Keys to locked mechanical equipment rooms.
      (3)   Keys to locked electrical rooms.
      (4)   Keys to elevator controls.
      (5)   Keys to locked elevator rooms.
      (6)   Keys to any fence or secured area.
      (7)   Keys to any other areas as directed by the Fire Marshal.
   E.   The Fire Marshal shall be authorized to implement rules and regulations
for the use of the lock box system.
§ 117-10.   Outside cooking using charcoal or propane-fired equipment.
[Added 6-15-2004 by Ord. No. 1132]
No charcoal or propane-fired cooking equipment shall be used or stored on the
patio or patio balcony of any multifamily dwelling in Upper Dublin Township or
stored within any dwelling unit of a multifamily dwelling. Such cooking
equipment may be used only on the ground and at least 15 feet from any
multifamily building, with permission of the owner.
§ 117-11.   Fire hydrant regulations.
[Added 6-15-2004 by Ord. No. 1132]
   A.   Fire hydrants required. Fire hydrants connected to sufficient water
supply for fire-fighting purposes shall be provided in new real estate
subdivisions, on new streets, in office centers, shopping centers, educational
institutions, apartment complexes and similar occupancies at the direction of
the Code Official who shall consult with an approved rating bureau and the
Township Engineer before directing such installations.
   B.   Specification. The following specifications shall apply to all fire
hydrants installed or replaced after the effective date of this chapter which
are on public water systems. The following specifications shall also apply to
private fire hydrants which are on private property but are served by a public
water system.
      (1)   All fire hydrants shall adhere to specifications shown on a
document known as "Hydrant Hose Connection Standard, dated July 23, 1975,
Drawing No. S-5, Construction Standards, Upper Dublin Township," on file with
the Code Official in the Township Building, and as revised from time to time by
the Code Official.
      (2)   Fire Department siamese connections on all existing buildings or
structures shall be provided with three-inch National Standard Fire Hose Thread
(3-6 N H) female connection on siamese with caps or plugs and chains
      (3)   All hose cabinets shall be provided with one-and-one-half-inch male
National Standard Fire Hose Thread (1.5-9 N H) and single jacketed rubber lines
hose.
      (4)   All private yard hydrants which are on a private water system or
are metered from a public water system shall be of he yard hydrant type with
two two-and-one-half-inch grated valves with National Standard two-and-one-
half-inch thread caps. No pumper connection will be permitted. All presently
installed private yard hydrants which do not comply with these specifications
shall be made to comply with the above type valves.
   C.   Conduct prohibited: It shall be unlawful for any person to draw water
from a fire hydrant for any purpose, except official use by employees of the
township, other than to extinguish a fire, or to willfully permit water from a
fire hydrant to be wasted, or damage or break a fire hydrant, or to hinder or
obstruct any fireman or any vehicle of the Fire Department from passing along
the streets to or from a fire, or from conducting fire-fighting operations at a
fire.
§ 117-12.   Parking in fire zone.
[Added 6-15-2004 by Ord. No. 1132]
Violation for parking within a no parking area shall be punishable by paying
the official notice Upper Dublin Police Department ticket within 72 hours. If
this ticket is not paid, the violation shall be punishable under the
Pennsylvania Motor Vehicle Code § 3353, Subsection (a)(3)(ii).
Chapter 120
VOLUNTEER SERVICE CREDIT PROGRAM
§
120-1.   Definitions.
§
120-2.   Volunteer service credit program; description.
§
120-3.   Procedure to file tax credit claim.
§
120-4.   Appeals.
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Board of Commissioners of the Township of Upper Dublin
11-14-2023 by Ord. No. 23-1386.]
§ 120-1.   Definitions.
Unless otherwise expressly stated, the following words and phrases shall be
construed throughout this chapter to have the meanings indicated in this
section:
   ACTIVE VOLUNTEER — A volunteer for the Fort Washington Fire Company No. 1
who has complied with, and is certified under, the Volunteer Service Credit
Program.
   CHIEF — The Chief of the Fort Washington Fire Company No. 1.
   EARNED INCOME TAX (EIT) — The earned income tax levied by Upper Dublin
Township under the Local Tax Enabling Act.
   ELIGIBILITY PERIOD — The timeframe when volunteers may earn credit under the
Volunteer Service Credit Program.
   EMERGENCY RESPONDER — A volunteer who responds to an emergency call with the
Fort Washington Fire Company No. 1.
   EMERGENCY RESPONSE CALL — Any emergency call to which a volunteer responds,
including travel directly from and to a volunteer’s home, place of business or
other place where he/she shall have been when the call was received.
   FIRE COMPANY — The Fort Washington Fire Company No. 1. (FWFC).
   FIRE SERVICES ADMINISTRATOR — The person retained by Upper Dublin Township
to serve as the administrative head of the Upper Dublin Fire Department.
   QUALIFIED REAL PROPERTY — A residential real property in Upper Dublin
Township owned individually or jointly by an active volunteer and occupied as
that volunteer’s domicile.
   VOLUNTEER — A member of the Fort Washington Fire Company No. 1.
§ 120-2.   Volunteer service credit program; description.
   A.   Establishment. Upper Dublin Township hereby establishes a Volunteer
Service Credit Program pursuant to Act 91 of 2020 and Act 172 of 2016, 35 Pa.
C.S. §§ 79A01 – 79A33. The goal of the program is to encourage membership and
service in the Fort Washington Fire Company No. 1.
   B.   Program criteria. The Board of Commissioners shall establish, by
resolution, the annual criteria that must be met to qualify for credits under
the program based on some or all of the following:
      (1)   The number of emergency response calls to which a volunteer
responds.
      (2)   The level of training and participation in formal training and
drills for a volunteer.
      (3)   The total amount of time expended by a volunteer on administrative
and other support services, including but not limited to:
         (i)   Fundraising.
         (ii)   Providing facility or equipment maintenance.
         (iii)   Financial bookkeeping.
      (4)   The involvement in other events or projects that aid the financial
viability, emergency response or operational readiness of the Fire Company.
      (5)   The total number of years the volunteer has served.
   C.   Eligible entities. The Volunteer Service Credit Program is available to
residents of Upper Dublin Township who are volunteers with the FWFC.
   D.   Eligibility period. A volunteer must meet the minimum criteria, set by
resolution under this section, during the eligibility period to qualify for the
tax credits established under §
120-3 and §
120-4. For 2024, and each subsequent year thereafter, the eligibility period
shall run from January 1 until December 31.
   E.   Recordkeeping. The Chief shall keep specific records of each
volunteer’s activities in a service log to establish credits under the
Volunteer Service Credit Program. Service logs shall be subject to review by
the Board of Commissioners, the State Fire Commissioner and the State Auditor
General. The Chief shall annually transmit to the Fire Services Administrator a
notarized eligibility list documenting the eligibility of all volunteers that
have met the minimum criteria for the Volunteer Service Credit Program. The
notarized eligibility list and accompanying documentation shall be transmitted
to the Fire Services Administrator no later than February 1 of each year. The
Chief shall post the notarized eligibility list in an accessible area of the
fire company’s facilities. The Fire Services Administrator shall certify the
eligibility list to the Board of Commissioners.
   F.   Application. Volunteers that have met the minimum criteria of the
Volunteer Service Credit Program shall sign and submit an application for
certification to the Chief on or before March 1 of each year. The Chief and
another officer shall sign the application if the volunteer has met the minimum
criteria of the Volunteer Service Credit Program, and forward it to the Fire
Services Administrator. Applications shall not be accepted by the Fire Services
Administrator after March 15 of each year.
   G.   Municipal review. The Fire Services Administrator shall review the
applications for credit under the Volunteer Service Credit Program and shall
cross reference them with the notarized eligibility list approved by the Board
of Commissioners. If approved by the Fire Services Administrator, applicants
shall be issued a tax credit certificate by the Township Secretary.
   H.   Official tax credit register. The Township Secretary shall keep an
official tax credit register of all active volunteers that were issued tax
credit certificates. The Township Secretary shall transmit a copy of the tax
credit register, together with updates, as needed, to the following:
      (1)   Board of Commissioners.
      (2)   Fire Services Administrator.
      (3)   The Chief of the Fire Company.
      (4)   Township Treasurer.
   I.   Injured volunteers.
      (1)   An emergency responder that is injured during an emergency response
call may be eligible for future tax credits. The injury must have occurred
while responding to, participating in, or returning from an emergency response
call with the Fire Company.
      (2)   An injured emergency responder shall provide documentation from a
licensed physician with the application required under § 120-2 stating that
their injury prevents them from performing duties to qualify as an active
volunteer. In such a case, the injured emergency responder shall be deemed an
active volunteer for that tax year.
      (3)   An injured emergency responder shall annually submit the
application required under §
120-2, along with updated documentation from a licensed physician stating that
the injury still exists and prevents them from qualifying as an active
volunteer. The injured emergency responder shall again be deemed an active
volunteer for that tax year. An injured emergency responder shall only be
deemed an active volunteer for a maximum of five consecutive tax years.
§ 120-3.   Procedure to file tax credit claim.
   A.   Real property tax credit. Each active volunteer who has been certified
under the Upper Dublin Volunteer Service Credit Program shall be eligible to
receive a real property tax credit of 100% of the municipal tax liability for
the year following that during which the credit was earned on qualified real
property, up to a maximum credit of one thousand two hundred dollars ($1,200).
If the tax is paid in the penalty period, the tax credit shall only apply to
the base tax year liability as though paid at discount. The total tax credits
applicable to a property may not exceed one thousand two hundred dollars
($1,200) in a given year.
   B.   Earned income tax credit. Each active volunteer who has been certified
under the Upper Dublin Volunteer Service Credit Program shall be eligible to
receive an earned income tax credit of up to one thousand two hundred dollars
($1,200) to be applied against their EIT obligation for the prior year’s
earnings.
   C.   Claim.
      (1)   An active volunteer with a tax credit certificate may file a claim
for the tax credit against either (a) their qualified real property tax
liability for the Township’s real estate tax levy for the year for which the
certificate was issued, or (b) their earned income tax liability for the earned
income tax levied by the Township for the year for which the certificate was
issued.
      (2)   Claim for real estate tax credit. The real estate tax credit shall
be administered as a refund by the Township. If the total tax credits for a
single property exceed 100%, the refund will be prorated evenly between the
volunteers owning an interest in such property. An active volunteer shall file
the following with the Finance Director of the Township:
         (a)   A true and correct receipt from the Township real estate tax
collector of the paid municipal real property taxes for the tax year for which
the claim is being filed.
         (b)   The tax credit certificate.
         (c)   Photo identification.
         (d)   Documentation, such as a copy of a deed, showing that the tax
paid was for qualified real property.
      (3)   If the active volunteer provides all documents required under this
subsection, the Finance Director shall issue the real estate tax refund to the
active volunteer.
      (4)   Claim for earned income tax credit. The credit shall be claimed on
the EIT form filed with the Township. The volunteer shall file a copy of their
tax credit certificate with their EIT return.
      (5)   A volunteer submitting a claim shall verify the accuracy of the
information submitted by signing the following statement:
         “I hereby verify that the facts contained in the documents submitted
with this claim are true and correct to the best of my knowledge, information,
and belief. I understand that this statement is made subject to the criminal
penalties set forth at 18 Pa.C.S.A. § 4904, relating to unsworn falsification
to authorities.”
      (6)   Any person who knowingly makes or conspires to make a false service
record report, or who knowingly provides or conspires to provide false
information that is used to compile a service record report shall be subject to
the criminal penalties set forth at 35 Pa.C.S.A. § 79A31.
   D.   Rejection of the tax credit claim.
      (1)   The Finance Director shall reject the claim for a tax credit if the
active volunteer fails to provide the documents required under §
120-3(C).
      (2)   If the Finance Director rejects the claim, the active volunteer
shall be notified in writing of the decision. The notice shall include the
reasons for the rejection and provide the method of appealing the decision
pursuant to §
120-4.
§ 120-4.   Appeals.
   A.   Any active volunteer aggrieved by a decision of the Finance Director
under § 78-52(C) shall have a right to file an administrative appeal of said
decision within 30 days of its date.
   B.   The appeal shall be filed with the Township Secretary and shall be
decided by the Township Manager, who shall serve as the Hearing Officer,
pursuant to the procedures set forth in Chapter 224, Taxation, Article III,
Administrative Appeals.
Chapter 125
FOOD AND BEVERAGES
Part 1
Vending Machines
ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§
125-1. Definitions.
§
125-2. Commissaries outside township.
ARTICLE II
(Reserved)
§§ 125-3 through 125-9. (Reserved)
ARTICLE III
Sanitation Requirements
§
125-10. Foods, beverages, equipment and operations.
§
125-11. Machine location.
§
125-12. Exterior construction and maintenance.
§
125-13. Interior construction and maintenance.
§
125-14. Water supply.
§
125-15. Waste disposal.
§
125-16. Delivery of merchandise.
§
125-17. Personnel cleanliness.
§
125-18. Disease control.
ARTICLE IV
Enforcement; Violations and Penalties
§
125-19. Adulterated or misbranded merchandise.
§
125-20. Inspections.
§
125-21. Enforcement.
§
125-22. Violations and penalties.
Part 2
Bulk Foods
ARTICLE V
General Provisions
§
125-23. Definitions.
§
125-24. Labeling.
§
125-25. Regulations.
§
125-26. Potentially hazardous foods.
§
125-27. Method of dispensing.
§
125-28. Equipment and utensils.
§
125-29. Cleaning and servicing of equipment.
§
125-30. Hand-washing facilities.
§
125-31. Submission of plans.
Part 3
Public Eating and Drinking Places
ARTICLE VI
General Provisions
§
125-32. Definitions.
§
125-33. Certificate of inspection required.
§
125-34. Inspection fee.
§
125-35. Inspection.
§
125-36. Examination and certification of all employees.
§
125-37. Refusal to grant certificate or revocation of certificate.
§
125-38. Rules and regulations.
§
125-39. Violations and penalties.
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Board of Commissioners of the Township of Upper Dublin
as indicated in Part histories. Amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
 
Fees — See fee schedule
 
Part 1
Vending Machines
[Adopted 5-13-1986 as Title 5, Ch. 2, Art. 2, of the 1986 Code]
ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 125-1.   Definitions.
The following definitions shall apply in the interpretation and the enforcement
of this Part 1:
   ADULTERATED — A food:
   A.   Which bears or contains any poisonous or deleterious substance which
may be injurious to health.
   B.   Which bears or contains any added poisonous or deleterious substance
for which no safe tolerance has been established by regulations, or in excess
of such tolerance if one has been established.
   C.   Which consists in whole or in part of any filthy, putrid or decomposed
substance, or if it is otherwise unfit for human consumption.
   D.   Which has been prepared, packed or stored under insanitary conditions
whereby it may have become contaminated with filth or rendered injurious to
health.
   E.   The container of which is composed in whole or in part of a poisonous
or deleterious substance which may render the contents injurious to health.
   APPROVED — Approved by the health authority having jurisdiction in the
Township of Upper Dublin.
   COMMISSARY — Commissary, catering establishment, restaurant or any other
place in which food, beverages, ingredients, containers or supplies are kept,
handled, prepared or stored and directly from which vending machines are
serviced.
   EMPLOYEE — Any operator or any person employed by him to handle any food,
beverage or ingredient to be dispensed through vending machines or who comes
into contact with food-contact surfaces of containers, equipment, utensils or
packaging materials used in connection with vending machine operations or who
otherwise services or maintains one or more such machines.
   FOOD — Any raw, cooked or processed edible substance, beverage or ingredient
used or intended for the use, in whole or in part, for human consumption.
   HEALTH AUTHORITY — The health authority having jurisdiction in the Township
of Upper Dublin, or an authorized representative thereof.
   HOT LIQUID FOOD OR BEVERAGE — Liquid food or beverage, the temperature of
which at time of service to the consumer is at least 140° F.
   MACHINE LOCATION — The room, enclosure, space or area where one or more
vending machines are installed and operated.
   MISBRANDING — The use of any written, printed or graphic matter upon or
accompanying products or containers dispensed from vending machines, including
signs or placards displayed in relation to such products so dispensed, which is
false or misleading or which violates any applicable local, state or federal
labeling requirements.
   OPERATOR — Any person who by contract, agreement or ownership takes
responsibility for furnishing, installing, servicing, operating or maintaining
one or more vending machines.
   PERSON — Any individual, partnership, corporation, company, firm,
institution, trustee, association or any other public or private entity.
   PRODUCT CONTACT SURFACE — Any surface of the vending machine, appurtenances
or containers which comes into direct contact with any food, beverage or
ingredient.
   READILY PERISHABLE FOODS — Any food or beverage or ingredients consisting in
whole or in part of milk, milk products, eggs, meat, fish, poultry or other
food capable of supporting rapid and progressive growth of microorganisms which
can cause food intoxication. However, products in hermetically sealed
containers processed by heat to prevent spoilage and dehydrated, dry or
powdered products so low in moisture content as to preclude development of
microorganisms are excluded from the terms of this definition.
   SINGLE-SERVICE ARTICLE — Any utensil, container, implement or wrapper
intended for use only once in the preparation, storage, display, service or
consumption of food or beverage.
   VENDING MACHINE — Any self-service machine offered for public use which,
upon insertion of a coin, coins or token or by other means, dispenses unit
servings of food or beverage, either in bulk or in package, without the
necessity of replenishing the device between each vending operation.
§ 125-2.   Commissaries outside township.
   A.   Foods, beverages and ingredients from commissaries outside the
jurisdiction of the health authority of the Township of Upper Dublin may be
sold within the Township of Upper Dublin or its police jurisdiction, if such
commissaries conform to the provisions of the Food Establishment Sanitation
Regulations of the Township of Upper Dublin or to substantially equivalent
provisions.
   B.   To determine the extent of compliance with such provisions, the health
authority may accept reports from the responsible authority in the jurisdiction
where the commissary or commissaries are located.
ARTICLE II
(Reserved) 1
1 Editor's Note: Former Art. II, Permits, was repealed 3-9-1999 by Ord. No.
991.
§§ 125-3 through 125-9. (Reserved)
ARTICLE III
Sanitation Requirements
§ 125-10.   Foods, beverages, equipment and operations.
   A.   Foods, beverages and ingredients intended for sale through vending
machines shall be obtained from sources complying with the regulations of the
Township of Upper Dublin and with other applicable state and federal laws and
regulations. Such products shall be clean and wholesome, free from spoilage and
shall be processed, prepared, handled and stored in such a manner as to be
protected against contamination and adulteration. All product contact surfaces
of containers and equipment shall be protected from contamination.
   B.   This section shall be deemed to have been satisfied when the following
requirements are met:
      (1)   All foods, beverages and ingredients offered for sale through
vending machines shall be manufactured, processed and prepared in commissaries
or establishments which comply with all applicable local, state and federal
laws and regulations.
      (2)   All foods, beverages and ingredients offered for sale through
vending machines shall be wholesome and free from spoilage, contamination and
adulteration.
      (3)   All foods, beverages and ingredients shall be stored or packaged in
clean protective containers and shall be handled, transported and vended in a
sanitary manner. Wet storage of packaged products is prohibited.
      (4)   Readily perishable foods offered for sale through vending machines
shall be dispensed to the consumer in the individual original container or
wrapper into which it was placed at the commissary or at the manufacturer's or
processor's plant, or such products shall be dispensed into single-service
containers.
      (5)   Readily perishable foods or ingredients within the vending machine
shall be maintained at a temperature not higher than 45° F. or a temperature
not lower than 140° F. Vending machines dispensing readily perishable foods
shall be provided with controls which ensure the maintenance of these
temperatures at all times; provided, however, that an exception may be made for
the actual time required to fill or otherwise service the machine and for a
maximum recovery period of 30 minutes following completion of filling or
servicing operations. Such controls shall also place the machine in an
inoperative condition until serviced by the operator, in the event of power
failure or other condition, which permits the food storage compartment to
attain a temperature above 45° F. or below 140° F., whichever is applicable.
Vending machines dispensing readily perishable food shall be provided with a
thermometer which, to an accuracy of plus or minus two degrees Fahrenheit,
indicates the air temperature of the food storage compartment.
      (6)   Milk and fluid milk products offered for sale through vending
machines shall be dispensed only in individual, original containers or from
bulk containers into which such product was placed at the milk plant; provided,
however, that in the case of vending machines that use fluid milk products as
an ingredient in hot liquid foods or beverages, such milk product may be
transferred at the machine location from the individual, original container of
not more than V2 gallon capacity to a vending machine bulk container which is
clean and has been subjected to an approved bactericidal process in accordance
with Subsection B(8) of this section; provided further that in such transfer,
the entire contents of the individual original container are used.
      (7)   All multi-use parts of any bulk milk vending machine which come
into direct contact with the milk or milk product shall be effectively cleaned
and bactericidally treated at the milk plant; provided, however, that single-
service dispensing tubes which receive bactericidal treatment at the
fabricating plant and which are individually packaged in such manner as to
preclude contamination may be exempted from this provision. The can or other
bulk milk container shall be filled only at the milk plant and shall be sealed
with two (2) seals in such manner as to make it impossible to withdraw any part
of its contents without breaking one (1) seal and impractical to introduce any
substance without breaking the other seal. The delivery tube and any milk
contact parts of the dispensing device shall be attached at the milk plant and
shall be protected by a moisture-proof covering or housed in a compartment with
a moisture-tight closure, which shall not be removed until after the container
is placed in the refrigerated compartment of the vending machine.
      (8)   With the exception of product contact surfaces of bulk milk vending
machines for which separate provisions for cleaning and bactericidal treatment
are specified in Subsection B(7) of this section, all multi-use containers or
parts of vending machines which come into direct contact with readily
perishable foods, beverages or ingredients shall be removed from the machine
daily and shall be thoroughly cleaned and effectively subjected to an approved
bactericidal process at the commissary or other approved facility; provided,
however, that the requirement of daily cleaning and bactericidal treatments may
be waived for those contact surfaces which are maintained at all times at a
temperature of not higher than forty-five degrees Fahrenheit (45° F.) or at a
temperature not lower than one hundred forty degrees Fahrenheit (140° F.),
whichever is applicable. Such parts shall, after cleaning and bactericidal
treatment, be protected from contamination.
      (9)   All parts of vending machines which come into direct contact with
other than readily perishable foods shall be thoroughly cleaned and subjected
to bactericidal treatment by methods approved by the health authority. The
frequency of such cleaning and bactericidal treatment shall be established by
the health authority based upon the type of product being dispensed. A record
of such cleaning and bactericidal treatment operations shall be maintained by
the operator in each machine and shall be correct for at least the past thirty
(30) days.
      (10)   All single-service containers, which receive food or beverage from
machines dispensing such products in bulk, shall be purchased in sanitary
cartons or packages which protect the containers from contamination, shall be
stored in a clean dry place until used and shall be handled in a sanitary
manner. Such containers shall be stored in the original carton or package in
which they were placed at the point of manufacture until introduced into the
container magazine or dispenser of the vending machine. Single-service
containers stored within the vending machine shall be protected from manual
contact, dust, insects, rodents and other contamination.
§ 125-11.   Machine location.
   A.   The machine location shall be such as to minimize the potential for
contamination of the product, shall be easily cleanable and shall be kept
clean.
   B.   This section shall be deemed to have been satisfied when the following
requirements are met:
      (1)   Each vending machine shall be located in a room, area or space
which can be maintained in a clean condition and which is protected from
overhead leakage from drains and piping. Each vending machine shall be so
located that the space around and under the machine can be readily cleaned and
so that insect and rodent harborage is not created.
      (2)   The floor area upon which vending machines are located shall be
reasonably smooth, of cleanable construction and be capable of withstanding
repeated washing and scrubbing. This space and the immediate surroundings of
each vending machine shall be maintained in a clean condition.
§ 125-12.   Exterior construction and maintenance.
   A.   The exterior construction of the vending machine shall be such as to
facilitate cleaning and to minimize the entrance of insects and rodents, and
the exterior of the machine shall be kept clean. Service connections shall be
such as to protect against unintentional or accidental interruption of service
to the machine.
   B.   This section shall be deemed to have been satisfied when the following
requirements are met:
      (1)   The vending machine shall be of sturdy construction, and the
exterior shall be so designed, fabricated and finished as to facilitate its
being kept clean and to minimize the entrance of insects and rodents.
      (2)   Door and panel access openings to the product and container storage
spaces of the machine shall be tight-fitting and, if necessary, gasketed, so as
to preclude the entrance of dust, moisture, insects and rodents.
      (3)   All necessary ventilation louvers or openings into vending machines
shall be effectively screened against insects and rodents; provided, however,
that an exception to this provision may be made for vending machines currently
in use until such time as such machines are relocated or removed from present
machine location for any other purposes. Such screening material shall be not
less than sixteen (16) mesh to the inch or equivalent.
      (4)   In all new vending machines in which a condenser unit is an
integral part of the machine, such unit shall be sealed from the product and
container storage spaces.
      (5)   Unless the vending machine is sealed to the floor so as to prevent
seepage underneath or can be manually moved with ease, one (1) or more of the
following provisions shall be utilized to facilitate cleaning operations:
         (a)   The machine shall be mounted on legs six (6) or more inches in
height.
         (b)   The machine shall be mounted on casters or rollers.
         (c)   The machine shall be mounted on gliders which permit it to be
easily moved.
      (6)   All service connections through an exterior wall of the machine,
including water, gas, electrical and refrigeration connections, shall be
grommeted or sealed to prevent the entrance of insects and rodents. All
connections to such utilities shall be such as to discourage their unauthorized
or unintentional disconnection.
§ 125-13.   Interior construction and maintenance.
   A.   All interior surfaces and component parts of the vending machine shall
be so designed and constructed as to permit easy cleaning and shall be kept
clean. All product contact surfaces of the machine shall be of smooth,
nontoxic, corrosion-resistant and relatively nonabsorbent material and shall be
capable of withstanding repeated cleaning and bactericidal treatment by normal
procedures. Such surfaces shall be protected against contamination.
   B.   This section shall be deemed to have been satisfied when the following
requirements are met:
      (1)   The nonproduct contact surfaces of the interior of vending machines
shall be so designed and constructed as to permit easy cleaning and so
facilitate maintenance operations. Inaccessible surfaces or areas shall be
minimized
      (2)   All product contact surfaces of vending machines shall be smooth,
in good repair and free of breaks, corrosion, open seams, cracks and chipped
places. The design of such surfaces shall be such as to preclude routine
contact between food and V-type threaded surfaces. All joints and welds in
product contact surfaces shall be smooth; and all internal angles and corners
of such surfaces shall be rounded to facilitate cleaning.
      (3)   All product or ingredient contact surfaces of vending machines,
including containers, pipes, valves and fittings, shall be constructed of
nontoxic, corrosion-resistant and relatively nonabsorbent materials and shall
be kept clean. All containers, valves, fittings, chutes and faucets which are
in contact with food shall be easily and readily removable and so fabricated as
to be easily disassembled, and, when disassembled, all surfaces shall be
visible for inspection and cleaning. In machines of such design that product
contact pipes or tubing are not readily removable, in-place cleaning of such
pipes and pipe fittings may be permitted; provided that:
         (a)   They are so arranged that cleaning and bactericidal solutions
can be circulated throughout the fixed system.
         (b)   Such solutions will contact all interior surfaces.
         (c)   The system is self-draining or otherwise completely evacuated.
         (d)   The cleaning procedures result in thorough cleaning of the
equipment.
      (4)   The openings into all nonpressurized containers used for the
storage of vendable foods and ingredients, including water, shall be provided
with covers which prevent contamination from reaching the interior of the
containers. Such covers shall be designed to provide a flange which overlaps
the opening and shall be sloped to provide drainage from the cover surface. Any
port opening through the cover shall be flanged upward at least three-eighths
(3/8) inch and shall be provided with a cover which overlaps the flange.
Condensation- or drip-deflecting aprons shall be provided on all piping,
thermometers, equipment, rotary shafts and other functional parts extending
into the container, unless a watertight joint is provided. Such aprons shall be
considered as satisfactory covers for those openings which are in continuous
use. Gaskets, if used, shall be of a material which is nontoxic, relatively
stable and relatively nonabsorbent and shall have a smooth surface. All gasket
retaining grooves shall be readily cleanable.
      (5)   The delivery tube or chute and orifice of all bulk food and bulk
beverage vending machines shall be protected from normal manual contact, dust,
insects, rodents and other contamination. The design shall be such as to divert
condensation or other moisture from the normal filling position of the
container receiving the food or beverage. The vending stage of such machines
shall be provided with a tight-fitting, self-closing door or cover which is
kept closed except when the machine is in the process of delivering food or
beverage.
      (6)   The product storage compartment within vending machines dispensing
packaged liquid products shall be so constructed as to be self-draining or
shall be provided with a drain outlet which permits complete draining of the
compartment. All such drains shall be easily cleanable.
      (7)   Opening devices which come into contact with the product or the
product contact surface of the containers shall be constructed of smooth,
nontoxic, corrosion-resistant and relatively nonabsorbent materials. Unless the
opening device is of a single-service type, it shall be readily removable for
cleaning and shall be kept clean. Parts of multiuse opening devices which come
into contact with the product or product contact surface of containers shall be
reasonably protected from manual contact, dust, insects, rodents and other
contamination, and such parts shall be readily removable for cleaning and shall
be kept clean.
§ 125-14.   Water supply.
   A.   Water used in vending machines shall be from an approved source and
shall be of a safe and sanitary quality.
   B.   This section shall be deemed to have been satisfied when the following
requirements are met:
      (1)   All water used in vending machines shall be of safe and sanitary
quality and from a source approved by the health authority. Water used as a
product ingredient shall be piped into the vending machine under pressure, and
all connections and fittings shall be installed in accordance with local or
state plumbing regulations. Containers for the storage of water for product
ingredient, which are not apart of the closed water system, shall be designed
and maintained as product contact surfaces.
      (2)   If used, water filters or other water-conditioning devices shall be
of a type which may be disassembled for periodic cleaning or replacement of the
active element. Replacement elements shall be handled in a sanitary manner.
   All vending machines which dispense carbonated beverages and which are
connected to a water supply system, shall be equipped with two (2) (or a
double) check valves; or. an air gap; or a device to vent carbon dioxide to the
atmosphere; or other device approved by the health authority, which will
provide positive protection against the entrance of carbon dioxide or
carbonated water into the water supply system.
   Where check valves are used for the protection of the water supply system, a
screen of not less than one hundred (100) mesh to the inch shall be installed
in the water supply line immediately upstream from the check valves.
   In all vending machines which dispense carbonated beverages and which are
connected to a water supply system, the ingredient water contact surfaces from
the check valves or other protective device downstream, including the device
itself, shall be of such material as to preclude the production of toxic
substances which might result from interaction with carbon dioxide or
carbonated water.
§ 125-15.   Waste disposal.
   A.   All waters shall be properly disposed of and, pending disposition,
shall be kept in suitable containers so as to prevent creating a nuisance.
   B.   This section shall be deemed to have been satisfied when the following
requirements are met:
      (1)   All trash and other waste material shall be removed from the
machine location as frequently as may be necessary to prevent nuisance and
unsightliness and shall be disposed of in a manner approved by the health
authority.
      (2)   Self-closing, leakproof, readily cleanable, plainly labeled and
designed waste container or containers shall be provided in the vicinity of
each machine or machines to receive used cups, cartons, wrappers, straws,
closures and other single-service items. Such waste containers shall not be
located within the vending machine; provided, however, that an exception may be
made for those machines dispensing only packaged products with crown closures,
in which case the closure receptacle may be located within the machine.
Suitable racks or cases shall be provided for multi-use containers or bottles.
      (3)   Containers shall be provided within all machines dispensing liquid
products in bulk for the collection of drip, spillage, overflow or other liquid
wastes. An automatic shutoff device shall be provided which will place the.
vending machine out of operation before such container overflows. Containers or
surfaces on which such wastes may accumulate shall be readily removable for
cleaning, shall be easily cleanable and shall be corrosion-resistant. If liquid
wastes from drip, spillage or overflow which originate within the machine are
discharged into a sewerage system, the connection to the sewer shall be through
an air gap.
§ 125-16.   Delivery of merchandise.
   A.   Foods, beverages and ingredients and product contact surfaces of
containers, equipment and supplies shall be protected from contamination while
in transit to machine location. Readily perishable foods and beverages, while
in transit, shall be maintained at a temperature not higher than fifty degrees
Fahrenheit (50° F.) or not lower than one hundred fifty degrees Fahrenheit
(150° F.).
   B.   This section shall be deemed to have been satisfied when the following
requirements are met:
      (1)   Food, beverages or ingredients, while in transit to vending machine
locations, shall be protected from the elements, dirt, dust, insects, rodents
and other contamination. Similar protection shall be provided for single-
service containers and for the product contact surfaces of equipment,
containers and devices in transit to machine locations.
      (2)   Readily perishable foods or beverages, while in transit to vending
machine locations, shall be maintained at a temperature of not more than fifty
degrees Fahrenheit (50° F.) or at a temperature of not less than one hundred
fifty degrees Fahrenheit (150° F.).
§ 125-17.   Personnel cleanliness.
   A.   Employees shall keep their hands clean and shall wear clean outer
garments while engaged in handling foods or beverages or product contact
surfaces of utensils or equipment.
   B.   This section shall be deemed to have been satisfied when the employees
shall wash their hands immediately prior to engaging in any vending machine
servicing operation which may bring them into contact with foods, beverages or
ingredients or with product contact surfaces or utensils, containers or
equipment. While engaged in such servicing operations, employees shall wear
clean outer garments.
§ 125-18.   Disease control.
   A.   No employee with any disease in a communicable form, or who is a
carrier of such disease shall work in any commissary or in vending machine
operations in any capacity which brings him into contact with the production,
handling, storage or transportation of foods, beverages, ingredients or
equipment used in vending machine operations; and no operator shall employ in
any such capacity any such person or any person suspected of having any disease
in a communicable form or of being a carrier of such disease. Any employee who
has a discharging or infected wound, sore or lesion on hands, arms or any
exposed portion of the body shall be excluded from those operations which will
bring him into contact with foods, beverages, utensils or equipment used in
vending machine operations. Any operator among whose employees there occurs a
communicable disease or who suspects that any employee has contracted any
disease in a communicable form or has become a carrier of such disease shall
notify the health authority immediately.
   B.   When suspicion arises as to the possibility of transmission of
infection from any employee, the health authority is authorized to require any
or all of the following measures:
      (1)   The immediate exclusion of the employee from all commissaries and
vending machine operations.
      (2)   The immediate closing of the commissaries and operations concerned
until, in the opinion of the health authority, no further danger of disease
outbreak exists.
      (3)   Adequate medical examinations of the employee and of his
associates, with such laboratory examinations as may be indicated.
ARTICLE IV
Enforcement; Violations and Penalties
§ 125-19.   Adulterated or misbranded merchandise.
   A.   It shall be unlawful for any person within the Township of Upper Dublin
or its police jurisdiction to sell, offer or expose for sale through vending
machines or to have in possession with intent to sell therefrom any food,
beverage or ingredient which is adulterated or misbranded.
   B.   Samples of food, beverage or ingredient may be taken and examined by
the health officer as often as may be necessary to determine freedom from
adulteration or misbranding. The health authority may, on written notice to the
operator, impound or forbid the sale of any food or beverage which is
adulterated or misbranded or which he has probable cause to believe to be
adulterated or misbranded. After the operator has been given an opportunity for
a hearing, the health authority may cause to be removed or destroyed any food
or beverage which is adulterated or misbranded; provided, however, that in the
case of misbranding which can be corrected by proper labeling, such food or
beverage may be released to the operator for correct labeling under the
supervision of the health authority.
§ 125-20.   Inspections.
[Amended 3-9-1999 by Ord. No. 991]
   A.   The health authority may inspect the servicing, maintenance and
operation of vending machines dispensing readily perishable foods and
commissaries at least once every six months. Vending machines dispensing other
than readily perishable foods may be inspected by the health authority as often
as deemed necessary.
   B.   The health authority, after proper identification, shall be permitted
to enter at any reasonable time upon any private or public property within the
Township of Upper Dublin or its police jurisdiction, where vending machines or
commissaries are operated or from which such machines are otherwise serviced,
for the purpose of determining compliance with the provisions of this Part 1.
The operator shall make provision for the health authority to have access,
either in company with an employee or otherwise, to the interior of all vending
machines operated by him
   C.   Whenever the health authority discovers a violation of any provision of
this Part 1, he shall notify the operator concerned. Such notice shall describe
the condition found and state which section of this Part 1 is violated by such
condition; provide a specific and reasonable period of time for the correction
of the condition; and state that an opportunity for a hearing of inspection
findings will be provided, if a written request for such hearing is filed with
the health authority within 10 days of receipt of the notice. The health
authority may advise the operator, in writing, that unless the violations are
corrected within the specified period of time, penalties may be imposed in
accordance with the provisions of §
125-22.
§ 125-21.   Enforcement.
This Part 2 shall be enforced by the health authority in accordance with the
interpretations thereof contained in The Vending of Foods and Beverages — A
Sanitation Ordinance and Code — 1957 Recommendations of the Public Health
Service, a copy of which shall be on file in the Office of the Secretary of the
Township of Upper Dublin.
§ 125-22.   Violations and penalties.
[Amended 8-9-1988 by Ord. No. 753; 1-10-1995 by Ord. No. 879]
Any person who shall violate any provision of this Part 1 shall, upon
conviction before a District Justice, be fined $500 for each violation upon a
first offense and not more than $1,000 for each violation on each subsequent
offense. Such fines shall be collected as like fines as are now by law
collected and shall be in addition to such costs as are permissible upon
hearing and conviction before a District Justice.
Part 2
Bulk Foods
[Adopted 5-13-1986 as Title 5, Ch. 2, Art. 3, of the 1986 Code]
ARTICLE V
General Provisions
§ 125-23.   Definitions.
The following shall be construed to have the meaning set forth as follows:
   BULK FOOD — Unpackaged or unwrapped processed or unprocessed food in
aggregate containers from which quantities desired by the consumer may be
drawn. For purposes of this Part 2, this definition shall not include fresh
fruits, fresh vegetables, nuts in the shell and salad bars.
   DISPLAY AREA — A location or locations, including physical facilities and
equipment, where bulk food is offered for customer self-service.
   POTENTIALLY HAZARDOUS FOODS — Those foods susceptible to rapid microbial
growth and those foods requiring refrigeration at a temperature of not
exceeding 45° F. and shall include, without limitation, all dairy products and
mayonnaise-based products and all hot-serve products.
   PRODUCT MODULE — A food-contact container (multi-use or single-service)
designed for customer self-service of bulk food by either direct or indirect
means.
   SERVICING AREA — A designated location or locations equipped for cleaning,
sanitizing, drying or refilling product modules or for preparing bulk food.
§ 125-24.   Labeling.
   A.   Bulk food product modules shall be labeled with either the
manufacturer's or processor's bulk container labeling plainly in view; or a
counter card, sign or other appropriate device bearing prominently and
conspicuously the common name of the product, a list of ingredients in proper
order of predominance and declaration of artificial color or flavor and
chemical preservatives, if contained in the product.
   B.   Labels or marking pens shall be available to customers to identify
their take-home containers with the common name of the product.
§ 125-25.   Regulations.
   A.   Bulk foods and product modules shall be protected from contamination
during display, customer self-service, refilling and storage.
   B.   Containers of bulk pet foods and bulk nonfood items shall be separated
by a barrier or open space from product modules.
   C.   Only containers provided by the store in the display area shall be
filled with bulk foods.
   D.   Bulk foods returned to the store by the customer shall be disposed of
by the store and shall not be offered for resale.
§ 125-26.   Potentially hazardous foods.
Potentially hazardous foods shall not be provided for customer self-service
except upon approval granted by the Health Officer. In determining whether or
not such approval shall be issued, the Health Officer shall use the following
criteria:
   A.   The food, while being stored, prepared, displayed or sold, shall be
protected from contamination and stored in such a manner as to prevent rodent
harborage and permit ease of cleaning of the food-service facilities.
   B.   All bulk products containing potentially hazardous foods shall have a
maximum turnover time of three (3) hours. Perishable products shall have a
turnover time that is adequate to prevent spoilage or degradation of the
product.
   C.   Potentially hazardous foods, once placed out for self-service, must be
discarded at the end of the work day, and the recombination cycle shall be
broken at least once every six (6) hours during the day.
   D.   All perishable food shall be stored at such temperatures as will
protect against spoilage. All potentially hazardous food shall be maintained at
safe temperatures. Foods shall be stored in the refrigerator so as to permit
the free circulation of cold air and in such a manner as to prevent
contamination. To promote rapid cooling, potentially hazardous foods shall be
stored in the refrigerator in shallow containers or by such other means which
shall ensure the cooling of the total mass to a temperature of forty-five
degrees Fahrenheit (45° F.) or less within two (2) hours, unless otherwise
specified by the Department.
   E.   Raw fruits and vegetables shall be washed before use. Stuffings,
poultry, stuffed meats and stuffed poultry and pork and pork products shall be
thoroughly cooked before being served.
   F.   No food which has been previously served to any person or persons or
returned from any counter or table shall be used in the preparation of foods,
offered for sale or given away. However, wrapped food which has not been
unwrapped and which is wholesome may be re-served.
   G.   Tongs, forks, spoons, picks, spatulas, scoops and other suitable
utensils shall be provided and shall be used by employees to reduce manual
contact with food to a minimum. For self-service by customers, similar
implements shall be provided.
§ 125-27.   Method of dispensing.
   A.   Bulk foods shall be dispensed only from product modules which are
protected by close- fitting, individual covers. If opened by the customer, the
covers shall be self-closing and shall remain closed when not in use.
   B.   Customer access to bulk food in product modules shall be limited and
controlled to avoid the introduction of contaminants. Means considered suitable
include but are not limited to:
      (1)   Providing a product module and depth of no more than eighteen (18)
inches; and
      (2)   Locating product modules with access from the top so that there is
at least thirty (30) inches between the access point and the floor.
   C.   Manual contact of bulk foods by the customer during dispensing shall be
avoided. Methods considered suitable are:
      (1)   Mechanical dispensing devices, including gravity dispensers, pumps,
extruders and augers;
      (2)   Manual dispensing utensils, including tongs, scoops, ladles and
spatulas; and (3) Wrapping or sacking.
   D.   If the dispensing devices and utensils listed in Subsection C(1) and
(2) do not prevent manual customer contact with certain bulk foods, then these
foods must be wrapped or sacked prior to display. Manual dispensing utensils
listed in Subsection C(2) shall be protected against becoming contaminated and
serving as vehicles for introducing contamination into bulk food. Means
considered suitable include but are not limited to:
      (1)   Using a tether which is constructed of easily cleanable material,
is of such length that the utensil cannot contact the floor and is designed to
prevent interference with the requirement for close-fitting covers.
      (2)   Storing the utensil in a sleeve or protective housing attached or
adjacent to the display unit when not in use or utilizing a utensil designed so
that the handle cannot contact the product if left in the product module.
   E.   Ladles, spatulas and other manual dispensing utensils used in other
than dry foods shall be stored in the food with handles extending at least six
(6) inches to the outside of the product module and shall not prevent lids from
being self-closing.
§ 125-28.   Equipment and utensils.
   A.   Product modules, lids, dispensing units and utensils shall be
constructed of safe materials and shall be corrosion-resistant, nonabsorbent,
smooth, easily cleanable and durable under conditions of normal use and shall
be designed to meet all requirements for food-contact surfaces. Single-service
plastic bags or disposable liners used as product modules shall be of safe
materials and of sufficient thickness to resist tears and cuts.
   B.   Surfaces of product module display units, tethers and all display
equipment not intended for food contact but which are exposed to splash, food
debris or other soiling shall be designed and fabricated to be smooth,
cleanable, durable under conditions of normal use and free of unnecessary
ledges, projections or crevices.
   C.   Tethers shall be designed to be easily removable from the product
module for cleaning.
   D.   The materials for non-food-contact surfaces shall be nonabsorbent or
made nonabsorbent by being finished and sealed with a cleanable coating.
§ 125-29.   Cleaning and servicing of equipment.
   A.   Tongs, scoops, ladles, spatulas, other appropriate utensils and tethers
used by customers shall be cleaned and sanitized at least daily or at more
frequent intervals based on the type of food and amount of food particle
accumulation or soiling. Product modules, lids and other equipment shall be
cleaned prior to restocking, when soiled or at intervals on a schedule based on
the type of food and amount of food particle accumulation. Food- contact
surfaces shall be cleaned and sanitized immediately if contamination is
observed or suspected. All product remaining in the production module at the
time of cleaning shall be disposed of to assure that the product cycle is
broken.
   B.   Individual product modules shall be designed to be easily removable
from the display unit for servicing unless the modules are so designed and
fabricated that they can be effectively cleaned (and sanitized when necessary)
through a manual in-place cleaning procedure that will not contaminate or
otherwise adversely affect bulk food or equipment in the adjoining display
area.
   C.   Facilities and/or equipment shall be available, either in a servicing
area or in place, to provide for proper cleaning and sanitizing of all food-
contact surfaces, including product modules, lids and dispensing utensils.
   D.   Take-home containers (bags, cups, lids, etc.) provided in the display
area for customer use shall be stored and dispensed in a sanitary manner.
§ 125-30.   Hand-washing facilities.
   A.   When hand-washing facilities are not available at the bulk food display
area, customers, upon request, are permitted access to hand-washing facilities
located in employee rest room(s).
   B.   When sanitary paper towels or disposable towelettes are provided,
easily cleanable waste receptacle(s) shall be conveniently provided in the
display area.
§ 125-31.   Submission of plans.
Plans and specifications for alterations of a retail food store to accommodate
self-service bulk foods shall be submitted to the Township Board of Health and
Township Health Enforcement Officer for review and recommendation. 1
1 Editor's Note: Former Sec. 3.10, which incorporated the provisions of former
Title 5, Ch. 2, Art. 1, was deleted at time of adoption of Code; see
Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
Part 3
Public Eating and Drinking Places
[Adopted at time of adoption of Code 2 ]
2 Editor's Note: See
Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
ARTICLE VI
General Provisions
§ 125-32.   Definitions.
The following shall be construed in this Part 3 to have the meanings set forth
as follows:
   PUBLIC EATING AND DRINKING PLACE — Any place within the Township of Upper
Dublin where food or drink is served to or provided for the public, with or
without charge.
   RETAIL FOOD ESTABLISHMENT — Any place, whether temporary or permanent,
stationary or mobile, where food or drink is packaged, stored, served, sold or
offered for sale directly to the consumer.
   PROPRIETOR — Any person, partnership, association or corporation conducting
a public eating and drinking place or a retail food establishment.
   EMPLOYEE — Any cook, waiter, clerk, cashier, kitchen help, chambermaid,
house servant or other employee of any kind in a public eating and drinking
place or a retail food establishment who, in any manner whatever, handles or
comes in contact with any food or drink served to or provided for the public,
and includes the proprietor or any member of his family who handles said food
or drinks.
§ 125-33.   Certificate of inspection required.
   A.   On or after the passage of this Part 3, it shall be unlawful for any
proprietor to conduct or operate a public eating or drinking place or retail
food establishment in the Township of Upper Dublin without first obtaining a
certificate of inspection from the Board of Health of the township or after
revocation of the certificate as herein provided. Said certificate shall be
issued only after said Board shall have ascertained by due inspection that the
premises at which the proposed public eating or drinking place is to be
conducted complies in all respects with the provisions of the Act of Assembly
of May 23, 1945 (No. 369), and with the rules and regulations adopted by the
Department of Health of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania pursuant to the
authority vested herein by said Act. Every certificate of inspection shall be
conspicuously displayed at all times in the public eating or drinking place
designated therein.
   B.   Said certificate shall not be transferable and shall be valid for one
(1) year from the date thereof and only for the public eating or drinking place
or retail food establishment located at the premises designated in said
certificate.
   C.   Whenever any person maintains more than one (1) food establishment, he
shall be required to apply for and procure a separate certificate for each food
establishment.
§ 125-34.   Inspection fee.
There shall be paid to the township an annual fee to cover the cost of
inspection, which fee shall be established by the Board of Commissioners and
set forth in the Township fee schedule.
§ 125-35.   Inspection.
The Township Health Enforcement Officer, as the duly authorized agent of the
Board of Health, shall have the power to enter at reasonable times upon private
or public property for the purpose of inspecting and investigating conditions
relating to the enforcement of the provisions of this Part 3.
§ 125-36.   Examination and certification of all employees.
Any food-handling employee with any illness requiring absence from work
exceeding five (5) working days should be authorized to return to work after a
physician's note has been received by the Health Enforcement Officer certifying
the employee's freedom from communicability.
§ 125-37.   Refusal to grant certificate or revocation of certificate.
   A.   Any proprietor whose application for a certificate of inspection has
been denied may request and shall be granted a hearing before the Board of
Health as herein provided.
   B.   Whenever the Board of Health, or duly authorized representative,
determines that there are reasonable grounds to believe that there has been a
violation of any provisions of this Part 3 or of any regulation adopted
pursuant thereto, it shall give notice of such alleged violation to the person
or persons responsible therefor, as hereinafter provided.
      (1)   Such notices shall:
         (a)   Be put in writing.
         (b)   Include a statement of the reasons why it is being issued.
         (c)   Allow a reasonable time for the performance of any act it
requires.
         (d)   Be served upon the holder of a license issued under this Part 3
or upon the owner or his agent or the occupant of any premises, provided that
such notice shall be deemed to have been properly served when a copy thereof
has been served personally or in accordance with any other method authorized or
required under the laws of this commonwealth.
      (2)   Such notice may:
         (a)   Contain an outline of remedial action which, if taken, will
effect compliance with the provisions of this Part 3.
         (b)   State that unless conditions or practices described in such
notice which violate this Part 3 are corrected within the reasonable time
specified in such notice a license which has been issued pursuant to this Part
3 may be suspended or revoked.
   C.   Any person who is affected by any notice which has been issued in
connection with the enforcement of any provisions of this Part 3 or of any
regulation adopted pursuant thereto may request and shall be granted a hearing
on the matter before the Board of Health, provided that such person shall file,
in the offices of the township, a written petition requesting such hearing and
setting forth a brief statement of the grounds therefor within ten (10) days
after the day the notice was served. Upon receipt of such petition, the Board
of Health shall set a time and place for such hearing and shall give the
petitioner written notice thereof. At such hearing, the petitioner shall be
given an opportunity to be heard. The hearing shall be commenced not later than
ten (10) days after the day on which the petition was filed, provided that,
upon application of the petitioner, the Board of Health may postpone the date
of the hearing for a reasonable time beyond such ten-day period when, in its
judgment, the petitioner has submitted a good and sufficient reason for such
postponement.
   D.   After such hearing, the Board of Health shall sustain, modify or
withdraw the notice, depending upon its finding based on such hearing as to
whether or not the provisions of this Part 3 and of the regulations adopted
pursuant thereto have been complied with. If the Board of Health sustains or
modifies such notice, it shall be deemed to be an order. Any notice shall
automatically become an order if a written petition for a hearing has not been
filed in the office of the Board of Health within ten (10) days after such
notice was served. In the case of any notice which states that the license
required by this Part 3 may be suspended or revoked, the Board of Health may
suspend or revoke such license if an order is issued and corrective action has
not been taken within the time specified in the notice.
   E.   The proceedings at such hearing, including the findings and decision of
the Board of Health, shall be summarized, put into writing and entered as a
matter of public record in the offices of the township. Such record shall
include, also, a copy of every notice or order issued in connection with the
matter. Any person aggrieved by the decision of the Board of Health may seek
relief therefrom in any court of competent jurisdiction, as provided by the
laws of this commonwealth.
   F.   Whenever the Board of Health finds that an emergency exists involving a
serious health hazard which requires immediate action to protect the public
health, it may, without notice or hearing, issue a written order citing the
existence of such an emergency and the conditions violating this Part 3 or
regulations adopted pursuant thereto which require corrective action to remove
such health hazard. If such corrective action has not been taken, the Board of
Health may take such action as may be necessary to protect the public health,
including complete shutdown. Notwithstanding other provisions of this Part 3,
such order shall be effective immediately, but upon petition to the Board of
Health shall be afforded a hearing as soon as possible, but in any case not
later than three (3) days after the petition was filed. After such hearing,
depending upon its finding as to whether or not the provisions of this Part 3
and of the regulations adopted pursuant thereto have been complied with, the
Board of Health shall continue such order in effect or modify it or revoke it.
§ 125-38.   Rules and regulations.
The Board of Health is hereby authorized to promulgate specific rules and
regulations governing the handling of food and drink and the conduct of any
public eating or drinking place or retail food establishment. These rules and
regulations shall be adopted as part of this Part 3 and amended from time to
time by resolution of the Board of Township Commissioners.
§ 125-39.   Violations and penalties.
Any proprietor, manager, partner, agent, servant or employee who shall conduct
a public eating or drinking place in the Township of Upper Dublin without first
having obtained a certificate of inspection as herein provided or who shall
continue to conduct such place after the revocation of said certificate or who
shall violate any of the other provisions of this Part 3 shall, for each
offense, be subject to a fine of not less than three hundred dollars ($300.)
nor more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.) and, upon failure of such
proprietor, manager, partner, agent, servant or employee to pay said fine and
the costs of prosecution, shall be subject to imprisonment in the county prison
for a period not exceeding thirty (30) days.
Chapter 127
HISTORIC PRESERVATION
§
127-1.   Legislative intent.
§
127-2.   Definitions.
§
127-3.   Historical Commission established.
§
127-4.   Duties of Historical Commission.
§
127-5.   Historic Resource Inventory.
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Board of Commissioners of the Township of Upper Dublin
11-14-2006 by Ord. No. 1175. Amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
 
Planning Agency — See        Subdivision and land development — See
Ch. 39.                        Ch. 212.
Building construction; Uniform Zoning — See
Construction                   Ch. 255.
Code — See                   Historic Resource Inventory — See Ch. A264.
Ch. 73.
 
§ 127-1.   Legislative intent.
It is hereby declared as a matter of public policy that the preservation and
protection of buildings, structures, and sites of historic, architectural,
cultural, archeological, educational, and aesthetic merit are public
necessities and are in the interests of the health, prosperity and welfare of
the people of Upper Dublin Township. Article 1, Section 27, of the Constitution
of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania states that: “The people have a right to
clean air, pure water, and preservation of the natural, scenic, historic and
aesthetic values of the environment.” The Township seeks to further these goals
as follows:
   A.   Identify the historic properties/structures in Upper Dublin Township by
adopting an inventory of historic places in the Township and documenting their
qualities as historic assets. 1
   B.   Encourage historic preservation by:
      (1)   Establishing an Historic Commission to advise owners regarding
historically appropriate alterations to structures listed as historic.
      (2)   Educating the community about historic preservation and historic
aspects of Upper Dublin Township through workshops, presentations, walking/
driving tours, etc.
      (3)   Assisting owners of historic resources with nomination to the
National Register of Historic Places.
      (4)   Providing assistance to owners to make ownership of an historic
resource more affordable.
   C.   Discourage demolition of historic assets by:
      (1)   Delaying demolition to allow the Historic Commission to discuss
alternatives with the owner.
      (2)   If demolition will occur, allowing time to document the historic
resource.
      (3)   Working with owners to prevent demolition of an historic resource
by neglect.
   D.   Deny demolition of highly significant resources in the Township while:
      (1)   Working with the owner to seek alternatives to demolition.
      (2)   Establishing fair market value of the property and assisting in
finding a new owner who will agree to preserve the structure.
1. Editor’s Note: See Ch. A264, Historic Resource Inventory.
§ 127-2.   Definitions. 
[Amended 9-8-2009 by Ord. No. 09-1218, § 2]
Unless otherwise expressly stated, the following words and phrases shall be
construed throughout this chapter to have the meanings indicated below:
   DEMOLITION or DEMOLISH — The razing or destruction, whether entirely or in
significant part, of the exterior of a building, structure, or site. The
removal of 75% or more of the square footage of the exterior walls of a
building will be considered “significant.”
   HISTORIC RESOURCE — A building, structure, or site which is historically or
archaeologically significant, or which has significant architectural,
engineering, scientific, economic, agricultural, educational, social,
political, military, cultural or aesthetic merit, including those buildings,
structures, and sites that are classified by Federal, State or local government
authority as historic buildings or sites. [Amended 9-8-2009 by Ord. No. 09-
1218]
§ 127-3.   Historical Commission established.
   A.   The Upper Dublin Township Historical Commission is hereby established
to be composed of seven members appointed by the Board of Commissioners, all of
whom must be residents of Upper Dublin Township. The Historical Commission
shall include at least four members with a demonstrated interest in
architectural history, history, historic preservation or community
revitalization and preferably include a registered architect, a licensed real
estate agent and a building contractor.
   B.   The terms of the members of the Historical Commission shall be three
years, staggered initially so that no more than three shall expire each year.
   C.   Members of the Historical Commission shall select a Chairman, Vice-
Chairman, and Secretary from among its members. It shall be the Chairman’s
responsibility to conduct meetings of the Historical Commission and to act as a
liaison between the Historical Commission and the Code Enforcement Officer, the
Planning, Commissioners’ Planning Committee, and Board of Commissioners. The
Vice-Chairman shall assist the Chairman and assume the role of Chairman when
the Chairman is absent. The Secretary shall have duties related to keeping
records and handling correspondence.
   D.   Historical Commission members must attend all meetings. A member who is
absent for four consecutive regular monthly meetings shall be considered
inactive and will be replaced by appointment of a new member.
   E.   A quorum, required to conduct business at Historical Commission
meetings shall be a majority, or four members.
   F.   Members shall not be compensated, but may be reimbursed for expenses
approved by the Board of Commissioners and directly related to the duties of
the Historical Commission.
   G.   The Historical Commission shall hold meetings monthly, or more often as
necessary.
§ 127-4.   Duties of Historical Commission.
   A.   The Historical Commission shall be responsible for evaluating,
compiling, maintaining, and publishing the Historic Resource Inventory and of
distinguishing on the Inventory between Class I and Class II properties. The
Historical Commission shall periodically review the historic resources on the
inventory and recommend additions, deletions or reclassifications to the Board
of Commissioners.
   B.   The Historical Commission shall advise the Board of Commissioners with
respect to the demolition of historic resources in the Township.
   C.   The Historical Commission shall be responsible for monitoring projects
in Upper Dublin Township that may have an impact on historic resources.
   D.   The Historical Commission shall maintain regular communication with the
Pennsylvania Historical and Museum Commission and the National Park Service to
obtain lists of historic resources in the Township that are National Historic
Landmarks, or listed or eligible for the National Register of Historic Places,
and for advice on matters of historic preservation in Upper Dublin Township.
   E.   The Historical Commission shall aid, assist, promote, and perform the
nomination of resources in Upper Dublin Township to the National Register of
Historic Places.
   F.   The Historical Commission shall have the general responsibility to
promote historic preservation within Upper Dublin Township by performing any or
all of the following:
      (1)   Publishing printed material related to historic preservation.
      (2)   Adding historic preservation related material to the Township’s web
site.
      (3)   Holding events to foster historic preservation in the Township.
These events may include but are not limited to presentations, tours, and the
publication of brochures.
      (4)   Educating historic resource owners about the potential benefits of
having a resource listed on the Historic Resource Inventory including honorary
designation, improved development opportunities, and protection. These benefits
may include grants, tax incentives, and the benefits of protection provided by
state and federal government historic preservation programs and laws.
      (5)   Meeting with owners of historic resources wishing to demolish their
structure in order to discuss viable alternatives.
      (6)   Engaging in activities that would help owners retain and maintain
their historic resource. These activities could include but are not limited to:
creating a list of trades people skilled in the maintenance of historic
structures, working with financial institutions to attain low-cost loans for
owners of historic properties, working with preservation organizations to
assist owners (National Trust, Preservation Pennsylva nia, etc.) with their
properties, contacting state and national elected officials in the pursuit of
tax relief for owners of historic resources.
      (7)   Documenting all historic resources, particularly those scheduled
for demolition.
      (8)   Working with owners of historic structures seeking information
regarding the appropriateness of alterations or additions to their structures.
      (9)   Coordinating with Township staff in the implementation of the
provisions of the Upper Dublin Township Code relating to historic assets.
§ 127-5.   Historic Resource Inventory.
[Amended 6-14-2011 by Ord. No. 11-1241, § 1]
An Historic Resource Inventory is hereby established of buildings, structures,
and sites in the Township designated for preservation. It shall be available
for public inspection in the office of the Township Secretary. The Historic
Resource Inventory shall consist of those properties identified in
Chapter A264, Historic Resource Inventory. In all cases the historic resource
is the principal building on the property, unless otherwise noted.
   A.   Criteria for designation as a Class I resource. A building, structure,
or site, or a complex of the same, may be placed on the Historic Resource
Inventory as a Class I resource if it meets any one of the following criteria:
      (1)   Is listed in the National Register of Historic Places;
      (2)   Has been deemed eligible by the Pennsylvania Historic and Museum
Commission (PHMC) for listing in the National Register of Historic Places;
      (3)   Is designated by the Secretary of the Interior as a National
Historic Landmark; or
      (4)   Is classified as a certified historic structure by the Secretary of
the Interior.
      (5)   If documented as “Contributing Resources” in any National Register
Historic District. [Added 6-14-2011 by Ord. No. 11-1241]
      (6)   If documented as “Contributing Resources” in any local historic
district certified by the Pennsylvania Historical and Museum Commission (PHMC)
in accordance with Pennsylvania Act 167. [Added 6-14-2011 by Ord. No. 11-1241]
   B.   Criteria for designation as a Class II resource. A building, structure,
or site, or a complex of the same, may be placed on the Historic Resource
Inventory as a Class II resource if it meets any three of the following
criteria:
      (1)   Has significant character, interest or value as part of the
development, heritage or cultural characteristics of the Township, County,
region, commonwealth or nation, or is associated with the life of a person
significant in the past;
      (2)   Is associated with an event of importance to the history of the
Township, county, region, commonwealth or nation;
      (3)   Embodies an icon associated with an era characterized by a
distinctive architectural style;
      (4)   Embodies distinguishing characteristics of an architectural style
or engineering specimen;
      (5)   Is the noteworthy work of a designer, architect, landscape
architect or designer, or engineer whose work has significantly influenced the
historical, architectural, economic, social, or cultural development of the
Township, county, region, common wealth or nation; or
      (6)   Contains elements of design, detail, materials or craftsmanship
which represent a significant innovation;
      (7)   Is part of or related to a commercial center, park, community or
other distinctive area which should be preserved according to an historic,
cultural or architectural motif;
      (8)   Owing to its unique location or singular physical characteristic,
represents an established and familiar visual feature of the neighborhood,
community or Township;
      (9)   Has yielded, or may be likely to yield, information important in
prehistory or history; or
      (10)   Exemplifies the cultural, political, economic, social or
historical heritage of the community.
   C.   Criteria considerations. An historic resource that is less than 75
years old may only be recommended to be placed on the Inventory if it is
considered by the Historical Commission to be a Class I resource.
   D.   Documentation. The Historical Commission shall document the Historic
Resource Inventory with the owner’s name and address, the address or location
of the historic resource, the approximate year built, recent photographs, an
architectural description, a brief history of the resource, its status as a
Class I or Class II historic resource, and the date the historic resource was
added, changed, or deleted from the Inventory.
   E.   Publication. The Historic Resource Inventory shall be made available to
the public for inspection at the Upper Dublin Township Building during regular
business hours. The Inventory, or parts thereof, may also be made public
through other means including but not limited to publishing it on the
Township’s web site, at a local library, or at the Upper Dublin Historical
Association.
   F.   Procedure for designation or removal. Any property proposed for
designation on or removal from the Historic Resource Inventory shall be
proposed by or shall first be referred to the Historical Commission, which
shall hold a public meeting thereon.
      (1)   Unless a property is proposed by the owner(s), such owner(s) shall
be notified upon receipt of a proposal that their property be placed on,
removed from or reclassified on the Historic Resource Inventory and asked to
respond to such proposal within 15 days.
      (2)   At least 30 days before holding a public meeting to consider the
proposal the Historical Commission shall send notice to the owner of the
property. Such notice shall indicate the date, time and place of the public
meeting at which the Historical Commission will consider the proposed action.
Notice shall be sent to the registered owner’s last known address as the same
appears in the real estate tax records of the Township Treasurer and sent to
the owner at the street address of the property in question.
      (3)   Any interested party may present testimony or documentary evidence
regarding the proposed addition, removal, or reclassification at the public
meeting.
      (4)   Following the public meeting, the Historical Commission shall
present its written report to the Board of Commissioners, the applicant and the
owner within 30 days following the close of the public meeting, basing its
recommendation upon those criteria for designation established in this chapter.
A property shall be recommended for removal from the Historic Resource
Inventory or reclassified if it does not currently meet the criteria for
designation. The report shall include a summary of the information and copies
of all documents presented at the meeting and used by the Historical Commission
in making its recommendation.
      (5)   Based upon the criteria set forth in this section and after
receiving the recommenda tions of the Historical Commission, the Board of
Commissioners shall from time to time, by ordinance, add, delete or reclassify
buildings, structures and sites to or from the Historic Resource Inventory.
Written notice of the action of the Board of Commissioners shall be given to
the property owner and to any person appearing at the public meeting of the
Historical Commission who requests notification.
Chapter 128
Human Relations Commission; Discrimination
§
128-1.   Purpose and declaration of policy.
§
128-2.   Definitions.
§
128-3.   Unlawful practices.
§
128-4.   Exceptions.
§
128-5.   Establishment of Human Relations Commission.
§
128-6.   Procedures.
§
128-7.   Private right of action.
§
128-8.   Violations and penalties.
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Board of Commissioners of the Township of Upper Dublin
9-12-2017 as Ord. No. 17-1333. Amendments noted where applicable.]
§ 128-1. Purpose and Declaration of Policy.
[Amended 7-10-2018 by Ord. No. 18-1342, §1]
   A.   In order to ensure that all persons, regardless of race, color,
religious creed, ancestry, age, sex, national origin, physical or mental
disability, use of guide or support animals because of the blindness, deafness
or physical or mental disability of the user or because the user is a handler
or trainer of support or guide animals, or because of a person's actual or
perceived sexual orientation, gender identity or gender expression enjoy the
full benefits of citizenship and are afforded equal opportunities for
employment, housing, commercial property, and the use of public accommodations,
it is necessary that appropriate legislation be enacted. [Amended 7-10-2018 by
Ord. No. 18-1342]
   B.   It is hereby declared to be the public policy of Upper Dublin Township
to foster the employment of all individuals in accordance with their fullest
capacities regardless of their race, color, religious creed, ancestry, age,
sex, national origin, physical or mental disability, use of guide or support
animals because of the blindness, deafness or physical or mental disability of
the user or because the user is a handler or trainer of support or guide
animals, or because of a person’s sexual orientation, gender identity or gender
expression.
   C.   It is the intention of this chapter that all persons be treated fairly
and equally, and it is the express intent of this chapter to guarantee fair and
equal treatment under the law to all persons within the Township. [Amended 7-
10-2018 by Ord. No. 18-1342]
   D.   This chapter shall be deemed an exercise of the police power of Upper
Dublin Township for the protection of the public welfare, prosperity, health
and peace of the Township, and those within the Upper Dublin Township
community. [Amended 7-10-2018 by Ord. No. 18-1342]
   E.   No power or duty granted hereunder to the Upper Dublin Human Relations
Commission shall exceed those powers and duties granted to the Pennsylvania
Human Relations Commission by the Pennsylvania Human Relations Act, the Act of
October 27, 1955, as amended.
§ 128-2 Definitions.
[Amended 7-10-2018 by Ord. No. 18-1342, §2]
The following words and phrases when used in this chapter shall have the
meanings given to them in this subsection. To the extent words and phrases
appearing in this chapter are not expressly defined herein, their meaning for
purposes of this chapter shall be the same as such words are defined in the
Pennsylvania Human Relations Act and such words, if not therein defined, shall
be construed consistently with the Pennsylvania Human Relations Act.
   BOARD OF COMMISSIONERS — The duly elected Board of Commissioners of Upper
Dublin Township.
   DISCRIMINATION — Any discriminatory act(s) taken by any person, employer,
entity, employment agency, or labor organization, with respect to or involving
a transaction related to employment, public accommodations, commercial property
or housing accommodations, on the basis of a person’s race, color, religious
creed, ancestry, age, sex, national origin, physical or mental disability, use
of guide or support animals because of the blindness, deafness or physical or
mental disability of the user or because the user is a handler or trainer of
support or guide animals, or a person’s actual or perceived sexual orientation,
gender identity or gender expression.
   DISCRIMINATORY ACTS — All acts or actions defined in the Pennsylvania Human
Relations Act as unlawful discriminatory practices as related to employment,
public accommodations, commercial property or housing accommodations, when
those acts or actions are taken on the basis of a person’s race, color,
religious creed, ancestry, age, sex, national origin, handicap or disability,
use of guide or support animals because of the blindness, deafness or physical
or mental disability of the user, or because the user is a handler or trainer
of support or guide animals or when those acts or actions are taken on the
basis of a person’s actual or perceived sexual orientation, gender identity or
gender expression. [Amended 7-10-2018 by Ord. No. 18-1342]
   EMPLOYER — Any person, as defined below in this section, including the
Township, its departments, boards and commissions, and any other government
agency or school district within its jurisdiction, employing four or more
individuals within the Township. “Employer” excludes individuals acting in a
supervisory capacity unless they are an owner of the entity employing the
person aggrieved (“Complainant”).
   GENDER EXPRESSION — The manner in which a person’s gender identity is
communicated to others, through appearance, behavior, or physical
characteristics that may be in accord with, or opposed to, one’s physical
anatomy, chromosomal sex, or sex at birth, and shall include, but is not
limited to, persons who are undergoing or have completed sex change.
   GENDER IDENTITY — The gender(s), or lack thereof, a person self-identifies
as, whether or not based on biological fact.
   HOUSING ACCOMMODATIONS — Includes any building, structure, mobile home site
or facility, or portion thereof, which is used or occupied or is intended,
arranged or designed to be used or occupied as the home residence or sleeping
place of one or more individuals, groups or families whether or not living
independently of each other; and any vacant land publicly offered for sale or
lease for the purpose of constructing or locating thereon any such building,
structure, mobile home site or facility. This provision shall not apply to the
rental or leasing of a room or rooms in an owner occupied, single family
residential property or a carriage house or a garage on an owner-occupied,
single family residential property, but this provision shall apply to multi
unit apartment buildings whether or not owner occupied with two or more
dwelling units. [Amended 7-10-2018 by Ord. No. 18-1342]
   PERSON — One or more individuals, partnerships, associations, organizations,
corporations, limited liability entities, legal representatives, trustees in
bankruptcy or receivers, including but not limited to any owner, lessor,
assignor, builder, manager, broker, salesman, agent, employee, independent
contractor, lending institution and the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, and all
political subdivisions, authorities, boards and Commissions thereof.
   PUBLIC ACCOMMODATION — Any accommodation which is open to, accepts or
solicits the patronage of the general public, but shall not include any
accommodations which are in their nature distinctly private.
   SEXUAL ORIENTATION — Actual or perceived homosexuality, heterosexuality,
bisexuality and/or asexuality. [Amended 7-10-2018 by Ord. No. 18-1342]
   TOWNSHIP — The Township of Upper Dublin, County of Montgomery, Commonwealth
of Pennsylvania.
§ 128-3 Unlawful Practices.
[Amended 7-10-2018 by Ord. No. 18-1342, §3]
   A.   Discrimination in housing accommodations, commercial property
transactions, employment or public accommodations is prohibited under this
chapter. [Amended 7-10-2018 by Ord. No. 18-1342]
   B.   Retaliation against any individual because such individual has opposed
any practice forbidden by this chapter, or because such individual has made a
charge, testified or assisted in any manner in any investigation, proceeding or
hearing under this chapter is prohibited under this chapter.
   C.   Aiding, abetting, inciting, compelling or coercing the doing of any act
declared by this chapter to be an unlawful practice, or obstructing or
preventing any person from complying with the provisions of this chapter is
prohibited under this chapter.
§ 128-4 Exceptions.
An employer shall not be prevented from enforcing a dress code which is
reasonably related to the business or profession being conducted. However, no
dress code shall deny the right to dress according to one’s gender identity.
§ 128-5 Establishment of Human Relations Commission.
   A.   Pursuant to § 12.1 of the Pennsylvania Human Relations Act, there is
hereby established a Human Relations Commission in and for the Township of
Upper Dublin (hereinafter referred to as the “Upper Dublin Township Human
Relations Commission” or the “Commission”).
   B.   The Commission shall consist of no less than five and no more than nine
members, at the Board of Commissioner’s discretion, who shall serve overlapping
terms of three years each. All members of the Commission shall be appointed by
the Board of Commissioners. Members shall be residents of Upper Dublin Township
or business owners operating within the Township. No member of the Commission
shall hold any office in any political party. Members of the Commission shall
serve without compensation with respect to any and all duties performed under
this chapter but may be reimbursed reasonable expenses incurred in the
performance of their duties, as approved by the Board of Commissioners.
   C.   One of the Commission’s members shall be appointed by the members
thereof as Chairperson. The Chairperson will be responsible for setting
Commission meetings, coordinating with the Township Manager regarding received
complaints and answers, and generally ensuring that the duties of the
Commission are fulfilled. The Chairperson may delegate responsibility for
Commission duties to specific Commissioners.
   D.   The Commission shall have jurisdiction over unlawful practices
committed within the Township of Upper Dublin.
   E.   The Board of Commissioners hereby grants to the Commission, with
respect to unlawful practices as defined herein, all of the powers necessary to
the execution of its duties as set forth below.
   F.   The Commission shall be empowered to promulgate such additional
procedures to those set forth herein as it determines to be necessary or
desirable to implement the intent of this chapter subject to review and
approval of the Board of Commissioners.
   G.   The powers and duties granted to the Commission herein shall terminate
immediately upon the Pennsylvania Human Relations Commission being given
jurisdiction over discriminatory acts taken on the basis of a person’s actual
or perceived sexual orientation, gender identity or gender expression, except
for complaints previously filed with the Commission.
   H.   Members of the Commission shall, as soon after their appointment as
practical, attend such training and education seminars or sessions as deemed
necessary to acquaint themselves with the functioning of the Upper Dublin Human
Relations Commission under this chapter, as well as the terms, conditions and
provisions of the Pennsylvania Human Relations Act, and the operation of the
Pennsylvania Human Relations Commission. Such training and education shall be
as directed by the Chairperson, and shall be performed in conjunction with the
state Human Relations Commission.
   I.   The Commission shall operate within the scope of the funds which may be
allocated, on an annual basis, by the Board of Commissioners and shall not
exceed the annual allocation in any year, except upon prior approval by the
Board of Commissioners. It is the intention of the Board of Commissioners that
the Commission’s actions shall be supported by volunteers, unpaid staff, and
volunteer efforts and shall be as close to “zero-cost” to the Township as
reasonably feasible.
§ 128-6 Procedures.
   A.   Filing a complaint.
      (1)   Any person( s) claiming to be aggrieved by an unlawful practice may
make, sign and file a verified complaint alleging violations of this chapter,
which shall include the following information:
         (a)   The name and address of the aggrieved person(s);
         (b)   The name and address of the person(s) alleged to have committed
the prohibited practice;
         (c)   A concise statement of the facts, including pertinent dates,
constituting the alleged unlawful practice;
         (d)   If applicable, the address and a description of any housing
accommodation or commercial property which is involved; and
         (e)   Such other information as may be required by the Commission.
      (2)   Complaints may be filed in person or by mail at the Township
Manager’s office. All complaints must be received by the Township Manager’s
office within 180 days of the alleged unlawful practice, or the complaint will
not be considered timely.
      (3)   The Township Manager shall record the date and time of receiving
the complaint and shall immediately forward a complete copy to the Chairperson
of the Upper Dublin Township Human Relations Commission and to the Board of
Commissioners.
   B.   Notification and answer.
      (1)   Within 30 days of its receipt of a complaint, the Human Relations
Commission shall determine if it has jurisdiction hereunder to hear the
complaint. If the Commission determines that it does not have such
jurisdiction, it shall dismiss the complaint and notify the aggrieved party. If
the Commission determines it has jurisdiction to hear the complaint, it shall
proceed as follows:
         (a)   Send a copy of the complaint to the person(s) charged with an
unlawful practice (the “Respondent”) and to the Pennsylvania Human Relations
Commission; and
         (b)   Send a notice to the complainant informing the complainant that
the complaint has been received. If the complaint alleges discrimination on a
basis proscribed under state law, the notice shall advise the complainant that
the complaint is being cross-filed with the Pennsylvania Human Relations
Commission.
         (c)   If the complaint alleges discrimination on a basis proscribed
under federal law, the notice to the complainant shall also inform of the right
to file with the Federal Equal Employment Opportunity Commission.
      (2)   The Respondent shall file with the Township Manager a written
verified answer to the complaint within 30 days of respondent’s receipt of the
complaint from the Township. It shall be conveyed by the Township Manager to
the Chairperson of the Upper Dublin Township Human Relations Commission within
ten days of its receipt by the Township Manager. The Commission shall promptly
send a copy of the answer to the complainant.
   C.   Mediation.
      (1)   After the answer has been received, the Commission shall, within 15
days, invite the parties to voluntarily participate in the mediation of their
dispute. The parties shall respond to the invitation to mediate within 15 days
of being invited to mediate. Mediation shall be conducted in accordance with
procedures promulgated by the Commission and approved by the Board of
Commissioners.
      (2)   If mediation is elected by the parties, the parties may jointly
select a mediator, in which case they shall be jointly responsible for all
financial costs and expenses associated with mediation and may allocate the
costs of mediation as they agree. If the parties do not jointly select a
mediator, or agree to allocation of costs pursuant to approved procedures of
the Commission, the Chairperson of the Commission shall select a mediator, who
may be either a member of the Commission or a volunteer from the community.
      (3)   The parties shall notify the Commission as to whether the mediation
successfully resolved the complaint. Mediation proceedings shall otherwise be
confidential. Neither the results thereof nor any record made in connection
therewith shall be made public unless agreed to in writing by both parties to
the dispute.
      (4)   Dismissal of the Complaint Following Mediation.
         (a)   If the mediation has successfully resolved the complaint, the
Commission shall promptly notify the parties that it has dismissed the
complaint.
         (b)   If the mediation has not successfully resolved the complaint,
the parties shall be advised of their right to proceed to the Court of Common
Pleas of Montgomery County and/or to the Pennsylvania Human Relations
Commission if appropriate.
§ 128-7 Private Right of Action.
Nothing contained in this Chapter shall be deemed to limit the right of an
aggrieved person to recover under any other applicable law or legal theory.
However, the Upper Dublin Human Relations Commission shall have no jurisdiction
over matters which are the subject of pending or prior filings made by an
aggrieved person before any state or federal court or agency of competent
jurisdictions.
§ 128-8 Violations and penalties.
[Amended 7-10-2018 by Ord. No. 18-1342, §4]
Any person who shall violate any provision of §
128-3 of this chapter may be subjected by the Montgomery County Court of Common
Pleas, or any court of competent jurisdiction, to the penalties enumerated in
Sections 9(f)(1) and (2), 9.2, and 9.3, and Sections 10 and 11 of the
Pennsylvania Human Relations Act (43 P.S. §951 et seq.). The penalties
contained in this chapter shall mirror any future changes to the Pennsylvania
Human Relations Act as adopted by the General Assembly and approved by the
Governor.
Chapter 129
HUNTING AND FIREARMS
§
129-1.   Definitions.
§
129-2.   Prohibited acts.
§
129-3.   Target practice.
§
129-4.   Violations and penalties.
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Board of Commissioners of the Township of Upper Dublin
5-13-1986 as Title 7, Ch. 4, of the 1986 Code. Amendments noted where
applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
 
Disorderly conduct—See  Nuisances—See
Ch. 86.                   Ch. 158.
 
§ 129-1.   Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
   GAME   Includes all wild birds and wild animals, whether protected or
unprotected under the game laws of the commonwealth, found in a wild state.
§ 129-2.   Prohibited acts.
[Amended 4-12-2016 by Ord. No. 16-1318]
From and after the passage of this chapter, it shall be unlawful for any person
to hunt for, catch, take, wound or kill game of any kind through the use of a
gun, pistol, rifle, revolver or bow and arrow within the Township of Upper
Dublin unless permitted by the Pennsylvania Game Commission, or unless
permitted by the Township on Township property for the purpose of animal
control.
§ 129-3.   Target practice.
The prohibition in this chapter shall not apply to target practice, conducted
on a site and under the supervision of a competent adult. The site and
supervision shall be approved in writing by the Chief of Police of said
township. Said approval, when granted, shall be subject to withdrawal at any
time by said Chief of Police; however, no approval shall be good for longer
than one (1) year unless renewed. High-powered rifles shall not be discharged
within the township under any circumstances.
§ 129-4.   Violations and penalties. 1
Any persons violating any of the terms of this chapter shall, upon conviction
in a summary proceeding before a District Justice, be sentenced to a fine not
exceeding ten dollars ($10.) and costs.
1 Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see
Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
Chapter 132
INSURANCE
ARTICLE I
Fire Insurance
§
132-1.   Certificate required.
§
132-2.   Payment of charges against property.
§
132-3.   Construal of provisions.
§
132-4.   Violations and penalties.
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Board of Commissioners of the Township of Upper
Dublin: Art. I, 5-11-1993 as Ord. No. 840. Amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
 
Fire prevention — See
Ch. 117.
 
ARTICLE I
Fire Insurance
§ 132-1.   Certificate required.
No insurance company, association or exchange (collectively the "insuring
agent") doing business in the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania shall pay a claim of
a named insured for fire damage to a structure located within the Township of
Upper Dublin where the amount recoverable for the fire loss to the structure
under all policies exceeds five thousand dollars ($5,000.), unless the insuring
agent is furnished by the Township Treasurer with a certificate pursuant to §
508(b) of Act 98 of 1992 1 and unless there is compliance with the procedure
set forth in § 508(c) and (d) of Act 98 of 1992. 2
1 Editor's Note: See 40 P.S. § 638(b).
2 Editor's Note: See 40 P.S. § 638(c) and (d).
§ 132-2.   Payment of charges against property.
Where the Township Treasurer issues a certificate indicating that there are
delinquent taxes, assessments, penalties or user charges against the property,
or that there are expenses which the township has incurred as costs for the
removal, repair or securing of a building or other structure on the property,
and shall render a bill therefor, the insuring agent shall transfer to the
Treasurer an amount from the insurance proceeds sufficient to pay such sums
prior to making payment to the named insured. The insuring agent shall further
provide the Township Treasurer with the name and address of the named insured.
   A.   The transfer of proceeds shall be on a pro rata basis by all companies,
associations or exchanges insuring the building or other structure.
   B.   Upon receipt of the transferred funds and the name and address of the
named insured, the Township Treasurer shall contact the named insured and
certify the amount and purpose of the proceeds received by the township.
§ 132-3.   Construal of provisions.
Nothing in this Article shall be construed to limit the ability of the township
to recover any deficiency or to proceed by an action at law or equity to
enforce the codes of the township or to enter into an agreement with the named
insured with regard to such other disposition of the proceeds as the township
may deem reasonable.
§ 132-4.   Violations and penalties.
Any owner of property, any named insured or any insuring agent who violates the
provisions of this Article or who shall fail to comply with any of the
requirements hereof shall be liable, upon summary conviction, to fines and
penalties not exceeding one thousand dollars ($1,000.), which fines and
penalties may be collected by suit or summary proceeding brought in the name of
the Township of Upper Dublin before any District Justice or recovered as debts
of the like amount are now by law recoverable.
Chapter 135
JUNKYARDS
§
135-1.   Permit required.
§
135-2.   Operation requirements.
§
135-3.   Inspections; revocation of permit.
§
135-4.   Construal of provisions.
§
135-5.   Violations and penalties.
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Board of Commissioners of the Township of Upper Dublin
5-13-1986 as Title 5, Ch. 4, of the 1986 Code. Amendments noted where
applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
 
Brush, grass and weeds — See  Solid waste — See
Ch. 69.                         Ch. 203.
Dumping — See                 Zoning — See
Ch. 91.                         Ch. 255.
Littering — See
Ch. 145.
 
§ 135-1.   Permit required.
On and after the passage of this chapter, it shall not be lawful for any person
or persons, firms or corporations, either as principal or as agent, to carry
on, operate or conduct junkyards, salvage yards or other places used and
maintained for the collection, storage and disposal of materials within the
township, whether on public or private property, until a certificate or license
shall have been granted by the Secretary of the Township of Upper Dublin.
A.   All junk dealers, junkyards, salvage yards and other places used and
maintained for the collection, storage and disposal of used and secondhand
goods and materials shall be licensed within thirty (30) days from the
effective date of this chapter and annually thereafter by the 31st day of
December of each year.
B.   Registration shall be on a form supplied by the township. Separate
registration shall be filed for each and every junk business, junkyard, salvage
yard and other places used and maintained for the collection, storage and
disposal of used and secondhand goods and materials.
C.   Each application shall be accompanied by the fee set forth in the Township
fee schedule, which sum shall be paid into the Township Treasury for the use of
said township. 1
   D.   At the expiration of each calendar year, said certificate or license
shall be null and void.
1 Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see
Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
§ 135-2.   Operation requirements.
Before a license shall be issued, the applicant must conform to the following
requirements:
   A.   The junkyard, salvage yard or other place used and maintained for the
collection, storage and disposal of used and secondhand goods and materials
shall be confined to an area enclosed or surrounded by a tightly built fence
made of stone, brick, cement or cinder block, wood, meshed wire or other
similar matter or materials and shall be constructed of height and in a manner
that would not permit easy access over the same by animals or persons.
   B.   No advertising of any nature shall be displayed on the enclosure fence
or wall.
   C.   The business shall be conducted in such a way as to discourage the
harboring of rats, skunks, the breeding of mosquitoes and other animals or
insects.
   D.   The area within which the junkyard, salvage yard or other place used
and maintained for collection, storage and disposal of used and secondhand
goods and materials shall, in addition to the other requirements as set forth
in this chapter, be as follows:
      (1)   It shall not exceed sixty percent (60%) of the lot area as defined
by
Chapter 255, Zoning.
      (2)   It shall not exceed two (2) acres in size.
      (3)   It shall be confined to one (1) area on the lot.
§ 135-3.   Inspections; revocation of permit.
The Board of Health of the Township of Upper Dublin shall make at least monthly
inspections of the junkyards, salvage yards, etc., as hereinabove provided, and
in the event that such inspection, in the opinion of the Department of Health
of the Township of Upper Dublin, shall indicate a violation of any of these
rules and regulations, the said Board of Health shall give notice, in writing,
to the owner, operator or occupier of said junkyard, salvage yard, etc., to
comply with the rules and regulations within a reasonable time after
notification thereof, and in the event that said violation should continue
beyond the time allotted for its discontinuance, the certificate or license
granted under this chapter may be suspended or revoked by the Board of Health
of the Township of Upper Dublin.
§ 135-4.   Construal of provisions.
This chapter shall not be construed to prohibit a person, firm or corporation
depositing any used or secondhand goods and materials upon his or its premises
with the township where said person, firm or corporation is not engaged in the
business of junk dealing, the operation of junkyards, salvage yards or other
places used and maintained for the collection, storage and disposal of used and
secondhand goods and materials; but the same is deposited by the said person,
firm or corporation incidental to his or its use and enjoyment of his or its
property within the township, and provided that such does not violate any other
ordinance of the township. However, so-called "automobile graveyards" shall
come within the definition of "junkyards, salvage yards, and other places used
and maintained for the collection, storage and disposal of used and secondhand
goods and materials."
§ 135-5.   Violations and penalties. 2
Any person or persons, firm or corporations who or which shall fail to comply
with any of the provisions of this chapter regarding the procuring of a license
or certificate to operate as a junk dealer or establish a junkyard, salvage
yard or other place or places used and maintained for the collection, storage
and disposal of used and secondhand goods and materials within the Township of
Upper Dublin shall be liable, upon conviction for a first offense, to a fine of
five hundred dollars ($500.) for each and every day he, they or it shall
operate as a junk dealer or operate a junkyard, salvage yard or other places
used and maintained for the collection, storage and disposal of used and
secondhand goods and materials contrary to the provisions of this chapter; and
for a second offense, in a like manner to a fine of not less than one thousand
dollars ($1,000.) for each and every day, together with costs of prosecution in
each case. All prosecutions for violation of this chapter shall be, by summary
proceedings, brought in the name and for the use of the Township of Upper
Dublin before a Justice of the Peace in said township. All fines shall be paid
to the Treasurer of Upper Dublin Township to apply to general funds.
2 Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see
Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
Chapter 142
LIBRARY
ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§
142-1.   Definitions.
§
142-2.   Creation.
§
142-3.   Use of library.
§
142-4.   Title to property.
§
142-5.   Establishment of branches and other agencies.
§
142-6.   Retention of library property; notice to return.
§
142-7.   Injury of library property; violations and penalties.
ARTICLE II
Board of Directors
§
142-8.   Creation; rules and regulations.
§
142-9.   Composition.
§
142-10.   Organization; officers; bond.
§
142-11.   Control of funds; audits.
§
142-12.   Annual report.
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Board of Commissioners of the Township of Upper Dublin
6-9-1992 as Ord. No. 820. Amendments noted where applicable.]
ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 142-1.   Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
   LIBRARY — Local library as defined in the Library Code of the Commonwealth
of Pennsylvania, Act of June 14, 1961, P.L. 324, Art. I, et seq., as amended,
24 P.S. § 4101 et seq., as the same may be amended.
   MUNICIPAL AUTHORITIES — The members of the Board of Commissioners of Upper
Dublin Township.
   MUNICIPALITY — Upper Dublin Township, Montgomery County, Pennsylvania.
   PERSON — Includes individuals, corporations, firms, associations and their
servants, agents or employees.
§ 142-2.   Creation.
There is hereby established and created a free, public, nonsectarian library in
the Township of Upper Dublin to be known as the "Upper Dublin Public Library,"
which library shall serve the informational, educational and recreational needs
of all the residents of the municipality by providing free access, including
free lending and reference services, to an organized and currently useful
collection of printed items and other materials and to the services of a staff
trained to recognize and provide for these needs.
§ 142-3.   Use of library.
The library established and maintained under the provisions of this chapter
shall be free to the use of all residents and taxpayers of Upper Dublin
Township, subject to such reasonable rules and regulations as the Library Board
of Directors may adopt, and the Library Board may exclude from the use of the
library any person or persons who willfully violates such rules. The Library
Board may extend the privileges of such library to persons residing outside the
township upon such terms and conditions as the Library Board may prescribe.
§ 142-4.   Title to property.
The real and equitable title to all the real and personal property which may be
acquired by said Library Board of Directors, either by deed, gift, devise,
bequest or purchase, shall be vested in Upper Dublin Township, but the •
Library Board of said library shall and will control and administer such real
and personal property.
§ 142-5.   Establishment of branches and other agencies.
The Library Board of Directors may establish branches, deposit stations,
traveling libraries and such other agencies as it may deem necessary to bring
the books within convenient reach of all the residents, subject to the approval
of said Board of Commissioners.
§ 142-6.   Retention of library property; notice to return.
   A.   Whoever retains any book, pamphlet, magazine, newspaper, manuscript,
map or other property belonging in or to or on deposit with the library for a
period exceeding thirty (30) days after such library has given written notice
to return the same shall, upon conviction in summary proceedings, be sentenced
to pay a fine of not more than twenty-five dollars ($25.) and costs of
prosecution to be paid over by the magistrate imposing such fine to the
library. 1
   B.   Notice may be given by personal service on the borrower or by mailing
written notice by letter, by first class mail, to the borrower's address on
file with the library. Notice will refer to the Library Code of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania and shall contain a demand that the property be
returned.
1 Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see
Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
§ 142-7.   Injury of library property; violations and penalties. 2
Anyone who shall willfully cut, mutilate, mark or otherwise injure any book,
pamphlet, volume, map, chart, magazine, newspaper, painting, engraving or other
property of or deposited in the free library established by reason of this
chapter shall be deemed to be guilty of a misdemeanor and may be prosecuted for
said offense before any court of competent jurisdiction and, upon conviction
thereof, shall be liable to a fine of not more than twenty-five dollars ($25)
and costs of prosecution; said fine, when collected, shall be for the use of
said library against which the aforesaid offense was committed.
2 Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see
Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
ARTICLE II
Board of Directors
§ 142-8.   Creation; rules and regulations.
[Amended 10-13-2009 by Ord. No. 09-1221, § 1]
   A.   Pursuant to the Library Code Act of June 14, 1961, P.L. 324, as
amended, and the State Library regulations, Title 22 of the Pennsylvania Code,
Chapters 131-143, there is hereby created a Library Board of Directors
consisting of residents of Upper Dublin Township to be appointed by the Board
of Commissioners and to be known as the “Library Board of Directors.”
   B.   The said Library Board shall oversee the planning, operation and
maintenance of a free, public, nonsectarian library for the use of the
residents of Upper Dublin Township; and shall have the authority to prepare and
adopt rules and regulations which, in its opinion, shall effectuate the intent
and provisions of this chapter.
   C.   In carrying out the intent and provisions of this chapter, the members
of said Library Board may be guided by the standards laid down by the
Department of Education of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania and any other
similar body or organization which promulgates standards that would carry out
the intent of this chapter.
§ 142-9.   Composition.
[Amended 12-9-1997 by Ord. No. 962; 3-10-1998 by Ord. No. 965]
The affairs of the public library in Upper Dublin Township established by this
chapter or any amendments thereto, or both, shall be under the control of said
Library Board of Directors, to be composed of seven members. The Board of
Commissioners of the township shall appoint the members and fill any vacancies
occurring from any cause. All appointments to fill the places of those whose
terms expire shall be for a term of three years. Vacancies shall be filled for
the unexpired terms. All members of the Library Board shall serve until their
successors have been appointed. No member of this Library Board shall receive
any salary for his or her services as such.
§ 142-10.   Organization; officers; bond.
The Library Board of Directors shall organize as soon as may be possible after
appointment by electing a President, a Secretary and a Treasurer from its
membership and such other officers and agents as the Library Board may deem
necessary. The Treasurer shall give bond to the municipality, with satisfactory
surety, in such amount as the Board of Commissioners may determine.
§ 142-11.   Control of funds; audits.
All moneys appropriated for the establishment or maintenance, or both, of a
free, public, nonsectarian library, as established by this chapter, and all
moneys, if any, received from other sources for its use, shall be under the
exclusive control and shall be disbursed under the direction of the Library
Board of Directors, who shall make an annual report to the proper municipal
authorities of the moneys received by such library from the municipality and
the disposition made thereof. The accounts of the Treasurer of the Library
Board shall be audited as in the case of other municipal expenditures.
§ 142-12.   Annual report.
   A.   The annual report to be submitted to the Board of Commissioners shall
cover the calendar year and shall contain a statement on the following:
      (1)   An itemized statement of all receipts and expenditures.
      (2)   The condition of the library.
      (3)   The number of volumes, maps, pamphlets and other materials.
      (4)   The number of materials acquired by purchase, gift or otherwise.
      (5)   The number of materials lost or withdrawn.
      (6)   The number of registered borrowers and readers.
      (7)   A statement of the circulation of materials, with such other
information and suggestions as may seem desirable.
   B.   A copy of the annual report shall be sent to the State Library in
Harrisburg, Pennsylvania.
Chapter 145
LITTERING
§
145-1.   Title.
§
145-2.   Definitions and word usage.
§
145-3.   Deposit in or upon public places prohibited.
§
145-4.   Placement in receptacles.
§
145-5.   Sweeping into public places; duty to clear sidewalk.
§
145-6.   Parking areas.
§
145-7.   Litter from vehicles.
§
145-8.   Cases, shopping carts prohibited.
§
145-9.   Regulations for trucks.
§
145-10.   Parks.
§
145-11.   Bodies of water.
§
145-12.   Vacant lots.
§
145-13.   Enforcement.
§
145-14.   Violations and penalties.
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Board of Commissioners of the Township of Upper Dublin
5-13-1986 as Title 5, Ch. 5, of the 1986 Code. Amendments noted where
applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
 
Dumping — See                     Property maintenance — See
Ch. 91.                             Ch. 180.
Parks and recreation areas — See  Solid waste — See
Ch. 168.                            Ch. 203.
 
§ 145-1.   Title.
This chapter shall be known as and may be cited as "The Upper Dublin Township
Anti-Litter Ordinance."
§ 145-2.   Definitions and word usage.
   A.   When not inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense
include the future, words used in the plural number include the singular number
and words used in the singular number include the plural number The word
"shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory.
   B.   For the purpose of this chapter, the following terms, phrases, words
and their derivations shall have the meanings given herein.
   GARBAGE — Putrescible animal and vegetable wastes resulting from the
handling, preparation, cooking and consumption of food.
   LITTER — Garbage, refuse and rubbish as defined herein and all other waste
material which, if thrown or deposited as herein prohibited, tends to create a
danger to public health, safety and welfare.
   PARK — A park, reservation, playground, beach, recreation center or any
other public area in the township owned or used by the township and devoted to
active or passive recreation.
   PERSON — Any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company or
organization of any kind.
   PRIVATE PREMISES — Any dwelling house, building or other structure, designed
or used either wholly or in part for private residential purposes, whether
inhabited or temporarily or continuously uninhabited or vacant, and shall
include any yard, grounds, walk, driveway, porch, steps, vestibule or mailbox
belonging or appurtenant to such dwelling, house, building or other structure.
   PUBLIC PLACE — Any and all streets, sidewalks, boulevards, alleys, storm
drains, storm sewers, stormwater management facilities, watercourses; parking,
loading and unloading areas of commercial, industrial, shopping center and
institutional establishments or other places to which the public has access;
and any and all public parks, squares, spaces, grounds and buildings. [Amended
9-14-2004 by Ord. No. 1142]
   REFUSE — All putrescible and nonputrescible solid wastes (except body
wastes), including garbage, rubbish, ashes, street cleanings, dead animals,
abandoned automobiles and solid market and industrial wastes.
   RUBBISH — Nonputrescible solid wastes consisting of both combustible and
noncombustible wastes, such as paper, wrappings, cigarettes, cardboard, tin
cans, yard clippings, leaves, wood, glass, bedding, crockery and similar
materials.
   VEHICLE — Every device in, upon or by which any person or property is or may
be transported or drawn upon a highway, including devices used exclusively upon
stationary rails or tracks.
§ 145-3.   Deposit in or upon public places prohibited.
[Amended 9-14-2004 by Ord. No. 1142]
No person shall throw or deposit litter in or upon any public place within the
township except in public receptacles, in authorized private receptacles for
collection or in official township dumps.
§ 145-4.   Placement in receptacles.
Persons placing litter in public receptacles or in authorized private
receptacles shall do so in such a manner as to prevent it from being carried or
deposited by the elements upon any street, sidewalk or other public place or
upon private property.
§ 145-5.   Sweeping into public places; duty to clear sidewalk.
   A.   No person shall sweep into or deposit in any gutter, street or other
public place within the township the accumulation of litter from any building
or lot or from any public or private sidewalk or driveway. Persons owning or
occupying property shall keep the sidewalk in front of their premises free of
litter.
   B.   No person owning or occupying a place of business shall sweep into or
deposit in any gutter, street or other public place within the township the
accumulation of litter from any building or lot or from any public or private
sidewalk or driveway. Persons owning or occupying places of business within the
township shall keep the sidewalk in front of their business premises free of
litter.
§ 145-6.   Parking areas.
The owner or lessee of the common or entire area existing and used for parking,
loading and unloading and passageways upon and over each shopping center and
commercial area shall be responsible for the maintenance thereof and shall keep
such areas free and clear of litter.
§ 145-7.   Litter from vehicles.
No person, while a driver or passenger in a vehicle, shall throw or deposit
litter upon any street or public place within the township or upon private
property.
§ 145-8.   Cases, shopping carts prohibited.
No person, firm or corporation shall place or cause to be placed along any
highway, right-of-way, sidewalk area, occupied or unoccupied private property
any empty or filled milk cases, bread cases or shopping carts.
§ 145-9.   Regulations for trucks.
No person shall drive or move any truck or other vehicle within the township
unless such vehicle is so constructed or loaded as to prevent any load,
contents or litter from being blown from such truck or motor vehicle. Nor shall
any person drive or move any vehicle or truck within the township, the wheels
or tires of which carry onto or deposit in any street, alley or other public
place mud, dirt, sticky substances, litter or foreign matter of any kind.
§ 145-10.   Parks.
No person shall throw or deposit litter in any park within the township except
in public receptacles and in such a manner that the litter will be prevented
from being carried or deposited by the elements upon any part of the park or
upon any street or other public place. Where public receptacles are not
provided, all such litter shall be carried away from the park by the person
responsible for its presence and properly disposed of elsewhere as provided
herein.
§ 145-11.   Bodies of water.
[Amended 9-14-2004 by Ord. No. 1142]
No person shall throw or deposit litter in any fountain, pond, lake, stream,
bay or watercourse within the township.
§ 145-12.   Vacant lots.
No person shall throw or deposit litter on any open or vacant private property
within the township, whether owned by such person or not.
§ 145-13.   Enforcement.
The enforcement of the provisions of this chapter shall be with the Board of
Health and with the Department of Police.
§ 145-14.   Violations and penalties.
[Amended 12-19-1989 by Ord. No. 776; 1-10-1995 by Ord. No. 879]
Any person who or which shall violate any of the provisions of this chapter
shall, upon conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of not less than one
hundred dollars ($100.) nor more than six hundred dollars ($600.) for each and
every such offense at the discretion of the District Justice, together with the
costs of prosecution. All prosecutions for violations of this chapter shall be
by summary proceedings and brought in the name and for the use of the Township
of Upper Dublin before a District Justice. Each day of failure to correct a
violation, following written notice, shall be considered a separate violation.
Chapter 152
MECHANICAL STANDARDS
§
152-1.   Adoption of standards.
§
152-3.   Affect on existing actions and rights.
§
152-2.   Modification of standards.
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Board of Commissioners of the Township of Upper Dublin
during codification; see
Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II. Amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
 
Building construction — See  Fees — See fee schedule.
Ch. 73.
 
§ 152-1.   Adoption of standards.
A certain document, three copies of which are on file in the office of the
Secretary of the Township of Upper Dublin, being marked and designated as the
“BOCA National Mechanical Code, Eighth Edition, 1993,” as published by Building
Officials and Code Administrators International, Inc., be and is hereby adopted
as the Mechanical Code of the Township of Upper Dublin in the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania, for the control of buildings and structures as herein provided;
and each and all of the regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions and
terms of the said BOCA National Mechanical Code are hereby referred to, adopted
and made a part hereof, as if fully set out in this chapter, with the
additions, insertions, deletions and changes, if any, prescribed in §
152-2 of this chapter.
§ 152-2.   Modification of standards. 
[Added 9-8-2009 by Ord. No. 09-1219, § 1]
   A.   Changes from the BOCA National Mechanical Code, Eighth Edition, 1993,
to the Mechanical Code of the Township of Upper Dublin, are as follows:
      (1)   Section M-101.1, insert: “the Township of Upper Dublin” for Name of
Jurisdiction.
      (2)   Section M-113.2, insert: “The currently adopted fee schedule for
the Township of Upper Dublin as per the Township fee schedule.”
      (3)   Section M-113.3, insert: “The currently adopted fee schedule for
the Township of Upper Dublin as per the Township fee schedule.”
      (4)   Section M-116.4, for what a person shall be guilty of for a
violation, insert: “a summary offense, punishable by a fine of not more than
$1,000.”
      (5)   Section M-117.2, for what a person shall be liable for unlawful
continuance of work, insert: “a fine of not more than $1,000.”
      (6)   Section 121.0, delete all and add the following:
         SECTION 121.0 MEANS OF APPEAL
         121.1 An appeal from any decision of the Building Code Official may be
taken pursuant to the Uniform Construction Code as specified by Article III,
Uniform Construction Code, of
Chapter 73, Building Construction — Uniform Construction Code.
      (7)   Section 3408.2, insert: August 15, 1994.
   B.   The portions of the Mechanical Code of the Township of Upper Dublin
which equal or exceed the requirements of the Pennsylvania Construction Code
Act and the Uniform Construction Code as adopted under
Chapter 73 shall continue in full force and effect until such time as such
provisions fail to equal or exceed the minimum requirements adopted under
Chapter 73.
§ 152-3.   Affect on existing actions and rights.
Nothing in this chapter or in the Mechanical Code hereby adopted shall be
construed to affect any suit or proceeding impending in any court, or any
rights acquired, or liability incurred, or any cause or causes of action
acquired or existing, under any act or ordinance hereby repealed, nor shall any
just or legal right or remedy of any character be lost, impaired or affected by
this chapter.
Chapter 158
NUISANCES
§
158-1.   Definitions.
§
158-2.   Sewage disposal.
§
158-3.   Animal excrement.
§
158-4.   Dead animals.
§
158-5.   Stagnant water.
§
158-6.   Industrial waste regulations.
§
158-7.   Water supply.
§
158-8.   Enforcement.
§
158-9.   Violations and penalties.
§
158-10.   Composting.
§
158-11.   Odors.
§
158-12.   Noise.
§
158-13.   Large events.
§
158-14.   Outdoor lighting.
§
158-15.   Smoking.
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Board of Commissioners of the Township of Upper Dublin
5-13-1986 as Title 5,
Ch. 6, of the 1986 Code. Amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
 
Animals—See  Wells—See
Ch. 64.        Ch. 244.
Sewers—See
Ch. 192.
 
§ 158-1.   Definitions. 
[Amended 5-13-1997 by Ord. No. 943; 3-12-2013 by Ord. No. 13-1270, § 1; 3-11-
2014 by Ord. No. 14-1285, § 1]
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
   ANIMAL PRODUCTS—Food materials derived from animals and originating from the
preparation of food products. [Added 3-12-2013 by Ord. No. 13-1270; amended 3-
11-2014 by Ord. No. 14-1285]
   COMMERCIAL AREA—A group of commercial facilities and the abutting public
right-of-way and public spaces.
   COMMERCIAL FACILITY—Any premises, property or facility involving traffic in
goods or furnishing of services for sale or profit, including but not limited
to:
   A.   Banking and other financial institutions.
   B.   Dining establishments.
   C.   Establishments for providing retail or wholesale services.
   D.   Establishments for recreation and entertainment.
   E.   Office buildings.
   F.   Transportation.
   G.   Warehouses.
   CONSTRUCTION—The erection, repair, alteration, renovation, demolition or
removal of any building or structure and the excavation, filling, grading and
regulation of lots in connection therewith.
   EMERGENCY—Any occurrence or set of circumstances involving actual or
imminent physical trauma or property damage.
   EMERGENCY WORK—Any work or action necessary to deliver essential services,
including but not limited to repairing water, gas, electric, telephone or sewer
facilities or public transportation facilities, removing fallen trees on public
rights-of-way, abating life-threatening conditions or preventing or alleviating
the physical trauma or property damage threatened or caused by an emergency.
   FIREWORKS—Any combustible or explosive composition or any substance or
combination of substances which is intended to produce visible or audible
effects by combustion. [Added 8-25-2020 by Ord. No. 20-1362, § 1]
   GREEN KITCHEN WASTE—Organic plant materials, uncontaminated with animal
products of any kind, originating from the preparation of residential household
food products. [Added 3-12-2013 by Ord. No. 13-1270; amended 3-11-2014 by Ord.
No. 14-1285]
   INDUSTRIAL FACILITY—Any activity and its related premises, property,
facilities or equipment involving the fabrication, manufacture or production of
durable or nondurable goods.
   LARGE EVENT—Any event to which private citizens or the public are invited to
attend, with or without an admission fee, which event may: [Added 10-13-1998 by
Ord. No. 977]
   A.   Require a loudspeaker system, either indoors or outdoors, which
amplifies sound so that it is heard across a property boundary line;
   B.   Impede the normal flow of traffic in the vicinity of the event either
through additional traffic volume, additional parking or pedestrian traffic;
   C.   Require the provision of additional sanitary facilities;
   D.   Require the presence of standby fire, medical or other emergency
vehicles;
   E.   Otherwise adversely affect the health, safety and welfare of the
residents of the Township.
   LEGAL HOLIDAY—Any of the following: New Year's Day; Martin Luther King, Jr.
Day; Presidents Day; Good Friday; Memorial Day; Flag Day; Independence Day;
Labor Day; Veterans Day; Thanksgiving Day or Christmas Day.
   MOTOR VEHICLE—A device for carrying passengers, goods or equipment that is
propelled or drawn on land by an engine or motor, including motorcycles.
   MULTIDWELLING UNIT BUILDING—A structure or series of connected structures
containing two or more dwelling units in which two or more families live
independently of each other as separate housekeeping units, including twin,
duplex, twin duplex and townhouse dwellings, apartment buildings and
condominiums.
   NOISE—Any sound of such level and duration as to be or tend to be loud,
unexpected, disagreeable or injurious to human health or welfare, or which
would unreasonably interfere with the enjoyment of life or property throughout
the Township or in any portions thereof.
   NOISE CONTROL ADMINISTRATOR (NCA)—The Code Enforcement Officer, who shall be
the official liaison with all municipal departments and shall be empowered to
grant permits for variances.
   NOISE DISTURBANCE—Any sound that endangers the safety or health of any
person, disturbs a reasonable person of normal sensitivities or endangers or
injures personal or real property.
   ODORS — Emissions of odorous gases or other odorous matter in such
quantities as to be offensive at boundary lines.
   PERSON — Any individual, association, partnership, corporation or
institution, and includes any officer, employee, department, agency or
instrumentality of a state or any political subdivision of a state. Whenever
used in any clause prescribing and imposing a penalty, "person" includes the
individual members, partners, officers and managers, or any of them, of
partnerships and associations and, as for corporations and institutions, the
officers and managers thereof or any of them.
   POLICE DEPARTMENT — The Police Department of the Township of Upper Dublin.
[Added 10-13-1998 by Ord. No. 977]
   POWERED MODEL VEHICLE — Any self-propelled airborne, waterborne or landborne
plane, vessel or vehicle which is not designed to carry persons, including but
not limited to any model airplane, boat, car or rocket.
   PROPERTY BOUNDARY LINE — Either the imaginary line, including its vertical
extension, that separates one parcel of real property from another or the
vertical and horizontal boundaries of a dwelling unit that is one in a
multidwelling unit building. All areas devoted to public rights-of-way shall be
deemed to be across the property boundary line.
   PUBLIC OR COMMON NUISANCE — That which is set up, maintained or continued so
as to be injurious to the health or an obstruction to the use of property by
interfering with the repose, health, safety or life of any considerable number
of persons.
   PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY — Any strip of land occupied or intended to be occupied
by a street, avenue, boulevard, road, highway, sidewalk or alley that is
leased, owned or controlled by a governmental entity.
   PUBLIC SPACE — Any real property or structure thereon that is owned, leased
or controlled by a governmental entity.
   RESIDENTIAL AREA — A group of residential properties and the abutting public
rights-of-way and public spaces.
   RESIDENTIAL PROPERTY — Property used for human habitation, including but not
limited to:
   A.   Private property used for human habitation.
   B.   Commercial living accommodations and commercial property used for human
habitation.
   C.   Recreational and entertainment property used for human habitation.
   D.   Community service property used for human habitation.
   SOUND — The sensation stimulated in the organs of hearing by a vibratory
disturbance with frequency in the approximate range between 20 and 20,000
cycles per second. The description of "sound" may include any characteristics
of such sound, including duration, intensity and frequency.
   SPONSOR — To initiate, pay for, collect money for, provide a location for,
assume responsibility for or otherwise facilitate a large event, or one who
engages in such activity. [Added 10-13-1998 by Ord. No. 977]
   WATERS OF THE COMMONWEALTH — Includes all streams and springs and all other
bodies of surface or groundwater, whether natural or artificial, within the
boundaries of the state.
   WEEKDAY — Any day, Monday through Friday, that is not a legal holiday.
§ 158-2.   Sewage disposal.
   A.   No privy, cesspool or other receptacle for human excrement shall be
constructed, maintained or used so that flies have or may have access to the
excrementitious matter contained therein.
   B.   No privy, urinal, cesspool or other receptacle for human excrement
shall be constructed, maintained or used which directly or indirectly drains or
discharges over or upon the surface of the ground or into any waters of the
state.
   C.   All privies, urinals, cesspools or other receptacles for human
excrement shall be cleaned at sufficiently frequent intervals to prevent the
contents from overflowing.
   D.   The transportation of human excrement shall be effected in watertight
containers with tight-fitting covers. Containers shall be thoroughly cleansed
after each use.
   E.   No human excrement or material containing human excrement shall be
placed on the surface of the ground or buried or otherwise disposed of within
100 feet of or where it is likely to gain access to any waters of the state,
unless subjected to treatment by a method approved by the Board of Health.
   F.   The contents of privies, cesspools or other receptacles for human
excrement shall not be used on ground within the corporate limits of the
Township of Upper Dublin unless subjected to treatment by a method approved by
the Board of Health, and in accordance with regulations of the State Department
of Health.
   G.   No privy, cesspool or similar receptacle for human excrement shall be
constructed, maintained or used on premises where a sewer is at all accessible
which is part of a sewer system from which sewage is lawfully discharged into
the waters of the state.
   H.   No privy, urinal, toilet or other receptacle for human excrement shall
be constructed, maintained or used in any room, or have direct connection with
any room wherein any kind of exposed foods or foodstuffs are prepared, stored
or handled.
   I.   No privy vault or cesspool shall be cleaned or emptied without a permit
from the Board of Health, for which a fee as set forth in the Township fee
schedule shall be paid to the Secretary of the Board, excepting in cases
declared by the Board to be a nuisance, when in said cases, a different fee
shall be charged, and such cleaning shall be made in an inoffensive manner and
in a method which shall not be prejudicial to the public health. [Amended 12-
15-1992 by Ord. No. 833; 1-10-1995 by Ord. No. 879]
   J.   Kitchen and laundry wastewater shall only be discharged to a public
sanitary sewer system or an approved on-lot sewage facility. [Added 9-14-2004
by Ord. No. 1142]
§ 158-3.   Animal excrement.
[Amended 9-14-2004 by Ord. No. 1142]
   A.   Excrement from livestock, pets and other kept or domesticated animals
shall not be allowed to accumulate.
   B.   Excrement from livestock, domesticate animals, pets and other kept
animals shall not be deposited in or discharged to storm drains, storm sewers,
watercourses or waters of the commonwealth.
§ 158-4.   Dead animals.
   A.   The carcass of any dead animal shall be removed and disposed of by
burial, incineration or other proper method within 24 hours after death. If the
carcass is buried, it shall be placed so that every part shall be covered by at
least two feet of earth and at a location not less than 100 feet from any well,
spring, stream or other surface waters, and in a place not subject to overflow.
   B.   In all cases of death from communicable disease, the carcass, if
disposed of by burial, shall first be thoroughly enveloped in unslaked lime
   C.   Proper disposal shall be made by the owner of the animal or by the
owner of the property on which the dead animal is found. Where the owner of the
animal is unknown and the carcass is found upon any street, alley or public
place, it shall be removed and disposed of by the Board of Health at public
expense.
§ 158-5.   Stagnant water.
No person shall maintain or permit to be maintained any privy vault, cesspool,
well, cistern, rain barrel or other receptacle containing water in such a
condition that mosquitoes may breed therein.
§ 158-6.   Industrial waste regulations.
   A.   No person, partnership, firm or corporation maintaining a
slaughterhouse, rendering works, depository for dead animals, glue works,
tannery, wool-washing establishment, paper mill, by-product coke oven, dye
works, oil refinery, medical facility, veterinary facility, dairy, creamery,
cheese factory, milk station or similar establishment; or engaged in the
manufacture of gas, chemicals, pharmaceuticals, explosives, fertilizers or
similar products; or in the business of soap making, cosmetics, fish oil
extraction, bone boiling or similar occupations; shall allow any noxious
exhalation, odors, gases or fluids that are deleterious or detrimental to
public health to accumulate upon the premises; or be thrown or allowed to
discharge into any street, roadway or public place; or be thrown or allowed to
discharge into any storm drain, storm sewer, stream, watercourse or other
waters of the commonwealth. [Amended 9-14-2004 by Ord. No. 1142]
   B.   All slaughterhouses, rendering works, bone boiling establishment,
depositories for dead animals, garbage disposal works, piggeries and similar
establishments handling organic matter shall have an adequate water supply for
the purpose of keeping the place clean and sanitary. All floors shall be
constructed on concrete or other impervious material and shall have adequate
provision for drainage to a cesspool approved by the Board of Health, or to a
sewer or treatment works approved by the State Department of Health.
§ 158-7.   Water supply.
No owner or occupant of any premises shall maintain any well, spring, cistern
or other source of water supply used for drinking or household purposes and to
which the public has or may have access and which is polluted or which is so
situated or constructed that it may become polluted in any manner that may
render such water supply injurious to health.
§ 158-8.   Enforcement.
[Amended 10-13-1992 by Ord. No. 827; 5-13-1997 by Ord. No. 943]
   A.   The Department of Public Health, the Police Department and the duly
designated officials of the Township shall have the power to prohibit and
remove any nuisance and to order the owner, occupant or user of public or
private property, by appropriate action, at the expense of such owner, occupant
or user, to correct, cease and desist or remove such nuisance within such
reasonable time as the Township official shall determine, in default of which
the Township may cause the same to be done and collect the cost thereof,
together with a penalty of 10% of such cost, in the manner provided by law for
the collection of municipal claims, or by action of assumpsit, or may seek
relief by bill in equity. [Amended 10-14-1997 by Ord. No. 955]
   B.   Any facility owned or operated by the Township of Upper Dublin is
exempt from the provisions of this chapter. However, the Township's policy is
to comply with this chapter to the extent that such compliance would not
conflict with other Township interests in the health, safety and welfare of the
Township residents.
§ 158-9.   Violations and penalties.
[Amended 12-19-1989 by Ord. No. 776; 1-10-1995 by Ord. No. 879; 5-13-1997 by
Ord. No. 943]
   A.   Any person or persons violating any of the provisions of this chapter,
including but not limited to the owner, occupant or user of the property where
the nuisance originates, shall each be liable, upon conviction, to a minimum
fine of $200 for the first offense and of $350 for each subsequent offense,
with no fine to exceed the maximum fine permitted by statute, for each and
every offense, in the discretion of the District Justice, together with costs
of prosecution in each case. Once a person has been notified by the Township
that he is in violation of this chapter, each day that he shall continue such
violation after such notification shall constitute a separate offense
punishable by a like fine or penalty.
   B.   Subject to the provisions of Subsection A of this section, every person
shall be permitted one warning by the Township and a reasonable period of time
thereafter to cease and desist the violation, before a citation is issued, with
the exception of the violation of §
158-15, in which case the fine shall be $25 for the first offense and a maximum
of $350 for each subsequent offense. [Amended 5-11-2004 by Ord. No. 1129]
§ 158-10.   Composting. 
[Added 1-10-1995 by Ord. No. 879; amended 3-12-2013 by Ord. No. 13-1270, § 2;
3-11-2014 by Ord. No. 14-1285, § 2]
   A.   Only chopped or whole leaves, grass clippings and green kitchen waste
are permitted in a compost pile. Animal products of any type or classification
are not permitted in a compost pile. [Amended 3-12-2013 by Ord. No. 13-1270; 3-
11-2014 by Ord. No. 14-1285]
   B.   Compost piles must be located in the side or rear yard with the entire
contents of the pile being at least five feet off any property line and not
visible from any public right-of-way.
   C.   Compost piles should be located in a level, shady area out of direct
sunlight that will not develop puddles or be affected by drainage after
rainfall.
§ 158-11.   Odors.
[Added 5-13-1997 by Ord. No. 943]
   A.   Purpose. The Board of Commissioners, finding that excessive emission of
odor is detrimental to the physical, mental and social well-being of the
residents as well as to their comfort, living conditions, general welfare,
safety and well-being, and is therefore a public health and welfare hazard,
hereby finds it necessary to provide for the greater control and more effective
regulation of excessive odor and the sources of excessive odor within the
Township.
   B.   Prohibited odors. The emission of foul, offensive, gaseous or
nauseating odors in such quantities as to be offensive, a source of discomfort
or hazardous to health, at the boundary lines of the property on which the odor
originates, shall constitute a nuisance and shall be subject to enforcement by
the provisions of this chapter.
   C.   Prima facie violation. Credible testimony in a court of law from five
or more residents who are in general agreement as to the times and durations of
the odors and who reside in separate residences, including apartments and
condominiums, located across a property boundary line from the property on
which the source of the odor is generated, that the emission of prohibited
odors as described in Subsection B above, was a disturbance to their use,
occupancy and enjoyment of their property, shall be prima facie evidence of the
emission of a prohibited odor.
§ 158-12.   Noise.
[Added 5-13-1997 by Ord. No. 943; amended 7-12-2016 by Ord. No. 16-1320]
   A.   Purpose.
      (1)   The Board of Commissioners, finding that excessive levels by sound
are detrimental to the physical, mental and social well-being of the residents
as well as to their comfort, living conditions, general welfare, safety and
well-being and are therefore a public health and welfare hazard, hereby finds
it necessary to provide for the greater control and more effective regulation
of excessive sound and the sources of excessive sound within the Township.
      (2)   This section is intended to prohibit preventable and unnecessary
noise and is not intended, nor shall it be construed, to regulate the usual and
customary noise incidental to suburban life. This section may be applied to
commercial, industrial and institutional establishments, among others, but when
so applied to establishments properly located in commercial, industrial or
institutional zones, due consideration shall be given to the zone in which the
establishment is located. Further, the customary and natural noise incident to
the operation of business, industry or other facilities permitted in the area
zoned shall be considered so as not to create an undue hardship upon lawful
commercial, industrial, institutional or other establishments.
   B.   Noise disturbance prohibited. Any sound of such frequent repetition,
level or duration as to be or tend to be injurious to human health or welfare,
or which would unreasonably interfere with the enjoyment of life or property
throughout the Township or in any portions thereof, shall constitute a
nuisance.
   C.   Specific acts prohibited. Without in any way limiting the provisions of
Subsection A or B above, the following acts, and the causes thereof, are
declared to be noise disturbances and therefore in violation of this chapter.
      (1)   Operating, playing or permitting the operation or playing of any
radio, television, phonograph, drum, musical instrument, sound amplifier,
automobile radio, automobile stereo, high-fidelity equipment or other device
which produces, reproduces or amplifies sound as follows:
         (a)   At any time in such manner as to cause a noise disturbance
across a property boundary line or, from Sunday evening until Friday morning
between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m., and from Friday evening until
Sunday morning (or on the evening of a legal holiday) between the hours of 11:
00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m., so as to be plainly audible across a property boundary
line;
         (b)   In such a manner as to create a noise disturbance across a
property boundary line or at 50 feet from such device, whichever is less, when
the device is operated in or on a motor vehicle, or hand carried, on a public
right-of-way or public space; or
         (c)   In such manner as to create a noise disturbance to any person
other than the operator of the device when operated by any passenger or a
common carrier.
      (2)   Yelling and shouting. Engaging in loud or raucous yelling,
shouting, hooting, whistling or singing as follows:
         (a)   On the public streets or property from Sunday evening until
Friday morning between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m., and from Friday
evening until Sunday morning (or on the evening of a legal holiday) between the
hours of 11:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m.; or
         (b)   At any time or place in such a manner as to create a noise
disturbance.
      (3)   Construction. Operating or permitting the operation of any tool,
machinery, appliance or equipment used in construction, drilling, earthmoving,
excavation or demolition work which emits noise beyond the premises upon which
the tool, machinery, appliance or equipment is being operated or used from
Sunday evening until Friday morning between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 7:00
a.m. and from Friday evening until Sunday morning, and on all legal holidays,
between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m., except for emergency work.
Ambient outdoor temperatures exceeding 90 degrees for three consecutive days
during the months of June, July, August and September shall constitute
“emergency work,” permitting construction activities to begin at 7:00 a.m. and
continue to 10:00 p.m. This subsection shall not apply to the use of domestic
power tools subject to Subsection C.(4) hereof.
      (4)   Domestic power tools. Operating or permitting the operation of any
mechanically powered saw, drill, sander, grinder, lawn or garden tool or
similar device used outdoors in residential areas from Sunday evening until
Friday morning between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m., and from Friday
evening until Sunday morning (or on the evening of a legal holiday) between the
hours of 11:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m., so as to cause a noise disturbance across a
property boundary line, except for emergency work.
      (5)   Loading, unloading, opening, closing or other handling of boxes,
crates, containers, building materials, liquids, garbage cans, refuse or
similar objects or the pneumatic or pumped loading or unloading of bulk
materials in liquid, gaseous, powder or pellet form, or the compacting of
refuse by persons engaged in the business of scavenging or garbage collection,
from Sunday evening until Friday morning between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:
00 a.m., and from Friday evening until Sunday morning (or on the evening of a
legal holiday) between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m., when the sound
therefrom creates a noise disturbance across a property boundary line. This
subsection shall not apply to municipal or utility services in or about the
public right-of-way.
      (6)   Animals and birds. Owning, possessing, harboring or controlling any
animal or bird which howls, barks, meows, squawks or makes other sounds
continuously and/or incessantly for a period of 10 minutes or makes such noise
intermittently for 1/2 hour or more to the disturbance of any person at any
time of the day or night, regardless of whether the animal or bird is situated
in or upon private property; provided, however, it shall not be a violation if
at the time the animal or bird is making such noise a person is trespassing or
threatening to trespass upon private property in or upon which the animal or
bird is situated or if the animal or bird was caused to make such noise for any
other legitimate reason.
      (7)   Powered model vehicles. Operating or permitting the operation of
powered model vehicles so as to create a noise disturbance across a property
boundary line from Sunday evening until Friday morning between the hours of 10:
00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m., and from Friday evening until Sunday morning (or on the
evening of a legal holiday) between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m.
      (8)   Vehicle, motorboat or aircraft repairs and testing. Repairing,
rebuilding or testing any motor vehicles, motorcycle, motorboat or aircraft in
such a manner as to cause a noise disturbance across a property boundary line
from Sunday evening until Friday morning between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:
00 a.m., and from Friday evening until Sunday morning (or on the evening of a
legal holiday) between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m.
      (9)   Motor vehicles.
         (a)   Motor vehicles on public rights-of-way. No person shall operate
or cause to be operated a motor vehicle or any equipment attached to such
vehicle on a public right-of-way, at any time, in such a manner that the sound
level emitted by the motor vehicle or any equipment attached to such a vehicle
exceeds the level set forth in the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation
Regulations.
         (b)   Standing motor vehicles. No person shall operate or permit the
operation of any motor vehicle or any auxiliary equipment attached to such a
vehicle for a period longer than 15 minutes in any hour while the vehicle is
stationary, for reasons other than traffic congestion, anywhere within 150 feet
of any residence in such a manner as to cause a noise disturbance across a
property boundary line.
         (c)   Unnecessary horn blowing. No person shall at any time sound the
horn or other warning device of a motor vehicle while actually driving such
vehicle except when absolutely necessary as a warning or in an emergency.
      (10)   Operating an air-conditioning unit or units and equipment or other
types of mechanical equipment or apparatus installed in or attached to
buildings or located on premises appurtenant to buildings to make or produce
excessive noise, thereby causing annoyance, inconvenience or detriment to the
public or to any other person or persons.
      (11)   Fireworks. Ignition or discharge of fireworks so as to create a
noise disturbance across a property boundary line any evening from 10:00 p.m.
to 8:00 a.m. the following morning except the evenings of July 4th and December
31st, when fireworks may be discharged until 1:00 a.m. the following morning.
[Added 8-25-2020 by Ord. No. 20-1362, § 2]
   D.   Prima facie violation. Credible testimony in a court of law from five
or more residents who are in general agreement as to the times and durations of
the noise and who reside in separate residences, including apartments and
condominiums, located across a property boundary line from the property on
which the source of the noise is generated that the generation of prohibited
noise as described in Subsections A, B and C above was a disturbance to their
use, occupancy and enjoyment of their property shall be prima facie evidence of
the generation of a prohibited noise.
   E.   Exemptions. The following sounds are exempt from the provisions of this
chapter:
      (1)   Emergency work. Sounds caused by the performance of emergency work,
or by the ordinary and accepted use of emergency apparatus and equipment, or
the generation of sound for the purpose of alerting persons to the existence of
an emergency.
      (2)   Municipal and utility services. Sound resulting from the repair or
replacement of any municipal or utility installation in or about the public
right-of-way.
      (3)   Permitted sounds. Any activity which would otherwise cause or
constitute a violation of this chapter for which an appropriate permit has been
obtained from the Township.
   F.   Variance conditions.
      (1)   Any person who owns or operates any stationary noise source may
apply to the NCA for a variance from one or more of the provisions of this
section. Applications for a permit of variance shall supply information
including but not limited to:
         (a)   The nature and location of the noise source for which such
application is made.
         (b)   The reason for which the permit of variance is requested,
including the hardship that will result to the applicant, his/her client or the
public if the permit of variance is not granted.
         (c)   The level, duration and repetition intervals of noise that will
occur during the period of the variance.
         (d)   The section or sections of this chapter for which the permit of
variance shall apply.
         (e)   A description of interim noise control measures to be taken for
the applicant to minimize noise and the impacts occurring therefrom.
         (f)   A specific schedule of the noise control measures that shall be
taken to bring the source into compliance with this chapter within a reasonable
time.
      (2)   Failure to supply the information required by the NCA shall be
cause for rejection of the application.
      (3)   A copy of the permit of variance must be kept on file by the NCA
for public inspection.
      (4)   The NCA may charge the applicant a permit fee in the amount set
from time to time by the Board of Commissioners to cover expenses resulting
from the processing of the permit variance application.
      (5)   The permit of variance shall extend for a period not to exceed one
month at the discretion of the NCA. Permits for longer periods may only be
granted by the Board of Commissioners. Any person holding a permit of variance
and requesting an extension of time shall apply for a new permit of variance
under the provisions of this section.
      (6)   No variance shall be approved unless the applicant presents
adequate proof that:
         (a)   Noise levels occurring during the period of the variance will
not constitute a danger to public health; and
         (b)   Compliance with this chapter would impose an unreasonable
hardship on the applicant without equal or greater benefits to the public.
      (7)   In making the determination of granting a variance, the NCA shall
consider:
         (a)   The character and degree of injury to or interference with the
health and welfare or the reasonable use of property that is caused or
threatened to be caused to other persons in the Township;
         (b)   The social and economic value of the activity for which the
variance is sought; and
         (c)   The ability of the applicant to apply the best practical noise
control measures.
      (8)   No variance shall be granted which would expand the hours set forth
herein.
      (9)   A variance may be revoked by the NCA if there is:
         (a)   Violation of one or more conditions of the variance;
         (b)   Material misrepresentation of fact in the variance application;
or
         (c)   Material change in any of the circumstances relied on by the NCA
in granting the variance.
§ 158-13.   Large events.
[Added 10-13-1998 by Ord. No. 977]
   A.   Purpose. It shall be unlawful for any person, as defined in this
chapter, to sponsor a large event within the limits of the Township of Upper
Dublin without first having made application and received permission to do so
in accordance with any conditions or limitations imposed by the Police
Department, Code Enforcement Department or other Township officials designated
by the Board of Commissioners in accordance with the provisions of this Code
and in the interest of the health, safety and welfare of the community
   B.   Other Code provisions. All Township Code provisions are applicable when
sponsoring a large event.
   C.   Exceptions. Any normal, ordinary and customary activities conducted
under the sponsorship of an educational institution located in the Township of
Upper Dublin are exempt from the provisions for large events.
   D.   Application to sponsor a large event. Applications for a large event
must be submitted to the Police Department on forms provided by the Township no
less than 20 business days prior to the date of the proposed large event.
Applications may be submitted no more than six months prior to any proposed
large event, unless otherwise waived by the Chief of Police or his designee.
Applications for a series of large events may all be made at one time, and one
permit may be issued (with or without conditions) for the entire series.
   E.   Permission to sponsor a large event.
      (1)   Written permission from the Police Chief or his designee is
required before a large event can be sponsored. After review of the application
and all applicable, relevant circumstances which might impact upon or be
impacted by the proposed large event, the Police Chief or his designee may
impose conditions on the large event based on the relevant circumstances of the
specific proposed large event, which conditions would safeguard the health,
safety and welfare of the Township residents or the attendees of the large
event, or would ensure compliance with other regulations of the Township Code.
      (2)   An application may be denied if, in the sole opinion of the Police
Chief or his designees, the event would adversely affect the health, safety and
welfare of the community or would violate any provision of the Township Code.
      (3)   An application will be reviewed and returned to the applicant
within five business days from the date of submission to the Police Department
either approving the proposed large event (with or without conditions) or
denying the proposed large event.
      (4)   The Police Chief or his designee may require that additional police
or traffic protection be provided, and the cost for such additional personnel
shall be charged to the sponsor of the proposed large event.
   F.   Exemptions. The following events are exempt from the need to file an
application for a large event but are not exempt from any other provisions of
the Township Code:
      (1)   Funeral processions.
      (2)   Yard sales.
      (3)   Events which are sponsored by the Township or for which a permit
has been issued by the Township Parks and Recreation Department.
      (4)   Academic activities incidental to the daily, routine function of an
educational institution.
      (5)   Athletic activities held on the property of an educational
institution as part of the institution's annual or seasonal athletic program.
   G.   Revocation of permission to sponsor a large event. The Police
Department may revoke permission to sponsor a large event either prior to or
during a large event if the Police Department determines that the application
for the large event was fraudulent, or the large event fails to meet the
conditions set by the Police Chief or his designee, or the large event
adversely affects the health, safety or welfare of the community If a
revocation of permission order is issued by the Police Department, the sponsor
of the large event must cease operations immediately. Failure to do so may
result in the issuance of appropriate citations to the sponsor of the large
event and others.
   H.   Violations and penalties.
      (1)   Violations and penalties of this section shall be enforced in
accordance with the provisions of §
158-9 of this chapter.
      (2)   Conducting a large event without first obtaining written permission
from the Police Chief or his designee shall constitute a violation of this
chapter. Conducting a large event without adhering to any condition imposed by
the Police Chief or his designee in granting permission for the large event
shall constitute a violation of this chapter. Failure to terminate a large
event immediately after notice to do so by the Police Department shall
constitute a violation of this chapter.
§ 158-14.   Outdoor lighting.
[Added 10-8-2002 by Ord. No. 1093]
   A.   Purpose. To require and set minimum standards for outdoor lighting to:
      (1)   Provide appropriate lighting in outdoor public places to protect
public health, safety and welfare.
      (2)   Protect drivers and pedestrians from the glare of nonvehicular
light sources that impairs vision and safety.
      (3)   Protect the public and the environment from nuisance glare and
intrusive, stray and/or excessive light emitted from poorly or improperly
shielded, designed, aimed, placed, applied or maintained light sources.
   B.   Applicability.
      (1)   The provisions of this section shall be applicable to all
multifamily residential, commercial, industrial and institutional uses, and to
residential uses in combination with any of such uses or as specifically set
forth herein.
      (2)   Appropriate outdoor lighting with adequate nuisance glare-control
shall be required for safety and personal security during hours of darkness
where there is public assembly and traverse, including but not limited to the
following uses: multifamily residential, commercial, industrial and
institutional.
      (3)   The glare-control requirements herein contained apply to lighting
in all above-mentioned uses as well as, but not limited to, sign,
architectural, landscape and streetscape lighting applications.
      (4)   Appropriate officers or agents of the Township may require lighting
be incorporated and/or controlled for nuisance glare in residential uses or
locations as necessary. Otherwise the provisions of this section shall not be
applicable to residential uses.
      (5)   The provisions of this section shall not be applicable to public
rights-of-way or to properties owned by Upper Dublin Township or the Upper
Dublin School District or to properties used by them for public purposes.
   C.   Definitions. The following words and phrases, when used in this
section, shall have the meanings indicated:
      FOOTCANDLE — A common unit of light intensity used in the United States
and stated in lumens per square foot. It is measurable with a light meter.
(Note: LUX is the metric equivalent. There are approximately 10.7 lux per
footcandle.)
      FULL CUTOFF LUMINAIRE — A lighting unit in its mounted form that allows
no direct light or reflected source image from the lighting unit above a
ninety-degree plane, and no more than 10% of rated lamp output on an eighty-
degree plane, at any lateral angle around the fixture.
      FULLY SHIELDED — Providing internal and/or external shields and louvers
to prevent brightness from lamps, reflectors and lenses from causing glare at
normal viewing angles.
      GLARE — The sensation produced by direct lighting that causes an
annoyance, discomfort or loss in visual performance and visibility to the eye.
      ILLUMINANCE — The intensity of incident light at a point, measured in
footcandles or lux.
      LIGHT TRESPASS — Light emitted by a lighting installation which shines
beyond the boundaries of the property on which the installation is sited.
      LUMEN — A unit of measurement of light. One lumen is equal to one
footcandle falling onto one square foot of area.
      LUMINAIRE — A complete luminaire, including a lamp or lamps, together
with the parts designed to distribute the light, to position and protect the
lamps and to connect the lamps to the power supply.
      RESIDENTIAL — Single-family or two-family residential.
   D.   Criteria.
      (1)   Illumination levels.
         (a)   Lighting, where required or permitted by this section, shall
have intensities and uniformity ratios which shall not exceed the current
recommended practices of the Illuminating Engineering Society of North America
(IESNA) as contained in the IESNA Lighting Handbook or separately in IESNA
Recommended Practices.
         (b)   Future amendments to such recommended practices shall become a
part of this section without further action of the Township.
      (2)   Outdoor luminaire design.
         (a)   Luminaires shall be of a type and design appropriate to the
lighting application and shall conform to the requirements set forth in this
Code.
         (b)   For lighting horizontal tasks such as private roadways,
sidewalks, entrances and parking areas, full cutoff luminaires shall be used.
         (c)   The use of floodlighting, spotlighting, wall-mounted fixtures,
internally illuminated decorative globes and spheres and other fixtures not
meeting "full cutoff" criteria shall be permitted only with the approval of the
Township, based upon acceptable justification and achievement of adequate glare
control.
         (d)   Luminaires shall be equipped with light directing and/or
shielding devices such as shields, visors, skirts or hoods to redirect
offending light distribution and/or to reduce direct or reflected glare.
         (e)   A NEMA-head fixture, a.k.a. "barn light" or "dusk-to-dawn
light," shall not be permitted where it is visible from a neighboring use or
property unless fitted with a reflector to render it full cutoff. In no case
shall the intensity of illumination cast by a source or sources regulated by
this section onto an adjacent residential property exceed 0.1 vertical
footcandle measured line-of-sight from anywhere on the adjacent residential
property.
      (3)   Control of nuisance and disabling glare.
         (a)   All outdoor lighting shall be aimed, located, designed, fitted
and maintained so as not to present a hazard to drivers or pedestrians by
impairing their ability to safely traverse and so as not to create a nuisance
by projecting or reflecting light onto a neighboring use or property which
interferes with such use or with the enjoyment of such property.
         (b)   Only full cutoff luminaires may be used under outdoor canopies.
They shall be shielded in such a manner that the edge of the fixture shield
shall be level with or below the light source envelope and reflector. Outdoor
canopies include, but are not limited to, the following applications:
            [1]   Fuel island canopies associated with service stations and
convenience stores.
            [2]   Exterior canopies above storefronts in shopping centers and
malls
            [3]   Exterior canopies above driveways and building entrances.
            [4]   Pavilions and gazebos.
            [5]   Parking garages with interior lighting visible from the
exterior.
         (c)   Floodlights and spotlights. The use of searchlights or laser
source lights for advertising or entertainment purposes is prohibited.
         (d)   Outdoor lighting shall be controlled by automatic switching
devices such as time clocks or combination motion detectors and photocells that
will extinguish such lighting between 11:00 p.m. and dawn to reduce energy
waste and mitigate nuisance glare and sky-lighting consequences, except as
specifically otherwise permitted herein.
         (e)   Lighting proposed for use after 11:00 p.m. or after normal hours
of operation, which ever is earlier, for commercial, industrial or
institutional safety applications shall be reduced by 75% from the permitted
illumination levels set forth above from then until dawn.
         (f)   All illumination for advertising signs, buildings and/or
surrounding landscapes for decorative, advertising or esthetic purposes is
prohibited between 11:00 p.m. and sunrise, except that such lighting situated
on the premises of a commercial establishment may remain illuminated while the
establishment is actually open for business and until one hour after closing.
         (g)   Flagpole lighting sources shall not exceed 10,000 lumens per
pole.
         (h)   Vegetation screens shall not be employed to serve as the primary
means for controlling glare. Rather, glare control shall be achieved primarily
through the use of such means as cutoff fixtures, shields and baffles and
appropriate application of fixture mounting height, wattage, aiming angle and
fixture placement.
         (i)   Except as set forth by § 255-155, externally illuminated signs
shall be lighted by fixtures mounted at the top of the sign and aimed downward.
Such lighting shall be automatically extinguished between the hours of 11:00
p.m. and dawn. All such fixtures shall be so designed or fitted to concentrate
the light output onto and not beyond the sign.
         (j)   Full cutoff luminaires shall not be mounted in excess of 20 feet
above finished grade unless under a canopy. All other luminaires shall not be
mounted in excess of 16 feet above grade.
         (k)   Directional fixtures for such applications as facade, fountain,
feature, recreational and landscape illumination shall be aimed so as not to
project their output beyond the objects intended to be illuminated and shall be
extinguished between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and dawn.
         (l)   The use of white strobe lighting for tall structures such as
smokestacks, chimneys and radio/communications/television towers is prohibited
during hours of darkness except as required by the Federal Aviation
Administration or other regulatory agency.
      (4)   Installation.
         (a)   For new installations, electrical feeds for fixtures mounted on
poles shall be run underground.
         (b)   Poles supporting lighting fixtures for the illumination of
parking areas shall be placed a minimum of five feet outside the paved area, or
on concrete pedestals at least 30 inches high above the pavement, or otherwise
suitably protected from damage by vehicles as approved by the Board of
Commissioners.
      (5)   Maintenance. Lighting fixtures and ancillary equipment shall be
maintained so as always to meet the requirements of this section.
   E.   Plan submission.
      (1)   For subdivision and land development applications and
nonresidential construction, where site lighting is employed in four or more
locations, whether proposed or existing, lighting plans shall be submitted to
the Township for review and approval with any preliminary subdivision/land
development plan submission and with any nonresidential application for
conditional use, special exception, variance or building permit and shall
include:
         (a)   A site plan, complete with all structures, parking spaces,
building entrances, traffic areas (both vehicular and pedestrian), vegetation
that might interfere with lighting and adjacent use that might be adversely
impacted by the lighting, containing a layout of all proposed fixtures by
location, mounting height and type.
         (b)   Isofootcandle plots for individual fixture installations, or
ten-foot-by-ten-foot illuminance-grid plots for multifixture installations,
which demonstrate compliance with the intensity and uniformity requirements as
set forth in this section. Building and property outlines shall be clearly
identified on the layout plots.
         (c)   Description of the proposed equipment, including fixture catalog
cuts, photometrics, glare reduction devices, lamps, on/off control devices,
mounting heights, pole foundation details and mounting methods.
      (2)   In all instances where plan submission is required, the Board of
Commissioners may require that appropriate steps be taken to mitigate on-site
and off-site glare and light intrusion.
      (3)   Post-approval alterations to lighting plans or intended
substitutions for approved lighting equipment shall be submitted to the
Township for review and approval. A note to that effect shall be placed on the
lighting plan. Property owners shall maintain the approved lighting plan and
may not alter it without the approval of the Township.
   F.   Post-installation inspection. The Township reserves the right to
conduct a post-installation nighttime inspection to verify compliance with the
requirements of this section and, if appropriate, to require remedial action at
no expense to the Township. A note to that effect shall be placed on the
lighting plan.
   G.   Compliance monitoring.
      (1)   Safety hazards.
         (a)   If the Building Officer judges a lighting installation creates a
safety or personal security hazard, the person(s) responsible for the lighting
shall be notified in writing and required to take remedial action.
         (b)   If appropriate corrective action has not been effected within 30
days of written notification, the Township may commence legal action as
provided in Subsections J and K below.
      (2)   Nuisance glare and inadequate illumination levels.
         (a)   When the Building Officer judges an installation produces
unacceptable levels of nuisance glare, direct skyward light, excessive or
insufficient illumination levels or otherwise varies from this section, the
Township may cause written notification of the person(s) responsible for the
lighting and require appropriate remedial action.
         (b)   If appropriate corrective action has not been effected within 30
days of notifica tion, the Township may commence legal action as provided in
Subsections J and K below.
   H.   Noncompliant lighting. Any lighting fixture or lighting installation
existing on the effective date of this section that does not conform with the
requirements of this section shall be considered as a lawful nonconformance.
Unless minor corrective action is deemed by the Township to be an acceptable
alternative, a noncompliant lighting fixture or lighting installation shall be
made to conform with the applicable requirements of this section in any of the
following instances:
      (1)   When it is deemed by the Township to create a safety hazard or a
nuisance.
      (2)   When it is replaced, abandoned or relocated.
      (3)   When there is a change in use of the property on which the area
being illuminated in located.
      (4)   Within two years after the effective date of this section.
   I.   The Board of Commissioners, upon written application accompanied by a
fee of $100, may grant waivers from the requirements of this section to meet
public safety or security concerns, to meet the needs of all-night operations
on a property or where the strict application of the requirements of this
section in a commercial, industrial or institutional application would impose
an unreasonable financial hardship or would deprive the applicant the
reasonable use of the property. Before acting on the application for a waiver,
the Board may require that the applicant submit a lighting plan meeting the
criteria set forth in §
158-14D above.
   J.   All appeals from notifications authorized by this section shall be
taken to the Board of Commissioners within 30 days of the date of such
notification.
   K.   Violations and penalties. Violations of this section shall be enforced
in accordance with the provisions of §
158-9 of this chapter. The penalties during any one-year period for the first
offense shall be $50, for the second offense $200, and for the third offense
and all other offenses, no less than $350.
§ 158-15.    Smoking.
[Added 5-11-2004 by Ord. No. 1129; Amended 4-8-2008 by Ord. No. 1200, § 1]
All properties, managed, maintained and regulated by the Township are declared
smoke free environments. No person shall be permitted to smoke or carry a
lighted cigar, cigarette, pipe, or other lighted smoking device within, on, or
throughout all properties managed, maintained and regulated by the Township,
with the exception of specifically designated smoking areas marked with signs
stating “Smoking Permitted.”
Chapter 168
PARKS AND RECREATION AREAS
§
168-1.   Definitions.
§
168-2.   Rules and regulations.
§
168-3.   Trespassing on residential lands.
§
168-4.   Enforcement.
§
168-5.   Fees.
§
168-6.   Additional rules.
§
168-7.   Violations and penalties.
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Board of Commissioners of the Township of Upper Dublin
5-13-1986 as Title 6, Ch. 2, of the 1986 Code. Amendments noted where
applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
 
Parks and Recreation Advisory Board — See  Zoning — See
Ch. 32.                                      Ch. 255.
 
§ 168-1.   Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
   PARKLANDS — Tracts acquired by the township for public use, including golf
courses, playgrounds and open spaces kept in their natural state.
   VEHICLES — Any motorized device for carrying passengers or goods.
§ 168-2.   Rules and regulations.
[Amended 4-8-2008 by Ord. No. 1200, § 2; 11-10-2009 by Ord. No. 09-1223, § 1;
3-12-2013 by Ord. No. 13-1269, § 1; 7-14-2015 by Ord. No. 15-1305, § 1]
The following rules and regulations are set forth for the use of the parklands
in the Township of Upper Dublin:
   A.   No person or persons without a special permit shall be allowed in the
parklands except between the hours of sunrise and sunset.
   B.   Persons shall enter and leave a park by the entrance and exits provided
for that purpose.
   C.   No vehicle shall be used or parked in any roadway or section of the
parklands except in areas designated for such purposes. No person may operate
any recreational vehicle within any township park. “Recreational vehicle” shall
mean any hot-air balloon, mini-bike, dirt bike, all-terrain vehicle (ATV), off-
road vehicle (ORV) or other form of motorcycles or any snowmobiles. [Amended 1-
10-1995 by Ord. No. 879]
   D.   The washing or repair of any motor vehicle shall not be permitted.
   E.   Intoxicating beverages shall not be sold or distributed or consumed
except under special permit in certain designated park areas.
   F.   Intoxicated persons shall not be permitted in a park.
   G.   Gambling or any obscene or indecent act shall not be permitted.
   H.   Abusive, indecent or threatening language or any conduct that may annoy
shall not be permitted.
   I.   No device that expels a projectile may be used in a manner which
threatens or tends to threaten the safety of any person. The promiscuous use of
javelins, arrows, discuses or similar athletic equipment dangerous in character
is prohibited unless used under the direct supervision of an authorized
playground supervisor. No firecrackers, fireworks or rockets are permitted
except with adequate supervision and with a special permit. [Amended 11-10-2009
by Ord. No. 09-1223; 7-14-2015 by Ord. No. 15-1305]
   J.   No person or persons shall in any way injure, foul, pollute or deface
any building, equipment, signs and standards or water.
   K.   No person or persons shall cut, remove, injure or destroy flowers,
plants, wildflowers, shrubbery or trees. This includes downed trees cut up for
firewood. No person or persons shall erect any structures or install plant
material on parkland or assume parkland for personal use. [Amended 1-10-1995 by
Ord. No. 879]
   L.   Pet animals, including but not limited to dogs, cats and horses, shall
not be permitted except in designated areas. [Amended 1-10-1995 by Ord. No.
879]
   M.   No person shall scatter or drop or leave litter except in receptacles
provided for that purpose. No dumping of household, construction, commercial or
landscape debris in receptacles or on parkland for removal by the township is
permitted. [Amended 1-10-1995 by Ord. No. 879; 9-9-1997 by Ord. No. 949]
   N.   No person shall deface or destroy any notices, rules or regulations for
the regulation of a park system posted or in any manner permanently fixed
within the limits of the same.
   O.   No person shall annoy, strike, injure, maim or kill any animals or
birds.
   P.   Fires shall only be allowed in designated areas where fireplaces,
stoves or grills are provided by the township. Fires must be completely
extinguished before leaving a site. [Amended 1-10-1995 by Ord. No. 879]
   Q.   Scheduling and permits. [Amended 1-10-1995 by Ord. No. 879; 8-14-2001
by Ord. No. 1067]
      (1)   Any individual or group of individuals desiring the privilege of
having the exclusive or special use of all or portions of any park area,
ground, building, athletic field or other recreational facility shall schedule
such use with and obtain a permit from the township. Individuals or groups
desiring to conduct organized activities on park grounds shall schedule such
activities with and obtain a permit from the township.
      (2)   Scheduling and permit application shall be made with the Parks and
Recreation Department at least two business days before the date of the desired
use. Established fees, security deposits and/or required certificates must be
paid and/or filed with the Parks and Recreation Department at the time the
permit application is submitted for approval and scheduling.
      (3)   Any individual or group of individuals using a park facility to the
exclusion of others without a permit shall remove themselves from the facility
upon request by a properly scheduled and permitted user or authorized township
official or staff member.
      (4)   No permit will be issued for a use that violates Township
regulations regarding the use of park facilities. The Township reserves the
right to revoke any permit if those using the park pursuant to the permit
violate Township regulations. The Township further reserves the right to limit
the number of permits issued if the capacity of the facilities is exceeded.
      (5)   These regulations do not apply to minor children engaged in
ordinary and customary play, except that children must remove themselves from a
park facility upon request by a properly scheduled and permitted user or
authorized Township official or staff member.
   R.   When possible, Township residents shall be charged lesser fees than
nonresidents for the use of park facilities and for participation in recreation
programs. [Amended 1-10-1995 by Ord. No. 879]
   S.   Activities and games.
      (1)   Activities and games shall only take place in areas designated for
such. Individuals or groups using parklands, with or without Township
permission, are responsible for any damage done to turf or equipment. [Amended
1-10-1995 by Ord. No. 879]
      (2)   No person shall use parkland for the purpose of a golf driving or
practice range. [Added 9-9-1997 by Ord. No. 949]
   T.   There shall be no swimming, ice skating, fishing, boating, snorkeling
or scuba diving by any person at any time except in those areas so designated
for these purposes.
   U.   Soliciting prohibited.
      (1)   There shall be no soliciting of any kind, including the sale or
vending of food, on parklands or at Township recreational programs except by
permit issued by the Township. [Amended 1-10-1995 by Ord. No. 879]
      (2)   Use of any park facility or section of a park facility for
commercial or profit-making activities without a special permit issued by the
Township is prohibited. [Added 9-9- 1997 by Ord. No. 949]
   V.   Camping shall be permitted only in certain designated areas and only by
special permit issued by the Department. [Added 1-10-1995 by Ord. No. 879]
   W.   All public parks and recreational areas including, but not limited to,
fields, tennis and basketball courts, trails and pavilions shall be used only
for their intended purpose and no other unless a special permit has been issued
by the Township. [Added 9-9-1997 by Ord. No. 949]
   X.   Smoking. “Smoking” is defined as the carrying by a person of a lighted
cigar, cigarette, pipe or other lighted smoking device. In accordance with §
158-15, smoking is prohibited within, on, or throughout all properties managed,
maintained and regulated by the Township, including, but not limited to, parks,
playgrounds, playing courts, athletic fields and open space, and all buildings
and structures within parks and playgrounds. [Added 12-10-2002 by Ord. No.
1102; Amended 4-8-2008 by Ord. No. 1200, § 2]
   Y.   It is prohibited to operate a motor vehicle in any Township park at a
rate of speed greater than 15 mph. [Added 3-12-2013 by Ord. No. 13-1269]
§ 168-3.   Trespassing on residential lands.
There shall be no trespassing on adjacent lands of residents nor harassment of
the owners thereof.
§ 168-4.   Enforcement.
The Department of Parks and Recreation of Upper Dublin Township shall exercise
general supervision over persons occupying or using the parks and over the
care, maintenance and replacement of Township property and equipment in the
parks and shall keep such property and equipment in a clean and sanitary
condition. In addition, the Police Department is authorized to enforce the
provisions of this chapter.
§ 168-5.   Fees.
The Board of Commissioners may from time to time, by resolution, adopt a
schedule of fees and charges and other use regulations for Township facilities.
§ 168-6.   Additional rules.
The Director of Parks and Recreation and the Chief of Police shall have the
right to promulgate regulations from time to time not inconsistent with the
rules set forth in this chapter.
§ 168-7.   Violations and penalties.
[Amended 7-12-1988 by Ord. No. 751; 1-10-1995 by Ord. No. 879]
Any person violating the provisions of this chapter shall, upon summary
conviction before a magistrate, pay a fine not to exceed $600 and costs of
prosecution. All prosecutions for violations under this chapter shall be
brought in the name of Upper Dublin Township, and all fines shall be paid to
the Treasurer of the Township and shall be applied to the general funds of said
Township.
Chapter 170
PEACE AND GOOD ORDER
[RESERVED]
Chapter 171
PEDDLING AND SOLICITING
§
171-1.   Word usage; definitions.
§
171-2.   Registration and identification card required.
§
171-3.   Exemptions.
§
171-4.   Application procedure; issuance of identification card; conditions of
issuance.
§
171-5.   Standards of conduct.
§
171-6.   Revocation of identification card.
§
171-7.   Violations and penalties.
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Board of Commissioners of the Township of Upper Dublin
5-13-1986 as Title 7,
Ch. 6, of the 1986 Code; amended in its entirety 1-13-2004 by Ord. No. 1122.
Subsequent amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
 
Disorderly conduct — See  Parks and recreation areas — See
Ch. 86.                     Ch. 168.
Vending machines — See    Precious metals and gems — See
Ch. 125, Part 1.            Ch. 177.
Littering — See
Ch. 145.
 
§ 171-1.   Word usage; definitions.
[Amended 1-13-2015 by Ord. No. 15-1297, § 1]
   A.   Word usage. The singular number includes the plural, and the masculine
includes the feminine and the neuter.
   B.   Terms defined. The following words shall be construed to have the
meanings set forth below:
      PEDDLING AND SOLICITING — The taking of orders for goods, wares or
merchandise, including, but not limited to, subscriptions for magazines or
other printed matter, the obtaining of contracts for home and building devices,
repairs and improvements, and the securing of contributions to various causes
and organizations, upon a residential premises or upon any street, sidewalk or
publicly owned recreational property in the Township.
      PERSON — Any natural person, association, partnership, firm or
corporation.
§ 171-2.   Registration and identification card required.
[Amended 3-10-2009 by Ord. No. 09- 1211, § 1; 1-13-2015 by Ord. No. 15-1297, §
1]
No person shall engage in peddling and soliciting in the Township without first
having registered with the Police Department and obtained an identification
card from the Chief of Police, or his designee, unless such person is subject
to one of the exemptions provided herein.
§ 171-3.   Exemptions. 
[Amended 3-10-2009 by Ord. No. 09-1211, § 2; 1-13-2015 by Ord. No. 15- 1297, §
1]
This chapter shall not apply to boys or girls under 16 years of age who take
orders for and deliver newspapers, greeting cards, candy and the like, or who
represent the Boy Scouts and Girl Scouts or similar organizations and take
orders for and deliver cookies and the like, nor to any person who works for an
organization which has registered with the Pennsylvania Department of State, as
required by that statute known as the “Solicitation of Funds for Charitable
Purposes Act,” 1  as amended from time to time, or which is exempt from such
registration.
1. Editor’s Note: See 10 P.S. § 162.1 et seq.
§ 171-4.   Application procedure; issuance of identification card; conditions
of issuance. 
[Amended 3-10-2009 by Ord. No. 09-1211, § 3; 1-13-2015 by Ord. No. 15-1297, §
1]
   A.   Any person desiring to engage in peddling and soliciting and who is not
subject to one of the exemptions provided herein shall submit a written
application to the Police Department on a form to be furnished by the Township,
accompanied by the license fee set forth in Chapter A163A and accompanied by
two photographs of himself, two and one-half inches by three inches in size,
taken within six months prior to the date of the application.
   B.   The applicant shall state his name, age, sex, home address, business
address, name and address of employer, if any, what he desires to canvass and
solicit for, the length of time he wishes to engage in this work, the make and
type of vehicle, if any, he will use, its registration number and whether he
has ever been convicted of a felony, misdemeanor or a crime of any kind
involving moral turpitude.
   C.   The applicant shall provide with the application a certified copy of a
Pennsylvania State Police Criminal History check conducted within 30 days of
the application.
   D.   The Chief of Police, or his designee, will issue to the applicant,
within 10 business days from the date of filing of the application, an
identification card to which one of the applicant’s photographs will be
affixed.
   E.   An identification card will not be issued to any person who has been
convicted of a felony or misdemeanor or a crime of any kind involving moral
turpitude, or who has been found guilty of violating a peddling and soliciting
ordinance within the prior five years, and such person shall not be allowed to
engage in canvassing and soliciting in the Township.
   F.   An identification card will be valid for a period of three months. Such
card may not be transferred from one person to another.
§ 171-5.   Standards of conduct.
[Amended 3-10-2009 by Ord. No. 09-1211, § 4; 1-13-2015 by Ord. No. 15-1297, §
1]
Every person to whom an identification card has been issued shall, in the
conduct of his activities, comply with the following standards of conduct:
   A.   He shall carry his identification card at all times and exhibit it to
any person on whom he shall call or with whom he shall talk, and, upon request,
to any police officer.
   B.   He shall not permit any person to have possession of his identification
card and shall immediately report its loss to the Police Department. He shall
not cause or permit his identification card to be altered or defaced in any
way.
   C.   He shall not enter or attempt to enter any dwelling without the
invitation or permission of the occupant, and shall immediately leave any
premises upon request of the occupant.
   D.   He shall not enter upon any premises where the owner or occupant has
requested that solicitation not be permitted either by posting the premises or
by registering that fact with the Upper Dublin Township Police Department. Upon
issuance of an identification card each solicitor will be given a list of such
registered premises.
   E.   He shall not engage in peddling and soliciting between 9:00 p.m. and 9:
00 a.m. nor after dark.
   F.   He shall not be guilty of any false pretense or misrepresentation, and,
particularly, he shall not represent his identification card to be an
endorsement of himself, his goods or services or the goods or services of his
employer.
   G.   He shall immediately surrender his identification card to the Police
Department upon revocation thereof.
§ 171-6.   Revocation of identification card. 
[Amended 3-10-2009 by Ord. No. 09-1211, § 5; 1-13- 2015 by Ord. No. 15-1297, §
1]
Any identification card may be revoked by the Chief of Police or his designee
if the holder fails to comply with the standards of conduct contained in §
171-5 hereof, or any of them, or upon ascertainment by the Police Department
that the holder has made a false statement in his application.
§ 171-7.   Violations and penalties.
Any person who shall engage in peddling and soliciting without registering with
the Police Department or who shall violate any other provisions of this chapter
shall, upon conviction thereof before a District Justice, be subject to a fine
or penalty of not less than $100 nor more than $600. Such fine or penalty shall
be collected as like fines or penalties are now by law collected.
Chapter 174
PLUMBING
§
174-1.   Adoption of standards.
§
174-2.   Modification of standards.
§
174-3.   Affect on prior actions and rights.
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Board of Commissioners of the Township of Upper Dublin
during codification; see
Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II Amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
 
Building construction — See  Mechanical standards — See
Ch. 73.                        Ch. 152.
Fees — See fee schedule.     Sewers — See
                               Ch. 192.
 
§ 174-1.   Adoption of standards.
A certain document, three copies of which are on file in the office of the
Secretary of the Township of Upper Dublin, being marked and designated as the
“BOCA National Plumbing Code, Ninth Edition, 1993,” as published by the
Building Officials and Code Administrators International, Inc., be and is
hereby adopted as the Plumbing Code of the Township of Upper Dublin in the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania; for the control of buildings and structures as
herein provided; and each and all of the regulations, provisions, penalties,
conditions and terms of said BOCA National Plumbing Code are hereby referred
to, adopted and made a part hereof, as if fully set out in this chapter, with
the additions, insertions and changes, if any, prescribed in §
174-2 of this chapter.
§ 174-2.   Modification of standards. 
[Added 9-8-2009 by Ord. No. 09-1220, § 1]
   A.   Changes from the BOCA National Plumbing Code, Ninth Edition, 1993, to
the Plumbing Code of the Township of Upper Dublin, are as follows:
      (1)   Section P-101.1, insert: “The Township of Upper Dublin” for Name of
Jurisdiction.
      (2)   Section P-113.2, insert: “The currently adopted fee schedule for
the Township of Upper Dublin as per the Township fee schedule.”
      (3)   Section P-116.4, for what a person shall be guilty of for a
violation, . insert: “a summary offense, punishable by a fine of not more than
$1,000.”
      (4)   Section P-117.2, for what a person shall be liable for unlawful
continuance of work, insert: “a fine of not more than $1,000.”
      (5)   Section P-121.0, delete all and add the following:
         SECTION 121.0 MEANS OF APPEAL
         121.1 An appeal from any decision of the Building Code Official may be
taken pursuant to the Uniform Construction Code as specified by Article III,
Uniform Construction Code, of
Chapter 73, Building Construction—Uniform Construction Code.
      (6)   Section 3408.2, insert: August 15, 1994.
   B.   The portions of the Plumbing Code of the Township of Upper Dublin which
equal or exceed the requirements of the Pennsylvania Construction Code Act and
the Uniform Construction Code as adopted under Chapter 73 shall continue in
full force and effect until such time as such provisions fail to equal or
exceed the minimum requirements adopted under
Chapter 73.
§ 174-3.   Affect on prior actions and rights.
Nothing in this chapter or in the Plumbing Code hereby adopted shall be
construed to affect any suit or proceeding impending in any court, or any
rights acquired or liability incurred or any cause or causes of action acquired
or existing under any act or ordinance hereby repealed, nor shall any just or
legal right or remedy of any character be lost, impaired or affected by this
chapter.
Chapter 177
PRECIOUS METALS AND GEMS
§
177-1.   Definitions.
§
177-2.   Licenses.
§
177-3.   Scales.
§
177-4.   Posting of prices.
§
177-5.   Records required.
§
177-6.   Inspection of records.
§
177-7.   Retention of articles.
§
177-8.   Prohibited transactions.
§
177-9.   Applicability.
§
177-10. Violations and penalties.
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Board of Commissioners of the Township of Upper Dublin
5-13-1986 as Title 7, Ch. 10, of the 1986 Code. Amendments noted where
applicable.]
§ 177-1.   Definitions.
The following definitions shall be applicable in this chapter:
   DEALER IN PRECIOUS METALS — An individual, partnership, association,
corporation or other business entity including an itinerant merchant doing
business in the Township of Upper Dublin which purchases or makes appraisals of
precious metals and their alloys for resale to refiners, brokers or the public.
   PRECIOUS METALS — Items of gold, silver, platinum and their alloys,
including but not limited to jewelry, but excluding coins and bullion.
§ 177-2.   Licenses.
   A.   No license shall be issued unless the applicant furnishes the township
with an application setting forth the following:
      (1)   The name, home and business address and telephone number of the
dealer in precious metals.
      (2)   The exact location(s), if other than the business address of the
dealer, where transactions in precious metals are to be conducted.
      (3)   Such other information as the township may require.
   B.   The licensee shall notify the township, in writing, within seventy-two
(72) hours of any changes in the information supplied to the township.
   C.   The applicant for a license hereunder shall pay an annual license fee
as set forth in the Township fee schedule. 1
   D.   The license shall be prominently displayed on the premises.
   E.   Each license shall be valid for one (1) place of business only. A
dealer with more than one (1) place of business must secure a license for each
location.
   F.   All licenses shall be conditioned upon continued compliance with the
provisions of this chapter. Any licensed dealer who violated any provision of
this chapter in addition to the fine prescribed by this chapter shall have his
license revoked by the township.
1 Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; (see
Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I); repealed and replaced 7-9-2024 by Ord. No.
24-1392.
§ 177-3.   Scales.
All scales or other devices used by dealers to weigh precious metals must be of
the type approved for commercial use in the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania and
must be inspected and sealed by the Bureau of Weights and Measures.
   A.   The dealer of precious metals must notify the Montgomery County Bureau
of Weights and Measures whenever a weighing device is moved from one (1)
location to another.
   B.   All weighing devices shall be so positioned that their indications may
be accurately read and the weighing operation observed by the seller.
§ 177-4.   Posting of prices.
The dealer shall post a conspicuous sign in proximity to the place where
weighings are made quoting the prices offered for the various units and
fineness of precious metals.
§ 177-5.   Records required.
All dealers in precious metals shall maintain records of each transaction in
which they purchase precious metals from the public or give a statement of
appraisal. Such information will be kept in a bound book and shall include, at
least, the following information:
   A.   The name, current address and telephone number of the person making the
transaction as evidenced by two (2) documents of identification, one (1) of
which must prove the individual is at least eighteen (18) years of age.
   B.   The date and time of transaction.
   C.   An accurate description of each item.
   D.   The source of acquisition.
   E.   The name, current address and telephone number of the purchaser of such
property.
   F.   Such other information as the Chief of Police shall require.
§ 177-6.   Inspection of records.
The book required by §
177-5 shall be subject to the periodical inspection and approval of the Upper
Dublin Township Police Department.
   A.   The dealer shall return to the office of the Chief of Police a sheet,
to be furnished by the Police Department, showing all business transacted the
previous week and giving the information required by §
177-5.
   B.   The information given to the Police Department shall be made under
penalty of prosecution pursuant to 18 Pa.C.S.A. § 4904(b) (relating to unworn
falsification to authorities).
§ 177-7.   Retention of articles.
The dealer shall retain articles purchased for a period of fifteen (15) days in
their original condition, and such articles shall be subject to examination by
the Police Department.
§ 177-8.   Prohibited transactions.
No dealer, or his clerk or employee, shall purchase any article from any person
under eighteen (18) years of age, anyone intoxicated, any habitual drunkard or
any person known to be a thief, an associate of thieves or receiver of stolen
property, or any person he has reason to suspect to be such, and must require
that valid identification be presented to the dealer prior to the transaction
of any business.
§ 177-9.   Applicability.
This chapter shall not apply to the purchase by a retailer of merchandise from
an established wholesaler located within or outside of the boundaries of Upper
Dublin Township.
§ 177-10.   Violations and penalties.
[Amended 7-12-1988 by Ord. No. 7512 ]
Any dealer in precious metals who violates any provisions of this chapter
shall, upon summary conviction, be subject to a fine of not more than one
thousand dollars ($1,000.) and costs.
2 Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see
Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
Chapter 180
PROPERTY MAINTENANCE
ARTICLE I
Property Maintenance Code
§
180-1.   Adoption of standards.
§
180-2.   Amendments.
§
180-3.   Effect on prior actions and rights.
ARTICLE II
Property Transfer Certification
§
180-4.   Intent.
§
180-5.   Definitions.
§
180-6.   Certification of zoning classification, use, and code compliance
§
180-7.   Procedure to obtain certification.
§
180-8.   Violations and penalties.
GENERAL REFERENCES
 
Building construction - See  Littering - See
Ch. 73.                      Ch. 145.
Burning - See                Mechanical standards - See
Ch. 79.                      Ch. 152.
Dumping - See                Plumbing - See
Ch. 91.                      Ch. 174.
Excavations - See            Snow and ice removal - See
Ch. 99.                      Ch. 198.
Fire prevention - See        Swimming pools - See
Ch. 117.                     Ch. 218.
Junkyards - See
Ch. 135.
 
ARTICLE I
Property Maintenance Code
[Adopted 10-14-2008 by Ord. No. 1206, § 1; Amended 2-9-2010 by Ord. No. 10-
1228, § 1]
§ 180-1.   Adoption of standards.
A certain document, three copies of which are on file in the office of the
Secretary of the Township of Upper Dublin, being marked and designated as the
“International Property Maintenance Code, 2006,” as published by the
International Code Council, Inc., is hereby adopted as the property maintenance
code of the Township of Upper Dublin, in the Common wealth of Pennsylvania, to
regulate and govern the condition and maintenance of all property, buildings
and structures as herein provided; and to provide the standards for supplied
utilities and facilities and other physical things and conditions essential to
ensure structures are safe, sanitary and fit for occupation and use; and to
provide for the condemnation and demolition of buildings and structures unfit
for human occupancy and use; and to provide for the issuance of permits and
collection of fees therefore; and to refer to, adopt, and make a part hereof
each and all of the regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of
said International Property Maintenance Code, as if fully set out in this
ordinance, with the additions, insertions, deletions and changes specified in §
180-2 of this chapter.
§ 180-2.   Amendments.
The International Property Maintenance Code is amended and revised in the
following respects:
   A.   Section 101.1, insert: “The Township of Upper Dublin.” as the name of
the jurisdiction.
   B.   Section 103.1, delete and replace with:
      103.1 General. The Township Code Enforcement Department shall serve as
the department of property maintenance and the Building Code Official as
designated in
Chapter 73 shall serve as the code official under this
Chapter 180.
   C.   Section 103.5, delete and replace with:
      103.5 Fees. The fees for activities and services performed by the
department in carrying out its responsibilities under this code shall be
indicated by the fee schedule adopted in the Township fee schedule.
   D.   Section 105, add the following:
      105.5 Housing Permit. No person shall lease or rent any dwelling,
dwelling unit or rooming unit, motel unit or hotel unit in the Township without
first making application to and obtaining a permit from the code official to
rent or lease such dwelling unit or rooming unit.
      105.5.1 Initial Inspection. A housing permit shall be initially issued
after an inspection by the code official determines compliance with the
standards of this code and all other applicable standards of the Township
      105.5.2 Term. Housing permits shall be issued for a term of two years and
may be renewed for successive two-year terms so long as the unit or units
remain in compliance with the applicable standards.
      105.5.3 Periodic Inspections. The Township will inspect all rental units
within the two-year permit term.
      105.5.4 Inspections for Large Buildings. For large buildings with over 10
rental units, the Township will make monthly inspections of all empty units.
The owners of large buildings shall notify the code official by letter of the
vacant units so that they can be inspected. Motels and hotels will be inspected
during regular periodic inspections, and are subject to spot-check inspections.
      105.5.5 Permit Application. A housing permit application shall set forth
the name of the applicant, together with the address of the dwelling, the
dwelling unit (or units) or the rooming unit (or units) which are or will be
offered for rent and such other information as may be required by the code
official; such application will constitute an agreement between the applicant
and the Township for the faithful compliance by the applicant and all agents,
servants, employees or representatives of the applicant with all ordinances,
rules and regulations of the Township now in effect or hereafter adopted
relating to the basic equipment, physical condition, maintenance and occupancy
of dwellings and dwelling units, motel and hotel units.
      105.5.6 Permit Fees. A housing permit fee shall be paid by the applicant
at the time of permit application in accordance with the permit fee schedule
adopted in the Township fee schedule.
      105.5.7 Owner or Agent. A housing permit will not be issued or renewed
for any person who does not either reside or have an office in the County of
Montgomery, Commonwealth of Pennsylvania unless he designates in writing an
agent in the County of Montgomery, Commonwealth of Pennsylvania for the receipt
of any notice issued with respect to this code.
   E.   Section 106.4, delete and replace with:
      106.4 Violation Penalties. Any person who shall violate a provision of
this code, or fail to comply therewith, or with any of the requirements
thereof, shall be liable for fines and penalties not exceeding $1,000, which
fines and penalties may be collected by suit or summary proceeding brought in
the name of the Township before a district justice in like manner as debts of a
like amount are now by law recoverable. Each day that a violation continues
shall be deemed a separate offense.
   F.   Section 106.5, delete and replace with:
      106.5 Abatement of Violation. The imposition of the penalties herein
prescribed shall not preclude the Township from instituting appropriate action
to restrain, correct or abate a violation, or to prevent illegal occupancy of a
building, structure, or premises, or to stop an illegal act, conduct, business
or utilization of the building, structure or premises.
      106.5.1 Self Help. If a violation has not been corrected within the time
designated for such compliance and the Board of Commissioners finds that the
continuation of such violation constitutes a public nuisance or hazard, it may
order the correction of such violation using Township resources to accomplish
such corrections, and may charge the cost thereof to the violator and collect
such cost by lien and/or otherwise as may be authorized by law.
   G.   Section 111.2, delete and replace with:
      111.2 Board of Appeals. The board of appeals under this
Chapter 180 shall be the board of appeals constituted under
Chapter 73.
   H.   Section 111.4.1, delete and replace with:
      111.4.1 Procedure. The board of appeals under this
Chapter 180 shall follow the procedures established by the board of appeals
constituted under
Chapter 73.
   I.   Section 111.7, delete and replace with:
      111.7 Review of Decision. Any person aggrieved by a decision of the board
of appeals shall have the right to apply for review of that decision by an
appropriate court of competent jurisdiction.
   J.   Section 302.4, insert “10 inches” for the height limit of weeds.
   K.   Section 302.8, replace “no inoperative or unlicensed motor vehicle”
with “not more than one inoperative, uninspected or unregistered vehicle.”
   L.   Section 305.3, add:
      305.3.1 Mold. Mold shall be removed from rental units, including motel
and hotel rooms, by a certified mold remediation company and a report
documenting the mold remediation shall be provided to the code official.
   M.   Section 602.3, insert “October 1 to May 15" as the inclusive dates.
   N.   Section 602.3, add:
      602.3.1, Temporary/Portable Space Heaters. Temporary/portable space
heaters are prohibited in rental units, including motel and hotel rooms.
Examples include kerosene, propane, and electric space heaters.
      602.3.2, Heating Equipment Maintenance. Heating equipment in rental
units, including motel and hotel rooms, shall be cleaned, serviced, and
certified once every two years. Certification of maintenance shall be provided
to the code official.
      602.3.3, Fireplace and Chimney Maintenance. Fireplaces and chimneys,
including gas fireplaces, in rental units, including motel and hotel rooms,
shall be cleaned, serviced, and inspected as required by an appropriately
trained and certified person. Certification of maintenance shall be provided to
the code official.
   O.   Section 605.2, delete and replace with:
      605.2, Receptacles. Every habitable space in a dwelling unit shall
contain at least two separate and remote receptacle outlets.
      605.2.1, Wet Areas. Ground fault circuit interrupter (GFCI) receptacle
outlets are required within six feet of any water source per NEC 210.8.
      605.2.2, Laundry Areas. Every laundry area shall contain at least one
GFCI receptacle outlet.
      605.2.3, Bathrooms. Every bathroom shall contain at least one GFCI
receptacle outlet. Only GFCI receptacle outlets may be used in new bathrooms.
   P.   Section 702, add:
      702.5, Fire Escapes. Exterior fire escapes must be maintained in good
structural and working order.
   Q.   Section 704, add:
      704.5, Fire Extinguishers. In all rental units, including motel and hotel
rooms, a minimum size three pound A.B.C. fire extinguisher must be located in a
visible location near or in all kitchen areas. Fire extinguishers must be
replaced per manufacturer specifications or at least every 10 years, whichever
period is shorter.
   R.   Section 705, add:
      SECTION 705
      OUTDOOR COOKING
      705.1 Outdoor Cooking. No charcoal, wood, gas, or liquid fuel-fired
cooking equipment shall be used on any patio or patio balcony of any rental
unit, including motel and hotel rooms. Fuel for outdoor cooking equipment shall
not be stored within any unit or on any patio or patio balcony of any
multifamily dwelling. Outdoor cooking must be conducted on the ground at least
15 feet from any building and with the permission of the property owner.
§ 180-3.   Effect on prior actions and rights.
Nothing in this chapter and the International Property Maintenance Code hereby
adopted shall be construed to affect any suit or proceeding impending in any
court or any rights acquired or liability incurred or any cause or causes of
action acquired or existing under any act or ordinance hereby repealed, nor
shall any just or legal right or remedy of any character be lost, impaired or
affected by this chapter.
ARTICLE II
Property Transfer Certification
[Adopted 2-9-2010 by Ord. No. 10-1228, § 1]
§ 180-4.   Intent.
   A.   The Board of Commissioners of the Township of Upper Dublin finds that
many new owners of properties in the Township are not aware of the zoning
classification of their property or of the requirements and limitations imposed
upon their property by the Code of the Township of Upper Dublin. This lack of
knowledge on the part of property owners may result in unsafe, unhealthy, and/
or nuisance properties.
   B.   In order to promote the public health, safety, and welfare, the Board
of Commissioners finds and declares that all sellers of property in the
Township shall be required to file with the Township and deliver to the
purchaser not later than the settlement date for the sale of the property, a
certification showing the zoning classification for the property and a
certification indicating the property’s compliance status with the requirements
of the Township Code relating to sidewalks, smoke alarms, house numbering, and
sump pumps.
§ 180-5.   Definitions.
As used in this Article, the following words and phrases shall have the
meanings indicated:
   OWNER—Any person, partnership, association, corporation, or fiduciary having
legal or equitable title or any interest in any real property. Whenever used in
any clause prescribing or imposing a penalty, the term “owner,” as applied to
partnerships and associations, shall mean the partners, or members thereof, and
as applied to corporations, the officers thereof.
   PROPERTY—All real property, or any interest therein, situated in Upper
Dublin Township, Montgomery County, Pennsylvania.
   PURCHASER—Any person, partnership, association, corporation, or fiduciary
that will receive legal or equitable title or any interest in any real property
from the owner.
§ 180-6.   Certification of zoning classification, use, and code compliance.
In Upper Dublin Township, it shall be unlawful for any owner to transfer his
property, or any interest therein, unless the owner shall first deliver to the
purchaser at or prior to the date of settlement or transfer the following
certifications, each of which must be dated within 90 days of the transfer,
signed by the owner and purchaser, or their agents, and a copy filed with the
Township within 7 days after the transfer:
   A.   Zoning and use classification. Upon application, the Township Zoning
Officer shall certify the zoning classification of the property to be sold and
whether the use of the property as represented by the applicant conforms to
Township Code.
      (1)   Application for certification statement. The application for
certification statement shall be made on forms provided by the Township and
shall set forth such information as the Zoning Officer may require including
the following: the address of the property; the name and address of the current
owners and proposed purchasers, if known, together with their authorized
agents, if any; a complete statement of the current use or uses to which the
property is being put.
   B.   Sidewalk certificate of good repair. Upon application, the Director of
Code Enforcement shall determine whether the sidewalks adjacent to a property
are in good repair as required by
Chapter 207 of the Township Code.
      (1)   The Director shall issue a certification if the sidewalks are in
good repair.
      (2)   If the sidewalks are not in good repair, the Director shall issue a
report within five business days of the inspection that clearly identifies the
Township Code violations and the remedial action required for compliance. Upon
correction of all violations so that the sidewalks are in good repair, the
applicant shall notify the Director, in writing, for a re-inspection to be
conducted within five days from such notification.
   C.   Smoke detectors. The owner shall certify that smoke detectors have been
installed and are functioning properly as required by
Chapters 57 and
73 of the Township Code and the Pennsylvania Construction Code Act and Uniform
Construction Code.
   D.   Building numbers. The owner shall certify that building numbers have
been conspicuously posted in such manner that they are visible and legible from
the street as required by
Chapter 76 of the Township Code.
   E.   Sumps and drains. The owner shall certify that all sumps and drains on
the property are installed and properly functioning as required by
Chapter 206,
Chapter 207, and
Chapter 218 of the Township Code.
§ 180-7.   Procedure to obtain certification.
   A.   Applications shall be submitted on forms provided by the Township,
shall be completely filled out and shall be accompanied by a fee, the amount of
which shall be set by the Board of Commissioners.
   B.   The application for a certificate under this section authorizes the
Township to inspect the premises being transferred. Such inspection shall not
be required, however, and the Township may rely solely upon the representations
made in the application for certification as the basis for issuance of a
certificate.
   C.   The Township shall respond to an application within 10 business days of
its receipt.
§ 180-8.   Violations and penalties.
   A.   If any owner fails to comply with any provisions required by this
Article, then in any action, at law, or in equity, instituted by a purchaser
against an owner, it shall be conclusively presumed that the owner, at the time
of the signing of such agreement, represented and warranted to the purchaser
that such property was being used in compliance with the then existing Township
Code provisions relating to the certifications required above.
   B.   Any person who submits a false application to the Township, or who
obtains a certification through misrepresentation, or who fails to provide the
certifications required by this Article and whose property at the time of
transfer was not in compliance with the then existing Township Code provisions
relating to the certifications required above, shall be guilty of violating the
provisions of this section and, upon conviction thereof in a summary
proceeding, shall be subject to payment of a civil fine of not more than $600
and costs of prosecution, in addition to such other remedies as may be provided
by law or equity.
Chapter 192
SEWERS
Part 1
General Provisions
ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§
192-1.   Purpose and policy.
§
192-2.   Abbreviations.
§
192-3.   Definitions.
§
192-4.   Sanitary sewer service areas.
§
192-5.   Wastewater collection conveyance system.
ARTICLE II
Connections
§
192-6.   (Reserved).
§
192-7.   Connections required.
§
192-8.   Individual systems.
§
192-9.   Compliance required; rules and regulations.
§
192-10.   Violations and penalties.
Part 2
Wastewater Control Regulations
ARTICLE III
General Regulations
§
192-11.   Rules and regulations.
§
192-12.   (Reserved).
§
192-13.   (Reserved).
ARTICLE IV
Discharge Regulations
§
192-14.   Prohibited discharge standards.
§
192-15.   Specific pollutant discharge limitations.
§
192-16.   Dilution.
§
192-17.   (Reserved).
§
192-18.   (Reserved).
ARTICLE V
Wastewater Discharge Permit Administration
§
192-19.   Permit required; update of information.
§
192-20.   Existing and new connections.
§
192-21.   Contents of permit application.
§
192-22.   Certification.
ARTICLE VI
Pretreatment of Wastewater
§
192-23.   Adoption of federal and state categorical pretreatment standards;
construal of provisions.
§
192-24.   Accidental discharge/slug control plans.
§
192-25.   Hauled wastewater.
§
192-26.   Oil and grease interceptor/trap systems.
§
192-27.   Additional pretreatment measures.
§
192-28.   (Reserved).
§
192-29.   (Reserved).
§
192-30.   (Reserved).
§
192-31.   (Reserved).
§
192-32.   (Reserved).
§
192-33.   (Reserved).
§
192-34.   (Reserved).
ARTICLE VII
Reporting Requirements
§
192-35.   Baseline monitoring reports.
§
192-36.   Reports of changed conditions.
§
192-37.   Reports of potential problems.
§
192-38.   Reports to unpermitted users.
§
192-39.   Notice of violation; repeat sampling and reporting.
§
192-40.   Notification of discharge of hazardous waste.
§
192-41.   Recordkeeping.
§
192-42.   (Reserved).
§
192-43.   (Reserved).
§
192-44.   (Reserved).
§
192-45.   (Reserved).
§
192-46.   (Reserved).
§
192-47.   (Reserved).
ARTICLE VIII
Compliance Monitoring
§
192-48.   Right-of-entry inspection and sampling.
§
192-49.   Search warrants.
§
192-50.   Public access to information.
§
192-51.   (Reserved).
ARTICLE IX
Enforcement Remedies
§
192-52.   Surcharge in lieu of enforcement remedy.
§
192-53.   Administrative remedies.
§
192-54.   Judicial enforcement remedies.
§
192-55.   Supplemental enforcement action.
ARTICLE X
Affirmative Defenses to Discharge Violations
§
192-56.   Upset.
§
192-57.   Prohibited discharge standards.
§
192-58.   Bypass.
ARTICLE XI
Building Sewers and Connections
§
192-59.   General regulations.
ARTICLE XII
Ambler Wastewater Treatment Plant
§
192-60.   General provisions.
§
192-61.   Jurisdiction.
§
192-62.   National categorical pretreatment standards.
§
192-63.   Right of revision.
§
192-64.   Wastewater analysis.
§
192-65.   Regulation of waste received from other jurisdictions.
§
192-66.   Enforcement remedies.
§
192-67.   Show-cause hearing.
§
192-68.   (Reserved).
§
192-69.   (Reserved).
ARTICLE XIII
Grinder Pumps
§
192-70.   Purpose.
§
192-71.   General provisions.
§
192-72.   Installation.
§
192-73.   Operation and maintenance.
§
192-74.   Documentation.
§
192-75.   Gravity connection.
§
192-76.   Remedies.
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Board of Commissioners of the Township of Upper Dublin
6-14-2011 by Ord. No. 11-1242. Amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
 
Excavations — See  Streets and sidewalks — See
Ch. 99               Ch. 207
Plumbing — See
Ch. 174
 
Part 1
General Provisions
ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 192-1.   Purpose and policy.
   A.   The purposes of these regulations are to:
      (1)   Set forth uniform requirements for direct and indirect
contributions to sanitary sewer systems within the boundaries of Upper Dublin
Township and to adjacent sanitary sewer systems, including the systems of
Ambler Borough, Abington Township, Bucks County Water and Sewer Authority,
Horsham Water and Sewer Authority, Springfield Township, and Upper Moreland
Hatboro Joint Sewer Authority.
      (2)   Enable the Township, adjacent municipalities, and sanitary sewer
operators to comply with the Clean Water Act, the Pennsylvania Clean Streams
Law, General Pretreatment Regulations (40 CFR 403), and other applicable
federal, state and local laws and regulations.
      (3)   Prevent the discharge of pollutants to sanitary sewer systems that
will:
         (a)   Interfere with the operation of the sanitary sewer systems.
         (b)   Contaminate resulting sludge from the sanitary sewer systems.
         (c)   Cause the sanitary sewer systems to violate their respective
NPDES discharge permits.
         (d)   Pass through the sanitary sewer systems, inadequately treated,
into receiving waters or the atmosphere.
         (e)   Be otherwise incompatible with the sanitary sewer systems.
         (f)   Improve the opportunity to recycle and reclaim wastewater and
sludge from the sanitary sewer systems.
         (g)   Protect the general public and sanitary sewer system personnel
who may be affected by sewage and sludge.
   B.   These regulations provide for the regulation of direct and indirect
users to the sanitary sewer systems within Upper Dublin Township through
enforcement of general requirements for all users; monitoring and enforcement
activities; and reporting and compliance activities.
   C.   These regulations shall apply to all users who discharge wastewater to
the sanitary sewer systems within the Township.
   D.   Portions of the sanitary sewer systems within the Township discharge
sewage to adjacent sanitary sewer systems for treatment. The Township may from
time to time, upon recommendation from the appropriate officials of the
sanitary sewer systems, adopt regulations by resolution or ordinance applicable
to users’ sewage treated by the respective sanitary sewer systems. However,
unless otherwise specified, the regulations set forth in this chapter shall
apply to all users in the Township who discharge sewage that is collected,
transported, and/or treated by the sanitary sewer systems, excepting those
instances where the regulations of the sanitary sewer systems are more
stringent than those set forth herein. Where the respective sanitary sewer
system regulations are more stringent, the more stringent regulations shall
apply.
§ 192-2.   Abbreviations.
The following abbreviations shall have the designated meanings:
ASTM  American Society for Testing and Materials
BMP   Best Management Practice
BMR   Baseline Monitoring Report
BOD   Biochemical Oxygen Demand
CBOD  Carbonaceous Biochemical Oxygen Demand
CFR   Code of Federal Regulations
CIU   Categorical Industrial User
COD   Chemical Oxygen Demand
DEP   Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection
EPA   Environmental Protection Agency
GPD   Gallons per Day
IU    Industrial User
L     Liter
mg    Milligrams
MGD   Million Gallons per Day
mg/l  Milligrams per Liter
NPDES National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System
NSCIU Non-Significant Categorical Industrial User
POTW  Publicly Owned Treatment Works
RCRA  Resource Conservation and Recovery Act
SIC   Standard Industrial Classification
SRI   Significant Industrial User
SNC   Significant Noncompliance
SWDA  Solid Waste Disposal Act, 42 USC § 6901 et seq.
TSS   Total suspended solids
USC   United States Code
WPCF  Water Pollution Control Federation
WWTP  Waste Water Treatment Plant
 
§ 192-3.   Definitions. 
[Amended 5-13-2014 by Ord. No. 14-1290, § 1]
Unless the context specifically indicates otherwise, the following terms and
phrases, as used in these regulations, shall have the following meanings:
   ACT or THE ACT — The Federal Water Pollution Control Act, also known as the
“Clean Water Act,” as amended, 33 USC § 1251 et seq.
   AMBLER — The Borough of Ambler.
   AMBLER WASTEWATER TREATMENT PLANT (AWTP) — The sewer treatment plant owned
by Ambler and operated for the benefit of Ambler and areas of the Townships of
Lower Gwynedd, Upper Dublin, Whitpain and Whitemarsh served by said POTW
pursuant to an intermunicipal agreement between and among the said
municipalities dated December 16, 1959, as amended by several subsequent
agreements.
   APPROVAL AUTHORITY — The Regional Administrator of the EPA in a nonNPDES
state or NPDES state without an approved state pretreatment program, and the
Director in an NPDES state with an approved state pretreatment program.
   AUTHORIZED AGENT — An employee of the operator, professional engineer,
industrial pretreatment program coordinator, plumbing inspector, or other
qualified person authorized by the operator to administer and enforce this
section.
   AUTHORIZED REPRESENTATIVE OF INDUSTRIAL, COMMERCIAL, INSTITUTIONAL OR
SIGNIFICANT INDUSTRIAL USER:
   A.   If the user is a corporation:
      (1)   The president, secretary, treasurer or a vice president of the
corporation in charge of a principal business function, or any other person who
performs similar policy or decision-making functions for the corporation; or
      (2)   The manager of one or more manufacturing, production or operation
facilities, provided the manager is authorized to make management decisions
that govern the operation of the regulated facility including having the
explicit or implicit duty of making major capital investment recommendations,
and initiate and direct other comprehensive measures to assure long-term
environmental compliance with environmental laws and regulations; can ensure
that the necessary systems are established or actions taken to gather complete
and accurate information for wastewater discharge permit requirements; and
where authority to sign documents has been assigned or delegated to the manager
in accordance with corporate procedures.
   B.   If the user is a partnership or sole proprietorship: a general partner
or proprietor, respectively.
   C.   If the user is a federal, state or local facility: a director or
highest official appointed or designated to oversee the operation and
performance of the activities of the government facility or his or her
designee.
   D.   The individuals described in Subsections A through C above may
designate another authorized representative if the authorization is in writing,
the authorization specifies the individual or position responsible for the
overall operation of the facility from which the discharge originates or having
overall responsibility for environmental matters for the company, and the
written authorization is submitted to a POTW.
   BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES (BMPs) — Schedules of activities, prohibitions of
practices, maintenance procedures, and other management practices to implement
the prohibitions listed in 40 CFR 403.5(a)(1) and (b). BMPs include treatment
requirements, operating procedures, and practices to control plant site runoff,
spillage or leaks, sludge or waste disposal, or drainage from raw materials
storage.
   BIOCHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND (BOD) — The quantity of oxygen utilized in the
biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory procedure,
five days at 20ºC, expressed in terms of weight and concentration [milligrams
per liter (mg/l)]
   BUCKS COUNTY WATER AND SEWER AUTHORITY (BCWSA) — The municipal authority
that owns and operates a substantial portion of the sanitary sewer system
within Upper Dublin Township.
   BUILDING SEWER — A private sewer conveying wastewater from the premises of a
user to a POTW.
   BYPASS — The intentional diversion of waste streams from any portion of an
industrial user’s pretreatment facility.
   CARBONACEOUS BIOCHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND (CBOD) — The quantity of oxygen
utilized in the biochemical oxidation of carbonaceous organic matter under
standard laboratory procedures, five days at 20ºC, expressed in terms of
concentration [milligrams per liter (mg/l)].
   CATEGORICAL INDUSTRIAL USER — An industrial user subject to a categorical
pretreatment standard or categorical standard.
   CATEGORICAL STANDARDS — Any regulation containing pollutant discharge limits
promulgated by the EPA in accordance with Section 307(b) and (c) of the Act (33
U.S.C. § 1317) which apply to a specific category of users and which appear in
40 CFR, Chapter I, Subchapter N, Parts 405 - 471, or any amendment thereto.
   CHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND or COD — A measure of the oxygen required to oxidize
all compounds, both organic and inorganic, in water.
   COMMONWEALTH — The Commonwealth of Pennsylvania
   COMPOSITE SAMPLE — A timed sequential collection of samples of equal volume
or a collection of grab samples combined in a single reservoir to determine
concentration(s) of pollutant(s).
   CONTROL AUTHORITY — Refers to the respective operator of a sanitary sewer
system or treatment plant.
   COOLING WATER — The water discharged from any use, such as air conditioning,
cooling or refrigeration, or to which the only pollutant added is heat and
which does not contain a level of contaminants detectably higher than that of
the source of the water.
   DAILY MAXIMUM — The maximum allowable discharge of a pollutant during a
calendar day. Where maximum limitations are expressed in units of mass, the
daily discharge is the total mass discharged over the course of a day. Where
“daily maximum” limitations are expressed in terms of concentration, the daily
discharge is the arithmetic average measurement of the pollutant derived from
all measurements taken that day.
   DEPARTMENT — The Department of Public Works of the Township of Upper Dublin.
   DIRECT DISCHARGE — The discharge of treated or untreated wastewater directly
to the waters of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
   ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AGENCY (EPA) — The United States Environmental
Protection Agency or, where appropriate, the term may also be used as a
designation for the Administrator or other duly authorized official of said
agency.
   FLASH POINT — The temperature at which a liquid or volatile solid gives off
vapor sufficient to form an ignitable mixture with the air near the surface of
the liquid or within the test vessel “Flash point” is determined by the
Tagliabue open cup method (American Society for Testing and Materials D1310-
63), usually abbreviated “TOC.”
   GRAB SAMPLE — A sample which is taken from a waste stream without regard to
the flow in the waste stream and over a period of time not to exceed 15
minutes.
   GRINDER PUMP — Any electric-motor-driven, submersible pump capable of
macerating all material found in normal domestic sanitary sewage, including,
but not limited to, reasonable amounts of objects, such as plastics, sanitary
napkins, disposable diapers, rubber and the like, to fine slurry, and pumping
this material through a small-diameter discharge. [Added 5-13-2014 by Ord. No.
14-1290]
   HOLDING TANK WASTE — Any waste from holding tanks, such as vessels, chemical
toilets, campers, trailers, septic tanks and vacuum-pump tank trucks.
   HORSHAM WATER AND SEWER AUTHORITY (HWSA) — A municipal authority that owns
and operates a portion of the sanitary sewer system within Upper Dublin
Township.
   INDIRECT DISCHARGE — The discharge or the introduction of pollutants from
any nondomestic source into a POTW, including holding tank waste discharged
into the system.
   INDUSTRIAL, COMMERCIAL OR INSTITUTIONAL USER — An industrial, commercial or
institutional source of indirect discharge regulated under the federal, state
or local laws and regulations.
   INDUSTRIAL WASTE — Any liquid, gaseous or solid substance resulting from any
manufacturing or industrial processes.
   INSTANTANEOUS MAXIMUM ALLOWABLE DISCHARGE LIMIT — The maximum concentration
of a pollutant allowed to be discharged at any time, determined from the
analysis of any discrete or composited sample collected; independent of the
industrial flow rate and the duration of the sampling event.
   INTERFERENCE — A discharge which alone or in conjunction with a discharge or
discharges from other sources inhibits or disrupts a POTW, its treatment
processes, operations, maintenance or its sludge processes, use or disposal
which contributes to the violation of any requirements of the POTW’s NPDES
permit. The term includes prevention of sewage sludge use or disposal by a POTW
in compliance with any of the following statutory/regulatory provisions or
permits issued thereunder, or any more stringent state or local regulations:
Section 405 of the Act; the Solid Waste Disposal Act, including Title II
commonly referred to as the “Resource Conservation and Recovery Act (RCRA)”;
any state regulations contained in any state sludge management plan prepared
pursuant to Subtitle D of the Solid Waste Disposal Act; the Clean Air Act; the
Toxic Substances Control Act; and the Marine Protection, Research and
Sanctuaries Act which are applicable to the method of disposal or use employed
by a POTW.
   INTERMUNICIPAL AGREEMENT — The December 1959 agreement and amendments
thereto between Ambler Borough and the Townships of Lower Gwynedd, Upper
Dublin, Whitpain and Whitemarsh, and as applicable to the Bucks County Water
and Sewer Authority, to provide for the discharge of certain sewage from the
municipalities to the Ambler Wastewater Treatment Plant.
   MEDICAL WASTE — Isolation wastes, infectious agents, human blood and blood
products, pathological wastes, sharps, body parts, contaminated bedding,
surgical wastes, potentially contaminated laboratory wastes and dialysis
wastes.
   MIDDLE TIER CATEGORICAL INDUSTRIAL USER — A user which meets the
requirements found in 40 CFR 403.12(e)(3) and maybe classified as such upon a
determination made solely by the operator.
   NATIONAL CATEGORICAL PRETREATMENT STANDARD or PRETREATMENT STANDARD — Any
regulation containing pollutant discharge limits promulgated by the EPA in
accordance with Section 307(b) and (c) of the Act (33 U.S.C. § 1317), which
applies to a specific category of industrial users and pretreatment standards
as published in 40 CFR Chapter I, Subchapter N, Parts 401–471.
   NATIONAL POLLUTION DISCHARGE ELIMINATION SYSTEM OR NPDES PERMIT — A permit
issued pursuant to Section 402 of the Act (33 U.S.C. § 1342).
   NATIONAL PROHIBITIVE DISCHARGE STANDARD or PROHIBITIVE DISCHARGE STANDARD —
Any regulation developed under the authority of Section 307(b) of the Act and
40 CFR 403.5.
   NEW SOURCE —
   A.   Any building, structure, facility or installation from which there is
(or may be) a discharge of pollutants, the construction of which commenced
after the publication of proposed pretreatment standards under Section 307(c)
of the Act which will be applicable to such source if such standards are
thereafter promulgated in accordance with that section, provided that:
      (1)   The building, structure, facility or installation is constructed at
a site at which no other source is located.
      (2)   The building, structure, facility or installation totally replaces
the process or production equipment that causes the discharge of pollutants at
an existing source.
      (3)   The production or wastewater generating processes of the building,
structure, facility or installation are substantially independent of an
existing source at the same site In determining whether these are substantially
independent, factors such as the extent to which the new facility is integrated
with the existing plant, and the extent to which the new facility is engaged in
the same general type of activity as the existing source, should be considered.
   B.   Construction on a site at which an existing source is located results
in a modification rather than a new source if the construction does not create
a new building, structure, facility or installation meeting the criteria of
Subsection A(1)(b) or (c) above but otherwise alters, replaces or adds to
existing process or production equipment.
   C.   Construction of new source as defined under this subsection has
commenced if the owner or operator has:
      (1)   Begun, or caused to begin, as part of a continuous on-site
construction program:
         (a)   Any placement, assembly, or installation of facilities or
equipment.
         (b)   Significant site preparation work, including clearing,
excavation or removal of existing buildings, structures or facilities which is
necessary for the placement, assembly or installation of new source facilities
or equipment.
      (2)   Entered into a binding contractual obligation for the purchase of
facilities or equipment which are intended to be used in its operation within a
reasonable time. Options to purchase or contracts which can be terminated or
modified without substantial loss and contracts for feasibility, engineering
and design studies do not constitute a contractual obligation under this
subsection.
   NONCONTACT COOLING WATER — Water used for cooling which does not come into
direct contact with any raw material, intermediate product, waste product or
finished product.
   NONDOMESTIC USERS — Commercial, industrial, municipal or other users whose
discharge may have an effect on the sanitary sewer system.
   NON-SIGNIFICANT CATEGORICAL INDUSTRIAL USER — A user which meets the
requirements found in 40 CFR 403.3 (v)(2) and maybe classified as such upon a
determination made solely by the Authority.
   OCCUPIED BUILDING — Any structure erected and intended for continuous or
periodic habitation, occupancy or use by human beings or animals and from which
structure sanitary sewage and industrial wastes, or either thereof, is or may
be discharged, and a portion of all of which structure is situate 300 feet or
less form the nearest edge of the right-of-way or a sanitary sewer easement,
provided that such property abuts or has direct access to the right-of-way or
easement.
   OPERATOR — An entity lawfully operating a public sanitary sewer system in
the Township or receiving sewage from within the Township for further
conveyance and/or treatment. Operators serving the Township include, but may
not be limited to Bucks County Water and Sewer Authority (“BCWSA”), Upper
Moreland-Hatboro Joint Sewer Authority (“UMHJSA”), Horsham Water and Sewer
Authority (“HWSA”), Ambler Borough, Abington Township and Springfield Township.
   PASS-THROUGH — A discharge which exits a POTW into waters of the United
States or the Commonwealth or the atmosphere in quantities or concentrations
which alone, or in conjunction with discharge(s) from other sources, are a
cause of a violation of any requirement of a POTW’s NPDES permit or a violation
of any air emission standard set by the Clean Air Act or state or local rules
and regulations governing emissions to the air (including an increase in the
magnitude of duration of violation).
   PERSON — Any individual, partnership, co-partnership, firm, company,
corporation, association, joint-stock company, trust, estate, governmental
entity or any other legal entity or their legal representatives, agents or
assigns. The masculine gender shall include the feminine and the singular shall
include the plural where indicated by the context.
   pH — A measure of the acidity or alkalinity of a solution, expressed in
standard units.
   POLLUTANT — Any dredged spoil, solid waste, incinerator residue, filter
backwash, sewage, garbage, sewage sludge, munitions, medical wastes, chemical
wastes, biological materials, radioactive materials, heat, wrecked or
discharged equipment, rock, sand, cellar dirt, municipal, agricultural and
industrial waste, or any other contaminant discharged into water. The term
includes certain characteristics of wastewater (e.g., pH, temperature, TSS,
turbidity, color, BOD, CBOD, COD, toxicity or odor).
   POLLUTION — The man-made or man-induced alteration of the chemical,
physical, biological and radiological integrity of water.
   POTW TREATMENT PLANT or TREATMENT PLANT — That portion of a POTW designed to
provide treatment to wastewater.
   PRETREATMENT or TREATMENT — The reduction of the amount of pollutants, the
elimination of pollutants or the alteration of the nature of pollutant
properties in wastewater to a less harmful state prior to, or in lieu of,
discharging or otherwise introducing such pollutants into a POTW. The
reduction, elimination or alteration can be obtained by physical, chemical or
biological processes, process changes or by other means, except by diluting the
concentration of the pollutants unless allowed by an applicable pretreatment
standard or except as prohibited by 40 CFR 403.6(d).
   PRETREATMENT REQUIREMENTS — Any substantive or procedural requirement
related to pretreatment, other than a Pretreatment Standard, as mandated by the
Department and contained in this chapter. These requirements are in addition to
any National Categorical Pretreatment Standard and they shall take precedent
over the National Categorical Pretreatment Standards when this chapter’s
requirements are more restrictive.
   PRETREATMENT STANDARDS or STANDARDS — Prohibited discharge standards,
categorical pretreatment standards and local limits.
   PROCESS WASTEWATER — Any water which, during manufacturing or processing,
comes into direct contact with or results from the production or use of any raw
material, intermediate product, finished product, by-product or waste product.
   PROHIBITED DISCHARGE STANDARDS or PROHIBITED DISCHARGES — Absolute
prohibitions against the discharge of certain substances as identified
elsewhere in these regulations or as described in an operator’s industrial
wastewater discharge and pretreatment rules.
   PUBLICLY OWNED TREATMENT WORKS (POTW) — A treatment works as defined by
Section 212 of the Act (33 U.S.C. § 1292) which is owned by the Township or
another municipality or municipal authority, including any devices and systems
used in the storage, treatment, recycling or reclamation of municipal sewage
and industrial waste. This definition includes any sewers that convey
wastewater to a POTW treatment plant, but does not include pipes, sewers or
other conveyances not ultimately connected to a facility providing treatment.
For the purposes of this chapter, “POTW” shall also include any sewers outside
the Township that convey wastewaters to a POTW from persons outside the
Township who are, by contract or agreement with the Township, users of a POTW.
   RIGHT-OF-WAY — Includes the cartway and the shoulder of the street or road
in which a sewer main is located.
   SANITARY SEWAGE — The waste products or excrement or other discharge from
the bodies of human beings or animals, household liquid waste and all
substances defined by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania as “sewage,” but shall
not include stormwater, roof or surface waters, steam or air-conditioning
condensate, oils, tar, grease, gasoline, benzene or other combustible gases and
liquids, industrial waste or substances which would impair, impede, affect,
interfere with or endanger the sewer system or any part thereof in any manner
whatsoever, or the functioning of the processes of sewage treatment.
   SEVERE PROPERTY DAMAGE — Substantial physical damage to property, damage to
the treatment facilities which causes them to become inoperable or substantial
and permanent loss of natural resources which can reasonably be expected to
occur in the absence of a bypass. “Severe property damage” does not mean
economic loss caused by delays in production.
   SEWER SYSTEM or SANITARY SEWER SYSTEM — Refers to a sanitary sewage
collection, transport, and/or treatment system acquired or constructed by and
operated by an operator serving the Township and all additions, extensions, and
improvements thereto, but excluding stormwater management facilities and storm
sewers.
   SIGNIFICANT INDUSTRIAL USER (SIU) —
   A.   Except as provided in Subsection A(2) below:
      (1)   An industrial user subject to categorical pretreatment standards.
      (2)   An industrial user that
         (a)   Discharges an average of 25,000 gallons per day (gpd) or more of
process wastewater to the POTW (excluding sanitary, noncontract cooling and
boiler blow- down wastewater).
         (b)   Is designated as such by the operator on the basis that it has a
reasonable potential for adversely affecting the POTW’s operation or for
violating any pretreatment standard or requirement.
      (3)   The operator may determine that an industrial user subject to
categorical pretreatment standards is a non-significant categorical industrial
user rather than a significant industrial user on a finding that the industrial
user never discharges more than 100 gpd of total categorical wastewater
(excluding sanitary, noncontact cooling and boiler blowdown wastewater, unless
specifically included in the pretreatment standard) and the following
conditions are met:
         (a)   The industrial user, prior to operator’s finding, has
consistently complied with all applicable categorical pretreatment standards
and requirements.
         (b)   The industrial user annually submits the certification statement
required in Section 6.14 B [see 40 CFR 403.12(q)], together with any additional
information necessary to support the certification statement.
         (c)   The industrial user never discharges any untreated concentrated
wastewater.
      (4)   Upon finding that a user meeting the criteria in Subsection A(1)
above has no reasonable potential for adversely affecting a POTW’s operation or
for violating any pretreatment standard or requirement, the control authority
[as defined in 40 CFR 403.12(a)] may at any time, on its own initiative or in
response to a petition received from an industrial user or POTW, and in
accordance with 40 CFR 403.8(f)(6), determine that such user should not be
considered a significant industrial user.
   SIGNIFICANT NONCOMPLIANCE (SNC) — An industrial user or user is in
significant noncompliance if its violation meets one or more of the specific
criteria set forth in 40 CFR 403.8 (f) (2) (viii).
   SLUG LOAD or SLUG DISCHARGE — Any discharge at a flow rate or concentration,
which could cause a violation of the prohibited discharge standards in §
192-14 of this chapter. A slug discharge is any discharge of a non-routine,
episodic nature including, but not limited to, an accidental spill or a non-
customary batch discharge, which has a reasonable potential to cause
interference or pass through, or in any other way violate the POTW’s
regulations, local limits or permit conditions.
   STANDARD INDUSTRIAL CLASSIFICATION (SIC) — A classification pursuant to the
Standard Industrial Classification Manual issued by the Executive Office of the
President, Office of Management and Budget, 1972, as amended.
   STATE — The Commonwealth of Pennsylvania
   STORM SEWER — A public or private conveyance or system of conveyances
(including roads, streets, catch basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, man-made
channels, swales, pipes, culverts or storm drains and other stormwater
management facilities) primarily used for collecting and conveying stormwater
runoff.
   STORMWATER — Any flow occurring during or following any form of natural
precipitation and resulting therefrom.
   SUSPENDED SOLIDS — The total suspended matter that floats on the surface of
or is suspended in water, wastewater or other liquids and which is removable by
laboratory filtering expressed in terms of weight and concentration [milligrams
per liter (mg/l)].
   TOTAL SUSPENDED SOLIDS or SUSPENDED SOLIDS (TSS) — The total suspended
matter that floats on the surface of or is suspended in water, wastewater or
other liquids and which is removable by laboratory filtering expressed in terms
of concentration [milligrams per liter (mg/l)].
   TOWNSHIP — The Township of Upper Dublin or its authorized agent.
   TOXIC POLLUTANT — Any pollutant or combination of pollutants listed as toxic
in regulations promulgated by the Administrator of the EPA under the provision
of the Act, Section 307(a) or other state or federal statutes.
   UPPER DUBLIN SEWAGE TREATMENT PLANT — The sewage treatment plant within
Upper Dublin Township owned and operated by the Bucks County Water and Sewer
Authority, and also referred to as the “Upper Dublin Wastewater Treatment
Plant.”
   UPPER MORELAND HATBORO JOINT SEWER AUTHORITY (UMHJSA) — The municipal
authority that owns and operates a portion of the sanitary sewer system within
Upper Dublin Township.
   USER — Any person who contributes, causes or permits the contribution of
wastewater into a POTW.
   WASTEWATER — The liquid and water-carried industrial or domestic wastes from
dwellings, commercial buildings, industrial facilities and institutions,
together with any groundwater, surface water and stormwater that may be
present, whether treated or untreated.
   WATERS OF THE COMMONWEALTH — All streams, lakes, ponds, marshes,
watercourses, waterways, wells, springs, reservoirs, aquifers, irrigation
systems, drainage systems and all other bodies or accumulations of water,
surface or underground, natural or artificial, public or private, which are
contained within, flow through or border upon the commonwealth or any portion
thereof.
§ 192-4.   Sanitary sewer service areas.
   A.   Sanitary sewer service is provided throughout a large part of Upper
Dublin Township by the Bucks County Water and Sewer Authority (BCWSA).
   B.   Other providers of sanitary sewer service within the Township are the
Horsham Water and Sewer Authority (HWSA), the Upper Moreland Hatboro Joint
Sewer Authority (UMHJSA), Abington Township, and Springfield Township.
   C.   Sewage collected by operators within the Township is treated by various
publically owned treatment works including:
      (1)   Ambler Wastewater Treatment Plant. The Ambler WWTP is located off
Church Street in Ambler Borough and presently serves portions of Upper Dublin
Township, Lower Gwynedd Township, Whitpain Township, Whitemarsh Township, as
well as Ambler Borough.
      (2)   Abington Wastewater Treatment Plant. The Abington WWTP is located
on Fitzwatertown Road in Upper Dublin Township and presently serves portions of
Abington Township, Upper Dublin Township, Springfield Township, Cheltenham
Township and the Upper Moreland-Hatboro area.
      (3)   City of Philadelphia Southwest Sewage Treatment Plant. The City of
Philadelphia Southwest Sewage Treatment Plant (Philadelphia SW STP) is located
in Philadelphia at 8200 Enterprise Avenue. The facility has a service area of
several outlying Townships in addition to the flow from within the City.
Wastewater from Upper Dublin Township is transmitted to Springfield Township,
which in turn transmits the sewage to the Philadelphia SW STP for treatment.
      (4)   Horsham Water and Sewer Authority Park Creek Sewage Treatment
Plant. The Park Creek STP is located on Keith Valley Road approximately 1000
feet from the intersection of County Line Road. The plant primarily serves the
central and northwestern portions of Horsham Township. The northern most corner
of Upper Dublin Township lies within the Park Creek Drainage Area. A small
portion of Upper Dublin Township containing commercial properties within the
Maple Glen triangle (area between Welsh Road, Norristown Road, and Limekiln
Pike), is served by a public sewer extension for the Park Creek STP. All
remaining wastewater generated within the area of Upper Dublin that is
tributary to Park Creek is pumped to the Ambler WWTP for treatment.
      (5)   Upper Dublin Wastewater Treatment Plant. The Upper Dublin WWTP is
located on Delaware Avenue adjacent to the Pennsylvania Turnpike and serves the
Rapp Run/Pine Run Drainage Basins. The tributary collection system provides
service to the central portion of the Township, including the Fort Washington
Office Park, Dreshertown Plaza and residential customers.
      (6)   Upper Moreland-Hatboro Joint Sewer Authority Sewage Treatment Plant
(UMHJSA STP). The UMHJSA STP is located off Terwood Road approximately 4,000
feet northeast of the Route 611 intersection. The wastewater treatment plant
serves portions of Upper Dublin Township, Horsham Township, Warminster Township
and all of Upper Moreland Township and Hatboro Borough. The wastewater
collection system in Upper Dublin Township tributary to the UMHJSA STP serves
the existing Prudential Office Complex, the shopping center at Twining and
Welsh Roads, and approximately 380 residences.
§ 192-5.   Wastewater collection conveyance system.
   A.   Gravity collection and interceptors. The wastewater collection system
within Upper Dublin Township includes an extensive interceptor system to convey
collected wastewater to the various sewage treatment plants serving the
Township.
      (1)   Ambler WWTP Collection System. There are three gravity connections
to the Ambler WWTP collection system from Upper Dublin Township and there are
five primary collection areas within the Ambler WWTP/Upper Dublin Township
collection area. The areas are: Willow Avenue/Tennis Road, Hagues Mill Road/
Butler Pike, Argyle Avenue, the 18" interceptor, and the 12" interceptor.
         (a)   The Willow Avenue/Tennis Avenue Area serves the Willowmere,
Arrowhead, and Rose Valley areas.
         (b)   The Hague’s Mill Road/Butler Pike Area includes approximately
7,150 LF of collection sewer lines and serves Rose Valley, a portion of
Bethlehem Pike, and Cedar Wood.
         (c)   The Argyle Avenue Area collection system includes almost 22,000
LF of sewer lines and serves a portion of Butler Pike, Fairview Avenue,
Meadowbrook Avenue, Douglass Street, Argyle Avenue, Loch Alsh Avenue, Ardross
Avenue, Linwold Terrace, Cedar Road, Booth Lane, Heather Road, Hoffman Road,
Lake Drive and a portion of Susquehanna Road to a 10" sewer off Woodland
Avenue.
         (d)   The 18" interceptor includes over 38,000 LF of 8" pipe, 2,650 LF
of 16" pipe, and 10,370 LF of 18" pipe. The collection system serves both a
gravity collection area and flows pumped from the Tennis Avenue Pumping
Station, the Butler Pike Pumping Station, the Maple Glen Pumping Station, the
Welsh Road Pumping Station and the Meetinghouse Road Pumping Station. The
gravity collection area includes: Joel Drive, Russell Place, Tanneries Run,
Jonathan Way, Denton Drive, a portion of Susquehanna Road, the Woods
Apartments, Tanneries Woods Townhouses, a portion of Loch Lash Avenue,
Schiavone Drive, Van Sant Lane, Melissa Drive, Windsor Place, Shady Place,
Thelma Lane, a portion of Highland Avenue, St. Mary’s Manor, Villa Drive,
Bellaire Avenue, a portion of Bethlehem Pike, Inverness Avenue, Stuart Creek
Farms, Brookwood Drive, Randolph Avenue, Glencoe Avenue, a portion of Hartranft
and Prospect Avenues, Ellerslie Avenue, Stuart Lane, Bannockburn Avenue,
Renfrew Avenue, Trinity Place and Church Road. The 18" interceptor connects to
the Ambler WWTP collection system on Church Road below Main Street.
         (e)   The 12" interceptor includes 2,800 LF of 12" pipe, 1,000 LF of
10" pipe, and 14,650 LF of 8" pipe. The collection system serves both a gravity
collection area and flows pumped from the Commerce Drive Pumping Station. The
gravity collection area includes: Orchard Lane, a portion of Ambler Road, a
portion of Bethlehem Pike and Fort Washington Avenue, Washington Lane, Elliger
Avenue, Locust Road, and portions of Prospect, Spring, and Montgomery Avenues.
The 12" interceptor connects to the Ambler WWTP collection system adjacent to
the railroad west of Ambler Road.
      (2)   Abington WWTP Collection System. The Abington WWTP is located
within Upper Dublin Township. Two 18" interceptors are commonly shared between
the two municipalities. A third 10" interceptor is located between Lenape Drive
and the plant and serves Upper Dublin Township. The two 18" interceptors are
located in Fitzwatertown Road, east and west of the plant. The areas served by
the Abington WWTP can be divided into three areas, Meter No.1, Meter No 2, and
the unmetered.
         (a)   The Meter No.1 area includes flows from the eastern 18"
interceptor and the 10" interceptor. The service area includes gravity
collection areas and flows pumped from the Sandy Run Pumping Station, Ayr Lane
Pumping Station and the Dreshertown Road Pumping Station. The gravity
collection area includes: Afton Road, Lenape Drive, Alpin Drive, Duncan Drive,
Glen Burnie Drive, Dundee Drive, Ori Place, a portion of Twining Road, Bum Brae
Drive and Woodside Court.
         (b)   The Meter No.2 area includes flows from the western 18"
interceptor. The service area includes gravity collection areas and flows
pumped from the Malcolm Drive Pumping Station and Abington’s Kimbal Drive
Pumping Station. Wastewater flows from the Meter No. 2 location (Fitzwatertown
Road Woodland Road intersection) into Abington Township. The wastewater
ultimately flows back into Upper Dublin Township via the western 18"
interceptor and into the Abington WWII plant. The gravity collection area
includes: a portion of Fitzwatertown Road and Kimbal Road, Alba Road, Willow
Avenue, School Lane, Woodland Road, and Bernard Avenue.
         (c)   The third area served by the Abington WWTP is unmetered. The
unmetered flows include wastewater from Abington’s North Hill Pumping Station
and the Fitzwatertown Road/North Hills Avenue area including the following
roadways: North Hills Avenue, Eastview Drive, Chapel Road, Northview Drive,
Lukens Avenue, Quarry Road, Avenues “G”, “H”
      (3)   UMHJSA Terwood Road STP Collection System. The collection system
located in Upper Dublin Township owned, operated and maintained by UMHJSA, and
tributary to the UMHJSA STP is located between the Pennsylvania Turnpike and
Fitzwatertown Road near Welsh Road. The collection system contains
approximately 21,100 LF of 8" pipe. There are approximately 383 customers in
Upper Dublin Township tributary to the UMHJSA STP. The customers include: The
Prudential Office Complex, the Upper Dublin Township Shopping Center, and
residential customers.
      (4)   Springfield Township/Philadelphia SW STP Collection System. The
Upper Dublin Township collection system tributary to Springfield Township and
ultimately the Philadelphia SW STP is located in the southwest portion of the
Township. The collection system consists of approximately 44,300 LF of 8" pipe
and two pumping stations (Twining Valley Road Pumping Station and the Camp Hill
Road Pumping Station). The collection system also includes a 61 unit low
pressure collection system in the Applewood, Crestview, and Leah Drives area.
Flows enter into Springfield Township in three locations.
         (a)   The first connection is located on Pennsylvania Avenue across
from Mill Road and serves portions of Mill Road, Garden Road, and Manor Place,
Oreland Place, Cannon Place, Jackson Avenue, Girard Avenue, Logan Avenue and a
portion of Linden Avenue.
         (b)   The second connection is located on Pennsylvania Avenue across
from Baal Avenue and serves the Twining/Valley Pumping Station in addition to
Weld Avenue, Baal Avenue, Ape Avenue, and portions of Twining Road, Washman
Avenue, Orlando Avenue and Lafayette Avenue.
         (c)   The third connection is also on Pennsylvania Avenue outside of
the Township boundary, between Camp Hill Road and Belmont Avenue. The
collection system serves portions of Washman Avenue, Lafayette Avenue, Orlando
Avenue, and Rich Avenue, Belmont Avenue, the Apple wood, Crestview, Leah Drives
low pressure system, Winner Way, Wordsworth Academy and portions of Camp Hill
and Dreshertown Roads.
ARTICLE II
Connections
§ 192-6.   (Reserved).
§ 192-7.   Connections required.
   A.   Where properties abutting upon a sanitary sewer system are assessable
for a proportionate share of the cost thereof, all persons owning any occupied
building now erected upon premises abutting on the sanitary sewer system shall,
at their own expense, make the connection within two months after notice to do
so from the Township.
   B.   All persons owning any premises abutting on a sanitary sewer system
upon which an occupied building is hereafter erected shall, at the time of the
erection of such building and at their own expense, make the connection with
the sanitary sewer system.
   C.   All persons owning any occupied building upon premises which hereafter
shall abut on a sanitary sewer system shall, at their own expense, make the
connection with the sanitary sewer system within two months after notice to do
so from the Township.
§ 192-8.   Individual systems.
   A.   It shall be unlawful for any person owning any occupied building on
premises abutting on a sanitary sewer system to erect, construct or use or
maintain or cause to be erected, constructed, used or maintained any privy,
cesspool, sinkhole, septic tank or other receptacle on such premises for
receiving sewage.
   B.   Any person who erects, constructs or maintains a privy, cesspool,
sinkhole or septic tank or other receptacle for receiving sewage on any
property abutting on a sanitary sewer system in violation of this Part 1 shall
be deemed and shall be declared to be erecting, constructing and maintaining a
nuisance, which nuisance the Township is hereby authorized and directed to
abate in the manner provided by law.
§ 192-9.   Compliance required; rules and regulations.
No connection shall be made to a sanitary sewer system except in compliance
with the appropriate ordinances of the Township and with such rules and
regulations of the operator and the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania The following
rules and regulations shall apply to all sanitary sewer systems within the
Township:
   A.   Application for service line.
      (1)   Persons owning an occupied building upon premises abutting on a
sanitary sewer system desiring the introduction of a service line from the
sewer system to their premises must first make written application on the forms
furnished by the operator. The application must be signed by such persons or
their duly authorized representative.
      (2)   No person owning any premises connected with the sewer system or
tenant of such premises shall permit another person or premises to use or
connect with his service line, except upon written permit from the operator.
   B.   Permit for connection. Before making any connection to a sanitary sewer
system, a permit must be obtained from the operator.
   C.   Service connection. No sewer connection or disconnection shall be made
nor any lateral installed except in the manner and of a type approved by the
respective operator. The property owner is responsible for the construction and
maintenance of the lateral connection from the building to the sewer main. The
lateral line shall be constructed at the owner’s expense. All sewer connection
and disconnection work must be inspected and approved by the respective
operator.
   D.   Sewage facilities planning. All construction projects that propose new
or expanded plumbing/sewage facilities require DEP review under the
Pennsylvania Sewage Facilities Act (Act 537). No building permit, certificate
of occupancy, final subdivision or land development approval, or other proposed
construction approval may be issued until sewage planning has been approved by
DEP through the issuance of a planning module approval or an exemption from
planning, or until DEP has issued a letter stating that sewage planning is not
required.
   E.   Sewage discharge.
      (1)   No stormwater, roof drain, condensate line, cellar seepage, surface
or ground waters, oils, tar, grease, gasoline, combustible gases or liquids,
garbage or insoluble solids or any substance which would impair or interfere
with the sewer system or any part thereof in any manner or with the function of
the processes of sewage treatment shall be connected or discharge to a sanitary
sewer system.
      (2)   No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged into a sanitary
sewer system any ashes, cinders, sand, glass, straw, mud, hay, shavings, metal,
scraps, rags, feathers, plastics, wood or any other solid or viscous substance
capable of causing obstruction to the flow in the sewer system or the processes
of sewage treatment.
      (3)   All hotels, restaurants, boardinghouses and public eating places,
before draining into a sanitary sewer system, shall install grease traps on the
house drains of such character as may be specified by the Township and/or the
operator.
      (4)   Sewage shall not be discharged to storm sewers.
   F.   Inspections. The Township, the operator or their representatives shall
have the right of access at all reasonable times to all parts of any industrial
or commercial premises connected with a sanitary sewer system and to examine
and inspect the connections thereto and the plumbing fixtures or any improper
connection, installation, maintenance or use. The Township and operator may
make reasonable charges for such inspections to users of the sewer system.
   G.   Release of liability.
      (1)   The Township and the respective operator shall not be liable for
any damage or expense resulting from leaks, stoppages or defective plumbing or
from any other cause occurring to any premises or within any house or building;
and it is hereby expressly stipulated by all persons making connection with a
sanitary sewer system that no claims shall be made against the Township or
operator on account of the breaking or stoppage of or any damage to any lateral
or house sewer line or connection when the cause thereof is found to be in such
lateral or house sewer line or connection.
      (2)   The Township and the respective operator shall not be liable for a
deficiency or failure when occasioned by an emergency, or required repairs or
failure for any cause beyond control.
   H.   Vacated premises. When premises are vacated, the owner shall give
notice thereof to the operator, and the owner will be responsible for the
sewage charges until such notice is given.
   I.   Changing rules and regulations. The Township and the operators reserve
the right to change or amend, from time to time, their sanitary sewer rules and
regulations in accordance with law.
§ 192-10.   Violations and penalties.
The provisions and the rules and regulations set forth in this Article II
hereof are declared to be for the health, safety and welfare of the citizens of
the Township, and any person who shall violate any of such provisions, rules or
regulations shall, in addition to any authorized operator assessed penalties,
forfeit and pay a fine of not more than $1,000 to the Township, the same to be
collected by a summary proceeding before any district justice in said Township
or recovered as debts of like amount are now by law recoverable, and whenever
such person shall have been notified by the Township through its duly
constituted representatives, or by service of summons or prosecution, or in any
other way that such violation has been committed, each day that such person
shall continue in such violation shall constitute a separate offense,
punishable by like fine or penalty.
Part 2
Wastewater Control Regulations
ARTICLE III
General Regulations
§ 192-11.   Rules and regulations.
   A.   The Township reserves the right to, and may from time to time, adopt,
revise and amend and readopt such rules and regulations as it deems necessary
and proper for the use and operation of sewer systems, and all such rules and
regulations shall be and become a part of this chapter.
   B.   Sanitary sewer system users within the Township shall comply with
Township rules and regulations and the rules and regulations established by the
operators within their respective service areas.
   C.   No industrial waste shall be discharged into the sanitary sewer systems
within the Township without the express approval of the respective operators.
In the event that an operator agrees to accept industrial wastes, pretreatment
by the discharger shall be required as specified by the operator to upgrade
such waste to operator specified levels prior to discharge into a sanitary
sewer system.
§ 192-12.   (Reserved).
§ 192-13.   (Reserved).
ARTICLE IV
Discharge Regulations
§ 192-14.   Prohibited discharge standards.
   A.   General prohibitions. No user shall introduce or cause to be
introduced, directly or indirectly, to a sanitary sewer system any pollutant or
wastewater that causes pass-through or interference with the operation or
performance of a sanitary sewer system. These general prohibitions apply to all
users of a sanitary sewer system whether or not the user is subject to federal
categorical pretreatment standards or any other federal, state or local
pretreatment standards or requirements.
   B.   Specific prohibitions. No user shall introduce or cause to be
introduced into a sanitary sewer system the following:
      (1)   Pollutants that create a fire or explosive hazard in a sanitary
sewer system, including, but not limited to, wastestreams with a closed-cup
flashpoint of less than 140ºF (60ºC) using the test methods specified in 40 CFR
261.21.
      (2)   Wastewater having a pH less than 6.0, or more than 9, or otherwise
causing corrosive structural damage to a sanitary sewer system.
      (3)   Solid or viscous substances in amounts which will cause obstruction
of the flow in a sanitary sewer system resulting in interference, but in no
case solids greater than ½ inch in any dimension.
      (4)   Pollutants, including oxygen-demanding pollutants (BOD, etc.),
released in a discharge at a flow rate and/or pollutant concentration which,
either singly or by interaction with other pollutants, will cause interference
with a POTW.
      (5)   Wastewater having a temperature greater than 120ºF, or which will
inhibit biological activity in a POTW resulting in Interference, but in no case
wastewater which causes the temperature at the introduction into a POTW to
exceed 104ºF (40ºC).
      (6)   Petroleum oil, nonbiodegradable cutting oil, or products of mineral
oil origin, in amounts that will cause interference or pass through.
      (7)   Pollutants which result in the presence of toxic gases, vapors, or
fumes within a sanitary sewer system in a quantity that may cause acute worker
health and safety problems.
      (8)   Trucked or hauled pollutants, except at discharge points designated
by the operator.
      (9)   Noxious or malodorous liquids, gases, solids, or other wastewater
which, either singly or by interaction with other wastes, are sufficient to
create a public nuisance or a hazard to life, or to prevent entry into the
sewers for maintenance or repair.
      (10)   Wastewater which imparts color which cannot be removed by the
treatment process, such as, but not limited to, dye wastes and vegetable
tanning solutions, which consequently imparts color to a POTW’s effluent,
thereby violating the operator’s NPDES permit.
      (11)   Wastewater containing any radioactive wastes or isotopes except in
compliance with applicable state or federal regulations.
      (12)   Stormwater, surface water, ground water, artesian well water, roof
runoff, subsurface drainage, swimming pool drainage, condensate, deionized
water, noncontact cooling water, and unpolluted wastewater, unless specifically
authorized by the Township and the operator.
      (13)   Sludges, screenings, or other residues from the pretreatment of
industrial wastes.
      (14)   Medical Wastes, except as specifically authorized by the operator
a wastewater discharge permit.
      (15)   Wastewater causing, alone or in conjunction with other sources, a
POTW effluent to fail toxicity test.
      (16)   Detergents, surface-active agents, or other substances which that
might cause excessive foaming in a POTW.
      (17)   Fats, oils, or greases of animal or vegetable origin in
concentrations greater than 50 mg/l or that concentration otherwise specified
by the operator.
      (18)   Wastewater causing two readings on an explosion hazard meter at
the point of discharge into the POTW, or at any point in the POTW, of more than
5% or any single reading over 10% of the Lower Explosive Limit of the meter.
      (19)   Any wastewater which, because of its chemical nature or
composition, causes the sewer atmosphere to contain airborne chemical
concentrations in excess of concentrations established by the United States
Department of Labor, Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA),
under 29 CFR 1910, regardless of duration of exposure experienced by any
individual, unless specific authorization is granted by the operator.
      (20)   Any wastewater containing any organic chemical in excess of limits
specified by the operator.
      (21)   Any wastewater where there is a significant likelihood of
producing toxic effects to biota in the receiving water of a POTW or a POTW’s
effluent.
   C.   In addition, the following activities are prohibited:
      (1)   No person shall discharge wastewater into stormwater inlets or
through sewer manholes.
      (2)   No person who generates wastewater at one property shall discharge
it at another property without approval from the operator.
      (3)   No person shall discharge wastewater in quantities or at rates of
flow which may have an adverse or harmful effect on or overload an operator’s
sewer system or wastewater treatment plant or cause excessive or additional
treatment costs.
      (4)   No person shall discharge a wastewater flow contributing more than
the five-day biochemical oxygen demand limitation contributing more than the
suspended solids limitations, or having a volume in excess of the specific
limitations of the respective operator.
§ 192-15.   Specific pollutant discharge limitations. 
[Amended 5-12-2015 by Ord. No. 15-1302, § 1]
   A.   No person shall discharge wastewater to the BCWSA Wastewater Treatment
Plant containing in excess of the following, unless specifically authorized by
the BCWSA through issuance of a valid wastewater discharge permit:
Pollutant Maximum Instantaneous
          Concentration (mg/l)
Pollutant      Maximum Instantaneous
               Concentration (mg/l)
BOD            300
TSS            300
Oil and grease 50
Phenols (T)    1.00
Cyanide (T)    0.50
Arsenic        0.10
Beryllium      2.00
Cadmium        0.50
Chromium (T)   2.00
Copper         2.00
Lead           0.20
Mercury        0.01
Nickel         1.00
Selenium       0.01
Silver         0.30
Zinc           2.00
 
   B.   No person shall discharge wastewater to the Ambler Wastewater Treatment
Plant containing in excess of the following, unless specifically authorized to
do so by Ambler and the operator through issuance of a valid wastewater
discharge permit.
Pollutant Maximum Instantaneous Concentration (mg/l)
Pollutant           Maximum Instantaneous Concentration (mg/l)
Arsenic             0.19
Aluminum            14.51
Cadmium             0.02
Chromium(T)         6.01
Chromium Hexavalent 0.42
Copper              1.28
Cyanide (T)         0.36
Lead                0.32
Mercury             0.0009
Molybdenum          Monitor Only
Nickel              2.16
Selenium            0.13
Silver              0.96
Zinc                l.55
Phenols             126
Total Phosphorous   52.64
Ammonia             No Limit
BOD                 No Limit
TSS                 No Limit
TDS                 Monitor Only
 
   C.   No person shall discharge wastewater to the UMHJSA Wastewater Treatment
Plant containing in excess of the following, unless specifically authorized to
do so by UMHJSA and the operator through issuance of a valid wastewater
discharge permit.
Pollutant Maximum Instantaneous Concentration (mg/l)
Pollutant            Maximum Instantaneous Concentration (mg/l)
Arsenic              2.40
Aluminum             2,300
Cadmium              0.12
Chromium (T)         186.10
Chromium, Hexavalent 11.51
Copper               23.65
Cyanide (Free)       3.07
Cyanide (T)          3.07
Lead                 3.36
Mercury              0.05
Nickel               24.31
Phenols              794.36
Selenium             1.94
Silver               4.93
Zinc                 39.13
 
   D.   The above limits apply at the point where the wastewater is discharged
to a POTW, which for purposes of these regulations includes all points within
and throughout the sanitary sewer system. All concentrations for metallic
substances are for total metal unless indicated otherwise. The Township or the
operator may impose mass limitations in addition to, or in place of, the
concentration-based limitations listed herein.
§ 192-16.   Dilution.
No user shall ever increase the use of process water or in any way attempt to
dilute a discharge as a partial or complete substitute for adequate treatment
to achieve compliance with a discharge limitation unless expressly authorized
by an applicable pretreatment standard or requirement.
§ 192-17.   (Reserved).
§ 192-18.   (Reserved).
ARTICLE V
Wastewater Discharge Permit Administration
§ 192-19.   Permit required; update of information.
   A.   No significant industrial user shall discharge wastewater into a POTW
without first obtaining a wastewater discharge permit from the operator.
   B.   An operator may require other users to obtain wastewater discharge
permits as necessary to carry out regulatory purposes.
   C.   Any violation of the terms and conditions of a wastewater discharge
permit shall be deemed a violation of these regulations and subject the
wastewater discharge permittee to the sanctions set out elsewhere in these
regulations, the operator’s regulations, and the permit. Obtaining a wastewater
discharge permit does not relieve a permittee of its obligation to comply with
all federal, state, and operator pretreatment standards or requirements or with
any other requirements of federal, state and local law.
   D.   A user must submit information on the nature and characteristics of its
wastewater when requested by the operator. The operator may prepare a form for
this purpose and may periodically require users to update this information.
§ 192-20.   Existing and new connections.
Any nondomestic user who discharges into a sewer system must obtain a
wastewater discharge permit. An application for a wastewater discharge permit
under these regulations must be filed in accordance with the applicable rules
and instructions of the operator.
§ 192-21.   Contents of permit application.
All users required to obtain a wastewater discharge permit must submit a permit
application as specified by the operator. The operator may require all users to
submit as part of an application the following information:
   A.   All information required pursuant to baseline monitoring reports as
described elsewhere in these regulations.
   B.   Description of activities, facilities and plant processes on the
premises, including a list of all raw materials and chemicals used or stored at
the facility which are, or could accidentally or intentionally be, discharged
to a POTW.
   C.   Number and type of employees, hours of operation and proposed or actual
hours of operation.
   D.   Each product produced by type, amount, process or processes and rate of
production.
   E.   Type and amount of raw materials processed (average and maximum per
day).
   F.   Site plans, floor plans, mechanical and plumbing plans and details to
show all sewers, floor drains and appurtenances by size, location and elevation
and all points of discharge.
   G.   Time and duration of discharges.
   H.   Any other information as may be deemed necessary by the operator to
evaluate the wastewater discharge permit application.
§ 192-22.   Certification.
All wastewater discharge permit applications and user reports must be signed by
an authorized representative of the user and contain a certification statement
approved by the operator.
ARTICLE VI
Pretreatment of Wastewater
§ 192-23.   Adoption of federal and state categorical pretreatment standards;
construal of provisions.
   A.   The categorical pretreatment standards found at 40 CFR, Chapter I,
Subchapter N, Parts 401–471, as amended, and as adopted by the respective
operators, are hereby incorporated by reference as if set forth fully herein.
   B.   An operator may establish by regulation more stringent limitations or
requirements on discharges to sanitary sewer systems if deemed necessary to
comply with federal or state objectives.
§ 192-24.   Accidental discharge/slug control plans.
Operators may periodically evaluate whether each significant industrial user
needs an accidental discharge/slug control plan. The operator may require any
user to develop, submit for approval and implement such a plan. Alternatively,
the operator may develop such a plan for any user. An accidental discharge/slug
control plan may address, at a minimum, the following:
   A.   Description of discharge practices, including non-routine batch
discharges.
   B.   Description of stored chemicals.
   C.   Procedures for immediately notifying the operator of any accidental or
slug discharge, as required by these regulations.
   D.   Procedures to prevent adverse impact from any accidental or slug
discharge. Such procedures include, but are not limited to, inspection and
maintenance of storage areas, handling and transfer of materials, loading and
unloading operations, control of plant site runoff (i.e., a spill prevention
plan), worker training, building of containment structures or equipment,
measures for containing toxic organic pollutants, including solvents, and/or
measures and equipment for emergency response.
§ 192-25.   Hauled wastewater.
   A.   Septic tank waste may be introduced into a sanitary sewer system only
at locations designated by the operator and at such times as are established by
the operator. Such waste shall not violate these regulations or any other
requirements established by the operator. The operator may require septic tank
waste haulers to obtain wastewater discharge permits.
   B.   The operator may require haulers of industrial waste to obtain
wastewater discharge permits. The operator may require generators of hauled
industrial waste to obtain wastewater discharge permits. The operator also may
prohibit the disposal of hauled industrial waste. The discharge of hauled
industrial waste is subject to all other requirements of these and the
operator’s regulations.
   C.   Industrial waste haulers may discharge loads only at locations
designated by the operator. No load may be discharged without prior consent of
the operator. The operator may collect samples of each hauled load to ensure
compliance with applicable standards. The operator may require the industrial
waste hauler to provide a waste analysis of any load prior to discharge.
   D.   Industrial waste haulers must provide a waste-tracking form for every
load This form shall include, at a minimum, the name and address of the
industrial waste hauler, permit number, truck identification, names and
addresses of sources of waste and volume and characteristics of waste. The form
shall identify the type of industry, known or suspected waste constituents, and
whether any wastes are RCRA hazardous wastes.
§ 192-26.   Oil and grease interceptor/trap systems.
   A.   The purpose of this section is to provide for the regulation,
inspection, maintenance, and rehabilitation of oil and grease interceptor/trap
systems, to permit intervention in circumstances which may constitute a public
nuisance or health hazard; and to establish penalties for violations of the
provisions of this section.
   B.   Applicability. Oil and grease interceptor/trap systems are required for
all restaurants, food preparation facilities, or other commercial, industrial
and institutional establishments determined by the operator to have the
potential to discharge oil and/or grease into a sanitary sewer system.
   C.   Permits.
      (1)   No person shall install, construct or alter an oil and grease
interceptor/trap or occupy or utilize any structure in which an oil and grease
interceptor/trap system shall be installed without first obtaining written
approval from the operator, which said approval shall identify the site and
approve the plans and specifications so as to ensure compliance with the
provisions of this section.
      (2)   All oil and grease interceptor/traps shall be available for
inspection by the operator during normal business hours.
      (3)   After receipt of all required approvals, any person desiring to
construct a permanent oil and grease trap interceptor system shall notify the
operator at least 72 hours in advance of the commencement of the construction
so as to arrange the required inspections.
   D.   Design and inspection.
      (1)   All oil and grease interceptor/trap systems must be the type and
capacity approved by the owner’s design professional and must be located for
easy accessibility to clean and inspect.
      (2)   The owner or person utilizing any property connected to a sanitary
sewer system shall permit an authorized agent of the operator:
         (a)   To enter all properties and facilities for the purpose of
inspection, sampling, and testing to determine compliance with the provisions
of these regulations.
         (b)   To examine and copy any and all records required to be
maintained by the owner for the purpose of determining compliance with the
provisions of these regulations.
      (3)   Any oil and grease interceptor/trap system may be inspected by an
operator’s authorized agent at any reasonable time.
      (4)   Inspection of an oil and grease interceptor/trap system may require
a physical tour of the property, sampling of the oil and grease interceptor/
trap, and dye-testing of the interior plumbing to determine the path and
ultimate destination of the generated wastewater.
      (5)   An initial inspection may be conducted [to] determine the type and
functionality [of] oil and grease interceptors and traps.
      (6)   A schedule of routine inspections may be established to assure
proper functioning of oil and grease interceptors and traps.
      (7)   An operator’s authorized agent may inspect systems known or alleged
to be malfunctioning. Should said inspections reveal the system is
malfunctioning, the authorized agent will order action to be taken to correct
the malfunction.
   E.   Maintenance.
      (1)   Every person owning a building or structure containing an oil and
grease interceptor/trap system, as well as any person making use of the oil and
grease interceptor/trap system shall have the oil and grease interceptor/trap
pumped by a qualified pumper/hauler at least every three months, or as required
by manufacturer recommendations, or as required by the operator, whichever
schedule provides for more frequent pumping. The owner and/or utilizer of the
oil and grease interceptor/trap shall submit to the operator receipts from the
pumper/hauler confirming the pumping of the oil and grease interceptor/trap
within two weeks after the removal of the accumulated oil and grease.
      (2)   The required pumping frequency may be increased by the operator for
good cause shown.
      (3)   Any person owning a property served by an oil and grease
interceptor/trap, as well as any person making use of the oil and grease
interceptor/trap system, must submit, with each required pumping receipt, a
written statement from the pumper/hauler that the baffles in the oil and grease
interceptor/trap have been inspected and found to be in good working order. Any
person whose oil and grease interceptor/trap baffles are determined to require
repair or replacement must first contact the operator for approval of the
necessary repair.
      (4)   Any person owning a building served by an oil and grease
interceptor/trap, as well as any person utilizing an oil and grease
interceptor/trap system, must follow the operation and maintenance
recommendations of the equipment manufacturer. A copy of the manufacturer’s
recommendations and a copy of the service agreement must be submitted to the
operator within 60 days of the effective date of this chapter. In no case may
the service or pumping intervals for the oil and grease interceptor/trap exceed
those recommended by the manufacturer.
   F.   System rehabilitation.
      (1)   A written notice of violation may be issued to any person who is
the owner of any property and/or any person utilizing the oil and grease
interceptor/trap system, which is found to be served by a malfunctioning oil
and grease interceptor/trap system or which is discharging oil and grease
without a permit.
      (2)   Within seven days of notification by the operator that a
malfunction has been identified, the property owner and/or the person utilizing
the oil and grease interceptor/trap system, must make application to the
operator for approval to repair or replace the malfunctioning system. Within 30
days of initial notification by the operator, construction of the permitted
repair or replacement must commence. Within 60 days of the original
notification by the operator, the construction must be completed unless
conditions mandate a longer period, in which case the operator may set an
extended completion date.
      (3)   In the event the modifications do not result in the elimination of
the malfunction of the existing oil and grease interceptor/trap system, the
person owning and/or making use of the interceptor system shall bear
responsibility for the continued malfunction of the system. The owner and/or
utilize of said system shall be required to take such action as necessary to
eliminate the malfunction.
   G.   Liens. The operator, upon notice that an imminent public health or
safety hazard exists due to failure of a proper owner and/or utilize to
maintain, repair or replace an oil and grease interceptor/trap system, shall
have the authority to contract to have the work performed. The owner of record
of the property will be charged for the work performed and, if necessary, a
lien will be entered therefore in accordance with the law.
   H.   Oil and grease disposal.
      (1)   All grease originating within the operator’s collection system
shall be disposed of in accordance with the requirements of the Solid Waste
Management Act (Act 97 of 1980, 35 P.S. § 6018.101 et seq.) and all other
applicable laws and at sites or facilities approved by DEP.
      (2)   Pumpers/haulers of oil and grease shall operate in a manner
consistent with the provisions of the Pennsylvania Solid Waste Management Act
(Act 97 of 1980, 35 P.S. §§ 6018.101–6018-1003) and all other applicable laws.
   I.   Violations. Should any person violate the provisions of this section,
the Township or the operator is authorized to pursue all legal remedies
available to it in order to effectuate compliance.
§ 192-27.   Additional pretreatment measures.
   A.   Pretreatment facilities. Users shall provide wastewater treatment as
necessary to comply with these and the operator’s regulations and shall comply
with all categorical pretreatment standards, local limits and the prohibitions
set out in these and the operator’s regulations within the time limitations
specified by EPA, the state, the operator or the Township, whichever is more
stringent. Any facilities necessary for compliance shall be provided, operated
and maintained at the user’s expense. Detailed plans describing such facilities
and operating procedures shall be submitted to the operator for review and
shall be acceptable to the operator before such facilities are constructed. The
review of such plans and operating procedures shall in no way relieve the user
from the responsibility of modifying such facilities as necessary to produce a
discharge acceptable to the operator under the provisions of these regulations.
   B.   Sand interceptors shall be provided when, in the opinion of the
operator, they are necessary for the proper handling of wastewater containing
excessive amounts of sand or grit, except that such interceptors shall not be
required for residential users unless a residential user who is contributing
excessive amounts of sand or grit has first been given the opportunity to
reduce the discharge by other means. All interception units shall be of type
and capacity approved by the operator and shall be so located to be easily
accessible for cleaning and inspection. Such interceptors shall be inspected,
cleaned and repaired regularly, as needed, by the users at their expense, in
accordance with any procedure for the installation and maintenance of grease
traps as may be established from time to time by the Township or the operator.
   C.   Users with the potential to discharge flammable substances may be
required to install and maintain an approved combustible gas detection meter.
   D.   Whenever deemed necessary, the operator may require users to restrict
their discharge during peak flow periods, designate that certain wastewater be
discharged only into specific sewers, relocate and/or consolidate points of
discharge, separate sewage wastestreams from industrial wastestreams and such
other conditions as may be necessary to protect the POTW and determine the
user’s compliance with the requirements of this chapter.
   E.   The operator may require any person discharging into a POTW to install
and maintain, on his/her property and at his/her expense, a suitable storage
and flow-control facility to ensure equalization of flow. A wastewater
discharge permit may be issued solely for flow equalization.
§ 192-28.   (Reserved).
§ 192-29.   (Reserved).
§ 192-30.   (Reserved).
§ 192-31.   (Reserved).
§ 192-32.   (Reserved).
§ 192-33.   (Reserved).
§ 192-34.   (Reserved).
ARTICLE VII
Reporting Requirements
§ 192-35.   Baseline monitoring reports.
   A.   Within either 180 days after the date of a categorical pretreatment
standard, or the final administrative decision on a category determination
under 40 CFR 403.6(a)(4), or as required by the operator, whichever is later,
existing categorical users currently discharging to or scheduled to discharge
to a POTW shall submit to the operator a report which contains information as
requested by the operator. At least 90 days prior to commencement of their
discharge, or as required by the operator, new sources and sources that become
categorical users subject to the promulgation of an applicable categorical
standard shall submit to the operator a report which contains the information
as required by the operator. A new source shall report the method of
pretreatment it intends to use to meet applicable categorical standards. A new
source also shall give estimates of its anticipated flow and quantity of
pollutants to be discharged.
   B.   All significant industrial users shall, at a frequency determined by
the operator, submit a report indicating the nature and concentration of
pollutants in the discharge which are limited by pretreatment standards and the
measured or estimated average and maximum daily flows for the reporting period.
All periodic compliance reports must be signed and certified in accordance with
the operator’s regulations.
   C.   All wastewater samples must be representative of the user’s discharge.
Wastewater monitoring and flow measurement facilities shall be properly
operated, kept clean and maintained in good working order at all times. The
failure of a user to keep its monitoring facility in good working order shall
not be grounds for the user to claim that sample results are unrepresentative
of its discharge.
   D.   If a user subject to the reporting requirement in this section monitors
any pollutant more frequently than required by the operator, using the
procedures prescribed in these regulations, the results of this monitoring
shall be included in the report.
§ 192-36.   Reports of changed conditions.
Each user must notify the operator, at least 60 days before the change, of any
planned significant changes to the user’s operations or system which might
alter the nature, quality or volume of its wastewater.
§ 192-37.   Reports of potential problems.
   A.   In the case of any discharge, including, but not limited to, accidental
discharges, discharges of a non-routine, episodic nature, a non-customary batch
discharge or a slug load, that may cause potential problems for a POTW, the
user shall immediately telephone and notify the operator of the incident. This
notification shall include the location of the discharge, type of waste,
concentration and volume, if known, and corrective actions taken by the user,
along with the identity of the person or persons believed to be responsible for
the discharge.
   B.   Within five days following such discharge, the user shall, unless
waived by the operator, submit a detailed written report describing the cause
(s) of the discharge and the measures to be taken by the user to prevent
similar future occurrences. Such notification shall not relieve the user of any
expense, loss, damage or other liability which may be incurred as a result of
damage to a POTW or natural resources, or any other damage to person or
property; nor shall such notification relieve the user of any fines, penalties
or other liability which may be imposed pursuant to these regulations.
   C.   A notice shall be permanently posted on the user’s bulletin board or
other prominent place advising employees who to call in the event of a
discharge described in Subsection A above. Employers shall ensure that all
employees, who may cause such a discharge to occur, are advised of the
emergency notification procedure.
§ 192-38.   Reports to unpermitted users.
All users not required to obtain a wastewater discharge permit shall provide
appropriate reports to the operator as the operator may require.
§ 192-39.   Notice of violation; repeat sampling and reporting.
If sampling performed by a user indicates a violation, the user must notify the
operator within 24 hours of becoming aware of the violation. The user shall
also repeat the sampling and analysis and submit the results of the repeat
analysis to the operator within 30 days after becoming aware of the violation.
§ 192-40.   Notification of discharge of hazardous waste.
   A.   Any user who commences the discharge of hazardous waste shall notify
the operator, the EPA Regional Waste Management Division Director and state
hazardous waste authorities, in writing, of any discharge into a sanitary sewer
system of a substance which, if otherwise disposed of, would be a hazardous
waste under 40 CFR 261. Such notification must include the name of the
hazardous waste as set forth in 40 CFR 261, the EPA hazardous waste number and
the type of discharge (continuous, batch or other). If the user discharges more
than 100 kilograms of such waste per calendar month, the notification also
shall contain the following information to the extent such information is
required by the operator: an identification of the hazardous constituents
contained in the wastes, an estimation of the mass and concentration of such
constituents in the waste stream discharged during that calendar month, and an
estimation of the mass of constituents in the waste stream expected to be
discharged during the following 12 months.
   B.   Discharges are exempt from the requirements of Subsection A above
during a calendar month in which they discharge no more than 15 kilograms of
hazardous wastes, unless the wastes are acute hazardous wastes as specified in
40 CFR 261.30(d) and 261.33(e). Discharge of more than 15 kilograms of non-
acute hazardous wastes in a calendar month, or of any quantity of acute
hazardous wastes as specified in 40 CFR 261.30(d) and 261.33(e), requires a
one-time notification. Subsequent months during which the user discharges more
than such quantities of any hazardous waste do not require additional
notification.
   C.   In the case of any new regulations under Section 3001 of RCRA
identifying additional characteristics of hazardous waste or listing any
additional substance as a hazardous waste, the user must notify the operator,
the EPA Regional Waste Management Waste Division Director and state hazardous
waste authorities of the discharge of such substance within 90 days of the
effective date of such regulations.
   D.   In the case of any notification made under this section, the user shall
certify that it has a program in place to reduce the volume and toxicity of
hazardous wastes generated to the degree it has determined to be economically
practical.
§ 192-41.   Recordkeeping.
Users subject to the reporting requirements of these regulations shall retain,
and make available for inspection and copying, all records of information
obtained pursuant to any monitoring activities required by these regulations
and any additional records of information obtained pursuant to monitoring
activities undertaken by the user independent of such requirements. Records
shall include the date, exact place, method and time of sampling, and the name
of the person(s) taking the samples; the dates analyses were performed; who
performed the analyses; the analytical techniques or methods used; and the
results of such analyses. These records shall remain available for a period of
at least three years. This period shall be automatically extended for the
duration of any litigation concerning the user or the Township, or the
operator, or a POTW, or where the user has been specifically notified of a
longer retention period by the Township or operator.
§ 192-42.   (Reserved).
§ 192-43.   (Reserved).
§ 192-44.   (Reserved).
§ 192-45.   (Reserved).
§ 192-46.   (Reserved).
§ 192-47.   (Reserved).
ARTICLE VIII
Compliance Monitoring
§ 192-48.   Right-of-entry inspection and sampling.
   A.   The operator shall have the right to enter the premises of any user,
without notice, to determine whether the user is complying with the
requirements of these regulations and any wastewater discharge permit or order
issued hereunder. Users shall allow the operator ready access to all parts of
the premises for the purposes of inspection, sampling, records examination and
copying, and the performance of any additional duties.
   B.   Where a user has security measures in force which require proper
identification and clearance before entry into its premises, the user shall
make necessary arrangements with its security personnel so that, upon
presentation of suitable identification, the operator will be permitted to
enter without delay for the purposes of performing specific responsibilities.
   C.   The operator shall have the right to set up on the user’s property, or
require installation of, such devices as are necessary to conduct sampling and/
or metering of the user’s operations.
   D.   The operator may require the user to install monitoring equipment as
necessary. The facility’s sampling and monitoring equipment shall be maintained
at all times in a safe and proper operating condition by the user at its own
expense. All devices used to measure wastewater flow and quality shall be
calibrated to ensure their accuracy.
   E.   Any temporary or permanent obstruction to safe and easy access to the
facility to be inspected and/or sampled shall be promptly removed by the user
at the written or verbal request of the operator and shall not be replaced. The
costs of clearing such access shall be born by the user.
   F.   Unreasonable delays in allowing the operator access to the user’s
premises shall be a violation of these regulations.
   G.   When it would be impractical or cause undue hardship on the user to
situate the monitoring facility on the user’s premises, the Township may allow
the facility to be constructed in a public street or sidewalk area and located
so that it will not be obstructed by landscaping or parked vehicles. There
shall be ample room in or near such sampling manhole or facility to allow
accurate sampling and preparation of samples for analysis. The facility,
sampling and measuring equipment shall be maintained at all times in a safe and
proper condition at the expense of the user.
§ 192-49.   Search warrants.
If the operator has been refused access to a building, structure or property,
or any part thereof, and is able to demonstrate probable cause to believe that
there may be a violation of these regulations, or that there is a need to
inspect and/or sample as part of a routine inspection and sampling program of
the operator designed to verify compliance with these regulations or any permit
or order issued hereunder, or to protect the overall public health, safety and
welfare of the community, then the Township and the operator may seek issuance
of a search warrant from the District Justice in whose jurisdiction the
property is situate.
§ 192-50.   Public access to information.
Information and data on a user obtained from reports, surveys, wastewater
discharge permit applications, wastewater discharge permits and monitoring
programs, and from the operator’s inspection and sampling activities, shall be
available to the public without restriction, unless the user specifically
requests, and is able to demonstrate to the satisfaction of the operator, that
the release of such information would divulge information, processes or methods
of production entitled to protection as trade secrets under applicable state
law. Any such request must be asserted at the time of submission of the
information or data. When requested and demonstrated by the user furnishing a
report that such information should be held confidential, the portions of a
report which might disclose trade secrets or secret processes shall not be made
available for inspection by the public, but shall be made available immediately
upon request to governmental agencies for uses related to the NPDES program or
pretreatment program and in enforcement proceedings involving the person
furnishing the report. Wastewater constituents and characteristics and other
“effluent data” as defined by 40 CFR 2.302 will not be recognized as
confidential information and will be available to the public without
restriction.
§ 192-51.   (Reserved).
ARTICLE IX
Enforcement Remedies
§ 192-52.   Surcharge in lieu of enforcement remedy.
With respect to conventional pollutants, the operator may, from time to time
and at its discretion, adopt a policy whereby certain specifically identified
conventional pollutants are permissibly discharged to a POTW for removal at the
plant, with the cost of such removal to be borne by the discharger. The
operator may expand or limit the list of conventional pollutants to which this
surcharge system applies based upon the plant’s capacity/ability to effectively
remove particular conventional pollutants. In the event that a conventional
pollutant is within the scope of the surcharge system as it exists at the time
of discharge, then such conventional pollutant discharge shall not be
considered a violation of these regulations. However, any failure to pay the
surcharge cost for the plant’s removal of the pollutant shall itself be
considered a violation of these regulations and subject to enforcement action,
in addition to all generally held rights of collection.
§ 192-53.   Administrative remedies.
   A.   Notification of violation. When the Township or the operator find that
a user has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of these
regulations, a wastewater discharge permit or order issued hereunder, or any
other pretreatment standard or requirement, the Township or the operator may
serve upon that user a written notice of violation. When the notice of
violation includes a plan for satisfactory correction and prevention of the
violation, submission of such plan in no way relieves the user of liability for
any violations occurring before or after receipt of the notice of violation.
Nothing in this section shall limit the authority of the Township or the
operator to take any action, including emergency action or any other
enforcement action, without first issuing a notice of violation.
   B.   Consent orders. An operator may enter into consent orders, assurances
of voluntary compliance or other similar documents establishing an agreement
with any user responsible for noncompliance Such documents will include
specific action to be taken by the user to correct the noncompliance within a
time period specified by the document. Such documents shall have the same
effect as the administrative orders authorized elsewhere in these regulations
and shall be judicially enforceable.
   C.   Compliance order. When the Township or the operator finds that a user
has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of these regulations, a
wastewater discharge permit or order issued hereunder or any other pretreatment
standard or requirement, the Township or the operator may issue an order to the
user responsible for the discharge directing that the user come into compliance
within a specified time. If the user does not come into compliance within the
time provided, sewer service may be discontinued unless adequate treatment
facilities, devices or other related appurtenances are installed and properly
operated. Compliance orders also may contain other requirements to address the
noncompliance, including additional self-monitoring and management practices
designed to minimize the amount of pollutants discharged to the sewer. A
compliance order may not extend the deadline for compliance established for a
pretreatment standard or requirement, nor does a compliance order relieve the
user of liability for any violation, including any continuing violation.
Issuance of a compliance order shall not be a bar against, or a prerequisite
for, taking any other action against the user.
   D.   Cease and desist orders.
      (1)   When the Township or the operator find that a user has violated, or
continues to violate, any provision of these regulations, a wastewater
discharge permit or order issued hereunder or any other pretreatment standard
or requirement, or that the user’s past violations are likely to recur, the
Township or the operator may issue an order to the user directing it to cease
and desist all such violations and directing the user to:
         (a)   Immediately comply with all requirements.
         (b)   Take such appropriate remedial or preventive action as may be
needed to properly address a continuing or threatened violation, including
halting operations and/or terminating the discharge.
      (2)   Issuance of a cease and desist order shall not be a bar against or
a prerequisite for taking any other action against the user.
   E.   Administrative fines.
      (1)   When the Township or the operator find that a user has violated, or
continues to violate, any provision of these regulations, a wastewater
discharge permit or order issued hereunder or any other pretreatment standard
or requirement, the Township or the operator may fine such user in an amount
permitted by law. Such fines shall be assessed on a per violation, per day
basis. In the case of monthly or other long-term average discharge limits,
fines shall be assessed for each day during the period of violation.
      (2)   Unpaid charges, fines and penalties shall be assessed a penalty as
specified by the operator, and interest shall accrue thereafter at a rate
determined by the operator. A lien against the user’s property may be sought
for unpaid charges, fines and penalties.
      (3)   Users desiring to dispute such fines must file a written request
for the Township or operator to reconsider the fine along with full payment of
the fine amount within 20 days of being notified of the fine. Where a request
has merit, the Township or the operator may convene a hearing on the matter. In
the event that the user’s appeal is successful, the payment, together with any
interest accruing thereto, shall be returned to the user. The costs of
preparing administrative enforcement actions, such as notices and orders, may
be added to the fine.
      (4)   Issuance of an administrative fine shall not be a bar against or a
prerequisite for taking any other action against the user.
   F.   Emergency suspensions.
      (1)   The operator may immediately suspend a user’s discharge, after
informal notice to the user, whenever such suspension is necessary to stop an
actual or threatened discharge which reasonably appears to present or cause an
imminent or substantial endangerment to the health or welfare of persons. The
operator may also immediately suspend a user’s discharge, after notice and
opportunity to respond, that threatens to interfere with the operation of a
POTW, or which presents, or may present, an endangerment to the environment.
      (2)   Any user notified of a suspension of its discharge shall
immediately stop or eliminate its contribution. In the event of a user’s
failure to immediately comply voluntarily with the suspension order, the
operator may take such steps as deemed necessary, including immediate severance
of the sewer connection, to prevent or minimize damage to a POTW or its
receiving stream or endangerment to any individuals. The operator may allow the
user to recommence its discharge when the user has demonstrated to the
satisfaction of the operator that the period of endangerment has passed, unless
the termination proceedings in these regulations are initiated against the
user.
      (3)   A user that is responsible, in whole or in part, for any discharge
presenting imminent endangerment shall submit a detailed written statement,
describing the causes of the harmful contribution and the measures taken to
prevent any future occurrence, to the operator prior to the date of any show
cause or termination hearing described elsewhere in these regulations.
      (4)   Nothing in this section shall be interpreted as requiring a hearing
prior to any emergency suspension under this section.
   G.   Termination of discharge.
      (1)   In addition to the provisions in these regulations, any user who
violates the following conditions is subject to discharge termination:
         (a)   Violation of wastewater discharge permit conditions.
         (b)   Failure to accurately report the wastewater constituents and
characteristics of its discharge.
         (c)   Failure to report significant changes in operations or
wastewater volume, constituents and characteristics prior to discharge.
         (d)   Refusal of reasonable access to the user’s premises for the
purpose of inspection, monitoring or sampling.
         (e)   Violation of the pretreatment standards in these regulations.
      (2)   Such user will be notified of the proposed termination of its
discharge and be offered an opportunity to show cause why the proposed action
should not be taken. Exercise of this option by the operator shall not be a bar
to or a prerequisite for taking any other action against the user.
§ 192-54.   Judicial enforcement remedies.
   A.   Injunctive relief. When the operator determines that a user has
violated, or continues to violate, any provision of these regulations, a
wastewater discharge permit or order issued hereunder, or any other
pretreatment standard or requirement, the operator may petition the Court of
Common Pleas of Montgomery County for the issuance of a temporary or permanent
injunction, as appropriate, which restrains or compels the specific performance
of the wastewater discharge permit, order or other requirement imposed by these
regulations on activities of the user. The operator may also seek such other
action as is appropriate for legal and/or equitable relief, including a
requirement for the user to conduct environmental remediation. A petition for
injunctive relief shall not be a bar against or a prerequisite for taking any
other action against a user.
   B.   Civil penalties. In the event that the operator is required to seek
court redress for violations of these regulations, then all amounts recoverable
elsewhere herein as administrative fines shall be recoverable as civil
penalties; attorney’s fees, court costs and related expenses shall also be
recoverable. Filing suit for civil penalties shall not be a bar against or a
prerequisite for taking any other action against a user.
   C.   Criminal prosecution. In the event that any discharge or other
violation of these regulations constitutes a violation of any criminal or penal
statute, then, in addition, to all enforcement remedies described elsewhere in
these regulations, the Township shall have the unfettered right to initiate
and/or assist in any state or federal criminal proceedings as a result of such
violation. Examples of criminal conduct in connection with a violation include,
but are not limited to, knowing or intentional introduction of any substance
into the wastewater system which causes injury to persons or property,
otherwise undertaking any act or failing to undertake any act which recklessly
endangers the well-being of the community or plant personnel, falsification of
documents required to be filed pursuant to these regulations, and tampering
with or otherwise rendering inaccurate a monitoring device or similar
equipment.
   D.   Remedies nonexclusive. The remedies provided for in these regulations
are not exclusive. The operator may take any, all or any combination of these
actions and those actions specified by the operator’s regulations against a
noncompliant user. Enforcement of pretreatment violations will generally be in
accordance with an enforcement response plan if same is adopted by the
operator. However, the operator may take other action against any user when the
circumstances warrant. Further, the operator may take more than one enforcement
action against any noncompliant user.
§ 192-55.   Supplemental enforcement action.
   A.   Performance bonds. The operator may decline to issue or reissue a
wastewater discharge permit to any user who has failed to comply with any
provision of these regulations, a previous wastewater discharge permit, or
order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement,
unless such user first files a satisfactory bond, payable to the operator, in a
sum not to exceed a value determined by the operator to be necessary to achieve
consistent compliance.
   B.   Liability insurance. The operator may decline to issue or reissue a
wastewater discharge permit to any user who has failed to comply with any
provision of these regulations, a previous wastewater discharge permit, or
order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement,
unless the user first submits proof that it has obtained financial assurances
sufficient to restore or repair damage to a POTW caused by its discharge.
   C.   Water supply severance. Whenever a user has violated or continues to
violate any provision of these regulations, a wastewater discharge permit, or
order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement,
water service to the user may be severed. Service will only recommence, at the
user’s expense, after it has satisfactorily demonstrated its ability to comply.
   D.   Public nuisances. A violation of any provision of these regulations, a
wastewater discharge permit, or order issued hereunder, or any other
pretreatment standard or requirement may separately be declared as a public
nuisance to the extent that it constitutes such nuisance as defined by
Pennsylvania law or the Township Code.
ARTICLE X
Affirmative Defenses to Discharge Violations
§ 192-56.   Upset.
   A.   For the purposes of this section, “upset” means an exceptional incident
in which there is unintentional and temporary noncompliance with categorical
pretreatment standards because of factors beyond the reasonable control of the
user. An upset does not include noncompliance to the extent caused by
operational error, improperly designed treatment facilities, inadequate
treatment facilities, and lack of preventive maintenance or careless or
improper operation.
   B.   An upset shall constitute an affirmative defense to an action brought
for noncompliance with categorical pretreatment standards if the requirements
of Subsection C below are met.
   C.   A user who wishes to establish the affirmative defense of upset shall
demonstrate, through properly signed, contemporaneous operating logs, or other
relevant evidence, that:
      (1)   An upset occurred and the user can identify the cause(s) of the
upset.
      (2)   The facility was at the time being operated in a prudent and
workmanlike manner and in compliance with applicable operation and maintenance
procedures.
      (3)   The user has submitted the following information to the operator
within 24 hours of becoming aware of the upset (if this information is provided
orally, a written submission must be provided within five days):
         (a)   A description of the indirect discharge and cause of
noncompliance.
         (b)   The period of noncompliance, including exact dates and times or,
if not corrected, the anticipated time the noncompliance is expected to
continue.
         (c)   Steps being taken and/or planned to reduce, eliminate and
prevent recurrence of the noncompliance.
   D.   In any enforcement proceeding, the user seeking to establish the
occurrence of an upset shall have the burden of proof.
   E.   Users will have the opportunity for a judicial determination on any
claim of upset only in an enforcement action brought for noncompliance with
categorical pretreatment standards.
   F.   Users shall control production of all discharges to the extent
necessary to maintain compliance with categorical pretreatment standards upon
reduction, loss or failure of its treatment facility until the facility is
restored or an alternative method of treatment is provided. This requirement
applies in the situation where, among other things, the primary source of power
of the treatment facility is reduced, lost or fails.
§ 192-57.   Prohibited discharge standards.
A user shall have an affirmative defense to an enforcement action brought
against it for noncompliance with the general prohibitions in these regulations
or the specific prohibitions in these regulations if it can prove that it did
not know, or have reason to know, that its discharge, alone or in conjunction
with discharges from other sources, would cause pass-through or interference
and that either:
   A.   A local limit exists for each pollutant discharged and the user was in
compliance with each limit directly prior to, and during, the pass-through or
interference.
   B.   No local limit exists, but the discharge did not change substantially
in nature or constituents from the user’s prior discharge when the operator was
regularly in compliance with its NPDES permit and, in the case of interference,
was in compliance with applicable sludge use or disposal requirements.
§ 192-58.   Bypass.
   A.   A user may allow any bypass to occur which does not cause pretreatment
standards or requirements to be violated, but only if it also is for essential
maintenance to assure efficient operation. These bypasses are not subject to
the provision of Subsections C and D of this section.
      (1)   If a user knows in advance of the need for a bypass, it shall
submit prior notice to the operator at least 10 days before the date of the
bypass, if possible.
      (2)   A user shall submit oral notice to the operator of an unanticipated
bypass that exceeds applicable pretreatment standards within 24 hours from the
time it becomes aware of the bypass. A written submission shall also be
provided within five days of the time the user becomes aware of the bypass. The
written submission shall contain a description of the bypass and its cause; the
duration of the bypass, including exact dates and times, and, if the bypass has
not been corrected, the anticipated time it is expected to continue; and steps
taken or planned to reduce, eliminate and prevent reoccurrence of the bypass.
The operator may waive the written report on a case-by-case basis if the oral
report has been received within 24 hours.
   B.   Notice and report.
      (1)   If a user knows in advance of the need for a bypass, it shall
submit prior notice to the operator at least 10 days before the date of the
bypass, if possible.
      (2)   A user shall submit oral notice to the operator of an unanticipated
bypass that exceeds applicable pretreatment standards within 24 hours from the
time it becomes aware of the bypass. A written submission shall also be
provided within five days of the time the user becomes aware of the bypass. The
written submission shall contain a description of the bypass and its cause; the
duration of the bypass, including exact dates and times and, if the bypass has
not been corrected, the anticipated time it is expected to continue; and steps
taken or planned to reduce, eliminate and prevent reoccurrence of the bypass.
The operator may waive the written report on a case-by-case basis if the oral
report has been received within 24 hours.
   C.   Exceptions.
      (1)   Bypass is prohibited, and the operator may undertake an enforcement
action against a user for a bypass, unless:
         (a)   The bypass was unavoidable to prevent loss of life, personal
injury or severe property damage.
         (b)   There were no feasible alternatives to the bypass, such as the
use of auxiliary treatment facilities, retention of untreated wastes or
maintenance during normal periods of equipment downtime. This condition is not
satisfied if adequate backup equipment should have been installed in the
exercise of reasonable engineering judgment to prevent a bypass which occurred
during normal periods of equipment downtime or preventive maintenance.
         (c)   The user submitted notices as required under Subsection C of
this section.
      (2)   The operator may approve an anticipated bypass, after considering
its adverse effects, if the operator determines that it will meet the three
conditions listed in Subsection D(1) of this section.
ARTICLE XI
Building Sewers and Connections
§ 192-59.   General regulations.
   A.   No authorized persons (i.e., persons other than an operator, or its
agents) shall uncover, make any connections with or opening into, use, alter or
disturb any public sewer or appurtenance thereof without first obtaining a
written permit from the operator.
   B.   The owner or his agent shall make application on a form furnished by
the operator. The permit application shall be supplemented by any plans,
specifications or other information considered pertinent in the judgment of the
operator. A permit and inspection fee for a building sewer permit shall be paid
to the Township at the time the application is filed. All building sewer permit
applications shall be reviewed and approved by the Township prior to permit
issuance. Permit and inspection fees for sewer permits shall be in such amounts
as may be established from time to time by the Township through resolution.
   C.   All costs and expenses incidental to the installation, connection and
maintenance of the building sewer shall be borne by the owner or user, who
shall indemnify the Township and the operator from any loss or damage that may
be directly or indirectly be caused by the installation of the building sewer.
   D.   A separate and independent building sewer shall be provided for every
building or any part of any building as may be determined by the Township and
the operator.
   E.   Old building sewers may be used in connection with new buildings only
when they are found, upon examination and test by the operator, to meet all
applicable requirements.
   F.   The size, slope, alignment, materials or construction of a building
sewer and the methods to be used in excavating, placing of the pipe, jointing,
testing and backfilling the trench shall conform to the requirements of the
building and plumbing codes and/or other applicable rules and regulations of
the Township and the operator. In the absence of code provisions or in
amplification thereof, the materials and procedures set forth in appropriate
specifications of the ASTM and WPCF Manual of Practice No. 9 shall apply.
   G.   In order to prevent grease, oil and sand from being discharged into a
sanitary sewer system, all hospitals, nursing homes, hotels, restaurants and
any other establishments engaged in the preparation, processing or sale of food
shall install and properly maintain one or more grease traps of a type and
capacity approved by the operator and the same shall be located so as to be
readily and easily accessible for cleaning and inspection. If any other user,
in the opinion of the operator, discharges a quantity of oil or sand in its
sewage so as to warrant the installation and maintenance of one or more grease
traps, the same shall be installed and maintained in accordance with these
regulations at the direction of the operator.
   H.   In all buildings in which any building drain is too low to permit
gravity flow to a sanitary sewer, sanitary sewage carried by such building
drain shall be lifted by a method approved by the Township and the operator and
discharged to the building sewer.
   I.   No person shall make connection of sump pumps, roof downspouts,
foundation drains, areaway drains or other sources of surface runoff or
groundwater to a building sewer or building drain which in turn is connected
directly or indirectly to a sanitary sewer unless such connection is approved
in writing by the Township and the operator.
   J.   The connection of the building sewer into a sanitary sewer shall
conform to the requirements of the building and plumbing codes and other
applicable rules and regulations of the Township and the operator. All such
connections shall be made gastight and watertight and verified by proper
testing. Any deviation from the prescribed procedures and materials must be
approved by the Township and the operator before installation.
   K.   The applicant for a building sewer permit shall notify the operator
when the building sewer is ready for inspection and connection to the sanitary
sewer system. The connection to the sewer system and testing shall be made
under the supervision of the operator.
   L.   All excavations for building sewer installation shall be adequately
guarded with barricades and lights so as to protect the public from hazard
Streets, sidewalks, parkways and other public property disturbed in the course
of work shall be restored in a manner satisfactory to the Township.
   M.   No excavation, construction or connection work shall be commenced
within a Township right-of-way until the owner, his agents and/or independent
contractor shall have first filed a bond in double the amount of the cost of
the work to be performed by the Township, agreeing to indemnify and save
harmless the Township and the operator against any and all loss, damages, costs
and expenses which the Township and the operator may thereafter suffer, incur
or pay by reason of the failure to complete properly any of the aforesaid
excavation, construction or connection work.
   N.   The term “owner” as used herein, shall be deemed to include the owner
or owners in fee simple, lessees of the premises, occupiers of the premises,
users and all other parties having a use or interest in the premises and
occupying the same with or without the consent and permission of the owner of
the fee title.
   O.   Sanitary sewers installed with unused points of connection for building
sewers shall have said points of connection capped for watertight integrity
prior to connection of the building sewer. The method of capping shall be one
approved by the Township and the operator.
ARTICLE XII
Ambler Wastewater Treatment Plant
§ 192-60.   General provisions.
This Article XII applies to users within the Township that discharge wastewater
to the Ambler Wastewater Treatment Plant (“AWTP”), for which Ambler is
primarily responsible.
§ 192-61.   Jurisdiction.
   A.   With regard to direct and indirect contributions of wastewater from
within the boundaries of the Township which contributions are ultimately
discharged to the AWTP, the operator is responsible for enforcement of this
chapter and its own regulations in the first instance, but the AWTP and Ambler
share the duty to enforce this chapter to the extent necessary to assure
compliance by Ambler and the AWTP with the Clean Water Act of 1977 and the
General Pretreatment Regulations (40 CFR 403), along with all applicable state
and federal laws and permits.
   B.   Neither Ambler nor the AWTP have any jurisdiction or authority to
enforce this chapter or any ordinance with regard to users whose discharge does
not enter the AWTP.
   C.   With regard to users whose discharge enters the AWTP, the provisions of
this chapter as outlined above apply to Ambler and the AWTP as well as to the
Township and the operator. In addition, with regard to users whose discharge
enters the AWTP, the following provisions also apply to Ambler and the AWTP.
§ 192-62.   National categorical pretreatment standards.
The categorical pretreatment standards found at 40 CFR, Chapter I, Subchapter
N, Parts 405–4471, are hereby incorporated by reference as if set forth fully
herein.
   A.   Where a categorical pretreatment standard is expressed only in terms of
either the mass or the concentration of a pollutant in wastewater, AWTP may
impose equivalent concentration or mass limits in accordance with 40 CFR 403.6
(c).
   B.   When wastewater subject to a categorical pretreatment standard is mixed
with wastewater not regulated by the same standard, AWTP shall impose an
alternate limit using the combined waste stream formula in 40 CFR 403.6(e).
   C.   A user may obtain a variance from a categorical pretreatment standard
if the user can prove, pursuant to the procedural and substantive provisions in
40 CFR 403.13, that factors relating to its discharge are fundamentally
different from the factors considered by EPA when developing the categorical
pretreatment standard.
   D.   A user may obtain a net gross adjustment to a categorical standard in
accordance with 40 CFR 403.15.
§ 192-63.   Right of revision.
   AWTP reserves the right to establish, by ordinance or in wastewater
discharge permits, more stringent standards or requirements on discharges to
the AWTP.
§ 192-64.   Wastewater analysis.
When required by AWTP, a user must submit information on the nature and
characteristics of its wastewater within five days of the request. AWTP is
authorized to prepare a form for this purpose and may periodically require
users to update this information.
§ 192-65.   Regulation of waste received from other jurisdictions.
   A.   Pursuant to the Pennsylvania Pretreatment Works Penalty Law (Act 9 of
1992), the AWTP reserves the right to regulate waste entering the POTW
regardless of its point of origin.
   B.   Whenever possible, the enforcement of this chapter shall be a joint and
cooperative effort between the Township, the operators, and AWTP and/or Ambler,
which has primary responsibility for plant operations. In the event that the
Township and the operator fail or refuse to enforce its sewer regulations after
the AWTP or Ambler has made a determination that such enforcement is necessary,
then the AWTP and Ambler reserve all rights which they may have to either
undertake enforcement pursuant to the Pennsylvania Pretreatment Works Penalty
Law and/or to seek enforcement of any intermunicipal agreement which may
require the cooperation of the Township or the operator.
§ 192-66.   Enforcement remedies.
The Borough of Ambler and the AWTP, in conjunction with the operator, are fully
empowered to undertake all enforcement remedies set forth herein in order to
assure user compliance with state and federal laws and regulations.
§ 192-67.   Show-cause hearing.
   A.   In addition to the administrative enforcement remedies outlined above,
AWTP may order a user which has violated, or continues to violate, any
provision of this Article, a wastewater discharge permit or order issued
hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, to appear before
the AWTP and show cause why the proposed enforcement action should not be
taken. Notice shall be served on the user specifying the time and place for the
meeting, the proposed enforcement action, the reasons for such action, and a
request that the user show cause why the proposed enforcement action should not
be taken. The notice of the meeting shall be served personally or by registered
mail at least 10 days prior to the hearing. Such notice may be served on any
authorized representative of the user. A show-cause hearing shall not be a bar
against or prerequisite for taking any other action against the user.
   B.   At any hearing held pursuant to this Article, testimony taken must be
under oath and recorded stenographically. The transcript, so recorded, will be
made available to any member of the public or any party to the hearing upon
payment of the usual charges thereof.
   C.   After a hearing, an order may be issued as authorized directing that,
following a specified time period, the sewer service be discontinued unless
adequate treatment facilities, devices or other related appurtenances shall
have been installed or existing treatment facilities, devices or other related
appurtenances are properly operated. Further orders and directives, as are
necessary and appropriate, may be issued.
   D.   Any user aggrieved by the enforcement of this chapter may take an
appeal to the Court of Common Pleas of Montgomery County, Pennsylvania, in
accordance with the provisions of the Local Agency Law, 2 Pa.C.S.A. § 105 et
seq., and have a hearing thereon if the appeal is taken within 15 calendar days
of the user’s receipt of any order or notice under the applicable section.
§ 192-68.   (Reserved). 
[Added 5-13-2014 by Ord. No. 14-1290, § 2]
§ 192-69.   (Reserved). 
[Added 5-13-2014 by Ord. No. 14-1290, § 2]
ARTICLE XIII
Grinder Pumps
[Added 5-13-2014 by Ord. No. 14-1290, § 3]
§ 192-70.   Purpose.
The purpose of this Article is to establish procedures for the installation,
operation, maintenance, and retirement of grinder pumps and any associated low-
pressure sewer systems and laterals.
§ 192-71.   General provisions.
   A.   Each owner of a property served by a grinder pump shall bear full
responsibility for providing, installing, using, operating, maintaining,
servicing, repairing and replacing the grinder pump and any associated low-
pressure sewer system and lateral, unless otherwise set forth in this Article
or by agreement with the Township and/or the operator.
   B.   Each owner of a property served by a grinder pump shall have full
responsibility for using the grinder pump consistent with the manufacturer’s
instructions and shall avoid introducing into the sewer system materials that
may damage the grinder pump.
   C.   The Township and the operator shall bear no responsibility for the
purchase, installation, use, operation, maintenance, service, repair, or
replacement of a grinder pump and any associated low-pressure sewer system and
lateral, except as otherwise set forth in this Article or by agreement with the
property owner.
   D.   The Township shall require each property owner proposing to install or
who has installed a grinder pump or associated low-pressure sewer system or
lateral to assure the short- and long-term operation and maintenance, use,
service, repair or replacement of such systems.
§ 192-72.   Installation.
   A.   The connection of a property to an existing or proposed sanitary sewer
system through the use of a grinder pump and associated low-pressure sewer
systems and laterals shall occur only after the property owner receives the
required approvals from the Township, the operator, the Department of
Environmental Protection, and other agencies as applicable; such approvals to
include sewage facilities planning under the Pennsylvania Sewage Facilities Act
(Act 537, as amended).
   B.   The property owner is responsible for obtaining any required permits
and approvals for the installation or modification of a grinder pump and any
associated low-pressure sewer systems and laterals.
   C.   All grinder pumps and associated low-pressure sewer systems and
laterals shall be installed, used, operated, maintained, serviced, repaired and
replaced in full compliance with the rules and regulations of the Township and
the operator in effect from time to time.
   D.   The owner of a property serviced by a grinder pump shall provide an
adequate supply of electrical power with the proper phase, frequency and
voltage as recommended by the equipment manufacturers of the various components
of the system.
   E.   All control panels for individual grinder pump units shall have a
permanently attached phenolic label stating the following: “All maintenance
costs for grinder pump systems are the property owner’s responsibility.”
   F.   All off-site low-pressure sewers and service connections shall be
dedicated to the operator in accordance with the operator’s regulations and
procedures.
   G.   Maintenance of grinder pumps and low-pressure sewer systems not
dedicated to and accepted by the operator shall be performed by the property
owner in accordance with this Article.
   H.   The Township and/or the operator will not issue a permit for the
installation of a grinder pump until evidence is presented that all approvals
have been obtained as required by this section.
§ 192-73.   Operation and maintenance.
   A.   Each owner of a grinder pump and its associated low-pressure sewer
system and lateral shall implement an inspection and maintenance program for
the pump that includes, at a minimum, the manufacturers’ recommended services
and inspections for each separate component of the pump and system.
   B.   After the first month of operation of a grinder pump, and annually
thereafter, or more frequently if the manufacturer of any component parts
recommends more frequent servicing, the property owner shall have the grinder
pump inspected and certified by a qualified individual to confirm that it is
operating properly. The property owner shall obtain and maintain a report
signed by the inspector certifying that the grinder pump is operating in
accordance with the manufacturer’s specifications and recommendations. The
property owner shall provide the Township with a copy of the certified report
upon request by the Township.
   C.   The owner of each property served by a grinder pump shall close the
associated low-pressure sewer system or lateral and cease operations during any
period when the grinder pump and/or low-pressure sewer system or lateral
serving the property is inoperable.
   D.   All existing improved properties containing a grinder pump prior to the
enactment of this Article shall comply with the operations and maintenance
requirements of this Article within six months of the date of enactment.
§ 192-74.   Documentation.
   A.   A property owner proposing to install a grinder pump and associated
low-pressure sewer system or lateral shall prepare an operation and maintenance
plan for the grinder pump and execute and record a declaration of covenants,
easements, and restrictions with respect to the operation and maintenance of
the grinder pump and associated facilities in a form satisfactory to the
Township Solicitor. The declaration shall acknowledge, among other things, that
the property owner is aware of and will comply with this Article and will
assure the short- and long-term operation, maintenance, service, repair and
replacement of the grinder pump and any associated low-pressure sewer system
and lateral. Further, the declaration shall permit and empower the Township and
the operator, at and within their sole discretion, to take any and all steps
necessary to enforce the property owners’ obligations under this Article and
the declaration and to enter judgment and lien the subject property for
reimbursement of all costs and expenses related thereto. The Township will not
issue installation permits until evidence is presented that the declaration has
been recorded in the Office for the Recording of Deeds, Montgomery County,
Pennsylvania.
   B.   Where a low pressure sewer system or lateral is shared between property
owners, they shall submit to the Township a declaration of covenants,
easements, and restrictions in recordable form setting forth the agreement of
each benefitted property owner with respect to the installation, use,
operation, maintenance, service, repair and replacement of the low pressure
sewer system or lateral, which agreement shall bind all future property owners.
Following the approval of the low pressure system by all applicable agencies,
the Township will issue installation permits after evidence is presented that
the declaration has been recorded in the Office for the Recording of Deeds,
Montgomery County, Pennsylvania.
   C.   The owner of a property served by a grinder pump shall obtain and
maintain at the property, and make available to the Township and operator as
requested, the following information with respect to the grinder pump:
      (1)   Written operation and maintenance instructions.
      (2)   Annual inspection reports for the past three years.
      (3)   A detailed drawing showing the location, size, material type, and
depth of all components of the grinder pump and any associated low-pressure
sewer system and lateral, including provision of a caution notice regarding
disturbance near and within the grinder pump and associated facilities.
      (4)   A written description of any automatic alarm system with the
grinder pump and any associated low pressure system, and who to contact in the
event the alarm would be activated.
   D.   Upon the sale or transfer of a property served by a grinder pump or low
pressure sewer system or lateral, the seller/grantor shall provide the buyer/
grantee prior to settlement all information regarding the grinder pump system
installed. The information provided shall include all information and documents
required to be maintained at the property, recording information for all
recorded documents, manufacture and distributor identity and contact
information, operating instructions, warranties, and maintenance schedule.
   E.   The seller/grantor shall inform the buyer/grantee about the
requirements of this Article and any recorded document with respect to the
grinder pump and associated facilities.
   F.   All existing improved properties containing a grinder pump prior to the
enactment of this Article shall comply with the grinder pump documentation
requirements of this Article within six months of the date of enactment.
However, the execution and recordation of a declaration is not required.
§ 192-75.   Gravity connection.
The owner of each property served by a grinder pump and associated low-pressure
sewer system and lateral shall retire the grinder pump, disconnect the property
from the low-pressure system, and connect the property to a gravity sanitary
sewer system at the direction of the Township or the operator when a gravity
sanitary sewer collection system is constructed in a location abutting any
boundary line of the property or within 150 feet of any occupied structured
situated on the property, and the Township Engineer or the operator determines
that it is reasonably feasible to connect the property to the gravity system.
§ 192-76.   Remedies.
   A.   In addition to the enforcement remedies specified in this Chapter, in
the event of a property owner’s failure to perform under this Article or any
subsequent resulting agreements, the Township and the operator shall have the
right to pursue whatever legal or equitable remedy they shall deem appropriate,
including but not limited to bringing an action for specific performance
against the property owner to compel compliance with this Article or any
subsequent resulting agreement.
   B.   In the event the Township or the operator elects to perform the
property owner’s obligations contained in this Article, or in any declarations
or agreements entered into by the property owner, because the property owner
has failed to do so, the Township and the operator may charge the property
owner the cost incurred by the Township and the operator in performing any of
the property owner’s obligations, and the property owner shall reimburse the
Township and the operator for all such costs within 30 days after such costs
are billed. The Township and the operator shall have the right to file a lien
against the property to secure to the Township and the operator any
reimbursement of costs due to them.
Chapter 195
SHADE TREES
§
195-1.   Word usage; definitions.
§
195-2.   Establishment of Commission.
§
195-3.   Composition; appointments; terms; vacancies.
§
195-4.   Powers and duties.
§
195-5.   Annual report; budget.
§
195-6.   Planting, maintaining and removal of shade trees.
§
195-7.   Maintenance and removal of trees on private property.
§
195-8.   Emergency situations.
§
195-9.   Regulations on planting and removal.
§
195-10.   Acts injurious to shade trees prohibited.
§
195-11.   Violations and penalties.
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Board of Commissioners of the Township of Upper Dublin
6-14-1994 as Ord. No. 870. Amendments noted where applicable.]
§ 195-1.   Word usage; definitions.
   A.   Word usage. The singular number includes the plural, and the plural
includes the singular. The masculine gender includes the feminine.
   B.   Terms defined. Unless otherwise expressly stated, the following words
and phrases shall be construed throughout this chapter to have the meanings
indicated in this section:
      BOARD — The Board of Commissioners of the Township of Upper Dublin.
COMMISSION — The Shade Tree Commission.
      DBH — Diameter at breast height, 4.5 feet from the ground.
      DIRECTOR — The Director of Public Works.
      PERMIT — A permit in writing as issued by the Director pursuant to
application approval by the Commission.
      PERSON — Any individual, firm, association, partnership or corporation.
      PRUNING — Removal of branches from a tree or bush using proper tools and
approved cutting techniques.
      PUBLIC STREET OR HIGHWAY — Any public right-of-way, a portion of which is
used for vehicular travel, in the township.
      RIGHT-OF-WAY — The width of each public street, including sidewalks and/
or adjoining land, as indicated on township maps maintained by the Public Works
Department.
      SHADE TREE — Any tree having more than 50% of its trunk diameter at
breast height within the right-of-way of a public street or on township
property.
      SHADE TREE COMMISSION — A commission established pursuant to powers
granted by the First Class Township Code. 1
      STREET — Any public right-of-way, all or a portion of which is used for
vehicular travel, in the township.
      TOWNSHIP — The Township of Upper Dublin.
1 Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 55101 et seq.
§ 195-2.   Establishment of Commission.
A commission to be known as the "Shade Tree Commission" is hereby established.
§ 195-3.   Composition; appointments; terms; vacancies.
[Amended 12-9-1997 by Ord. No. 962]
   A.   The Commission shall be composed of five residents of the township who
are appointed by the Board and who shall serve without compensation.
   B.   Each member shall serve a term of five years. All initial terms shall
commence on the first day of July following the appointment. The initial
appointments shall be made for staggered terms so that the term of one member
shall expire each year.
   C.   Vacancies on the Shade Tree Commission shall be filled by the Board for
the unexpired term.
§ 195-4.   Powers and duties.
   A.   The Commission shall have exclusive custody and control of all shade
trees on township property and on public streets and is authorized to plant,
remove, maintain and protect all such shade trees in accordance with the
authority provided by law.
   B.   The Commission's meetings shall be held in the Township Administration
Building, shall be open to the public and shall be publicly advertised.
   C.   The Commission may prescribe rules and regulations for the conduct of
its affairs and for carrying out it duties.
§ 195-5.   Annual report; budget.
The Commission shall, by July 1 of each year, submit a report to the Board
summarizing accomplishments during the past fiscal year, together with plans
and a proposed budget for the next year.
§ 195-6.   Planting, maintaining and removal of shade trees.
   A.   Whenever the Commission proposes to plant or remove shade trees, all
property owners involved shall be notified by the Commission. Notice of such
work shall be sent by regular mail at least four weeks in advance, except in
emergency situations, as described in §
195-8, when immediate action is required.
   B.   Any person who wishes to plant, prune, spray or remove a shade tree in
the township right-of-way or who wishes to perform maintenance work on trees
growing within the public right-of-way or on that portion of a tree extending
over the public right-of-way shall secure a permit from the Director upon
written application accompanied by whatever fee the Commission deems necessary
and proper as reimbursement for its administrative expenses. The Commission
shall investigate the request and advise such person whether the work can be
carried out and, if so, the manner in which it may be done and, if work is to
be performed by the Commission, whether there will be any charge. The
provisions of this subsection shall apply to any public utility lawfully
occupying the public right-of-way and to any other entity occupying the public
right-of-way with the permission of a government agency. The Township Manager,
the Assistant Township Manager and the Director of Public Works are empowered
to revoke or suspend any permit for such work by issuing a stop-work order in
the event work under the permit is being performed in violation of the terms of
this chapter, the conditions attached to the grant of a permit, or the rules
and regulations of the Shade Tree Commission. [Amended 8-13-1996 by Ord. No.
914; 4-9-2002 by Ord. No. 1084]
   C.   If a property owner requests work to be done on a shade tree on the
owner's property and the Township Public Works Department is not in a position
to do it, the owner, with the permission of the Commission, may engage a
contractor to do the work. Before proceeding, the contractor must obtain a
permit from the Director of Public Works.
   D.   Any person who shall cause injury to a shade tree, whether by cutting,
pruning, spraying, climbing, striking or otherwise, shall be liable in damages
for the cost of repairing such injury, or, if such injury, in the opinion of
the Commission, requires the removal of the shade tree, for the cost of removal
and replacement thereof. No person with an approved application who performs
maintenance on a shade tree in a manner approved by the Commission, may be held
to have violated this subsection. [Added 8-13-1996 by Ord. No. 914]
§ 195-7.   Maintenance and removal of trees on private property.
   A.   Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, the Commission
shall, upon giving four weeks' written notice to the owner of the property,
require the owner to cut and remove any trees or bushes, or parts thereof, on
such owner's property (but not in the Township right-of-way) if such trees or
bushes are afflicted with any disease which threatens to injure or destroy
Township shade trees or constitute a hazard to those occupying public property
or the public right-of-way. Such removal may be required at the owner's
expense.
   B.   Upon failure of the owner to comply with such notice, the Commission
shall arrange for the work to be done and levy and collect the cost thereof
from the owner of the property. The cost of such work shall be a lien upon the
premises from the time of the commencement of the work, which date shall be
fixed by the Director and shall be filed with the Township Secretary. Any such
lien may be collected by appropriate legal action or by lien filed in the
manner provided by law for the filing and collection of municipal claims.
   C.   The Commission shall give said four-week notice by mailing to the last
known address of the owner of the property and by posting the notice at the
main entrance to the main habitable or occupied structure on the property.
§ 195-8.   Emergency situations.
Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, the Commission shall have
the right, without prior notice to any property owner, to perform any acts
necessary to abate any clear, present and immediate threat to the public
health, safety or welfare caused by the condition of any trees, bushes or parts
thereof. If any such threat is the result of any person's action or inaction,
the Commission may assess the cost of such summary abatement against that
person.
§ 195-9.   Regulations on planting and removal.
   A.   The following minimum planting standards regulate how trees should be
planted and the objectives to be achieved:
      (1)   Planting should avoid any interference with public safety at
intersections.
      (2)   Planting should avoid any interference with underground and
overhead utilities.
      (3)   There should be no planting less than 15 feet from fire hydrants,
streetlights or stop signs.
      (4)   Deep root barriers should be used to prevent cracked pavements.
      (5)   Trees should be spaced 30 to 50 feet apart and staggered along both
sides of all streets.
      (6)   Replacement of existing trees should be as close to their original
position as practicable.
   B.   New shade trees shall have a minimum trunk diameter of two to DA inches
DBH and shall have one foot of ball for each inch of trunk diameter. The hole
for the tree shall be at least 12 inches wider than the ball. If both a curb
and sidewalk are present and the space between is inadequate, the tree shall be
planted on the other side of the sidewalk but still within the Township right-
of-way.
   C.   In cases where there does not appear to be sufficient space to plant a
shade tree within the public right-of-way on the noncurb side of a sidewalk,
the Commission may plant one or more trees on private property with the
permission of the owner.
   D.   Preference shall be given to new shade trees that are native to this
region and that conform to the provisions. outlined in the Township Landscape
Ordinance. 1
1 Editor's Note: See
Ch. 212, Subdivision and Land Development, §
212-32.
§ 195-10.   Acts injurious to shade trees prohibited.
Except in case of immediate necessity for protection of life or property, it
shall be a violation of this chapter for any person to do any of the following
acts:
   A.   Cut, break, climb with spurs, injure in any manner or remove a shade
tree.
   B.   Cut down a shade tree or interfere in any manner with the roots of a
shade tree.
   C.   Spray a shade tree with any chemicals or insecticides.
   D.   Place any rope, guy wire, cable, sign, poster or other fixture on a
shade tree or on a shade tree guard.
   E.   Use, store or pour any material in such a manner that it could result
in injury to a shade tree.
§ 195-11.   Violations and penalties.
Any person who violates any of the provisions of this chapter shall, upon being
found guilty thereof, be liable to pay a fine or penalty in an amount not
exceeding $600. Each day that any such violation continues shall constitute a
separate offense.
Chapter 196
SIGNS
§
196-1.   Interpretation.
§
196-2.   Administration.
§
196-3.   General sign regulations.
§
196-4.   Illumination.
§
196-5.   Enforcement.
§
196-6.   Violations and penalties.
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Board of Commissioners of the Township of Upper Dublin
7-10-2001 by Ord. No. 1066. Amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
 
Zoning — See
Ch. 255.
 
§ 196-1.   Interpretation.
Where the provisions of this chapter conflict with
Chapter 73, Building Construction, the provisions of this chapter shall be
controlling. Unless otherwise expressly stated, the terms used herein are
defined as set forth in
Chapter 255, Zoning, §
255-7, Definitions.
§ 196-2.   Administration.
   A.   Sign permits. It shall be unlawful to erect, construct or significantly
alter any sign which requires a sign permit without first filing with Upper
Dublin Township an application therefore in writing, which application shall
contain the information required by the Director of Code Enforcement.
   B.   The following signs shall not require sign permits:
      (1)   Government signs (i.e., traffic signs, parking signs, etc.).
      (2)   Legal notices.
      (3)   Public monument, plaque, historic identification sign erected by a
government agency.
      (4)   The flag, insignia or decorative banner of a government agency.
      (5)   Public service and information signs advertising availability of
public restrooms, telephones or similar public conveniences, not exceeding
three square feet in area.
      (6)   Address signs, not exceeding two square feet.
      (7)   Name plates and identification signs, provided that characters do
not exceed three inches in height and an area not exceeding two square feet.
      (8)   Vending machine signs, where a product name is an integral
component of the vending machine, provided that the machine is not placed in
the front yard of a property.
      (9)   Incidental signs, provided that the aggregate area of incidental
signs on a property does not exceed four square feet; incidental sign area in
excess of four square feet shall be included in the calculation of a property's
permitted sign area.
      (10)   Home security signs, not exceeding one square foot.
      (11)   Temporary real estate signs erected on a property containing a
single-family dwelling for rent or sale. [Amended 8-13-2019 by Ord. No. 19-
1355, § 2]
      (12)   Yard sale signs.
      (13)   Personal expression signs, provided that they either are
freestanding, parallel wall or window signs. Such signs may not exceed four
square feet and, in the case of freestanding signs, four feet in height. They
also cannot be illuminated or placed within the sign setback area.
   C.   Sign permit review. The Zoning Officer shall either approve or deny the
application or refer the application back to the applicant in any instance
where insufficient information has been submitted.
   D.   The applicant for any permit for an off-premises sign shall present a
written statement from the owner of the property, duly notarized, that the
applicant has the right to use the property, to erect a sign and to maintain
the sign during the time that the sign is erected. The owner must further
verify, in writing, that it will, at its sole cost and expense, cause the sign
to be removed at such time as there is no further use of the sign.
   E.   Fees. All applications for permits for the erection, construction or
alteration of signs shall, at the time of making application, be paid to the
Township in accordance with the Township fee schedule.
§ 196-3.   General sign regulations.
No person may erect, install or maintain any sign visible from the exterior of
any property or structure in the Township if prohibited by this chapter or
Chapter 255, and unless specifically permitted by
Chapter 255. The following regulations shall apply to all signs in the
Township. Where another chapter of this Code contains a more restrictive
provision relating to the same sign, the more restrictive provision shall
govern.
   A.   No sign, other than official Township street or directional signs or
street banner signs, shall be erected or maintained within the sign setback
area.
   B.   No sign shall project over any public sidewalk or street right-of-way,
nor shall any sign extend beyond any property line; except, when a permit is
issued by the Building Department, banners displaying a logo, slogan or design
associated with an educational, religious, civic organization or similar
noncommercial organization may be erected above a sidewalk in such uniform size
and subject to such regulations as the Department of Building Regulations shall
promulgate. [Amended 12-10-2002 by Ord. No. 1100]
   C.   No sign or advertising structure shall be placed in such a position as
to endanger traffic on a street by obscuring a clear view or at any location
where, by reason of position, shape or color, it may interfere with, obstruct
the view of or be confused with any authorized traffic sign, signal or device.
   D.   No sign shall be erected or maintained so as to prevent free ingress
and egress to or from any door, window or fire escape.
   E.   No signs shall be placed on utility poles without the permission of the
owner of the pole or in violation of state statute. [Amended 5-13-2003 by Ord.
No. 1107]
   F.   No freestanding sign shall exceed 20 feet in height.
   G.   A parallel wall sign shall not be attached to a wall of a height less
than 10 feet above the ground level, shall not be permitted to extend beyond
the edge of any wall, roofline or other surface to which it is mounted, and may
not project more than 18 inches from the surface to which it is mounted.
   H.   A projecting sign shall not be permitted to project above the wall,
roofline or surface to which it is mounted nor to interfere with normal
pedestrian or vehicular traffic.
   I.   No window sign shall exceed 25% of the total window area.
   J.   A monument sign shall not exceed four feet in height.
   K.   No sign shall be erected or painted on the roof of any building, nor
shall it project above the height of the wall of the building to which it
pertains.
   L.   Property owners shall assume the cost of relocating any sign erected or
placed within the sign setback area upon request of the Township.
   M.   Every sign shall be constructed of durable materials, using non-
corrosive fastenings; shall be structurally safe and erected or installed in
strict accordance with the PA Uniform Construction Code; and shall be
maintained in safe condition and good repair at all times so that all sign
information is clearly legible. No sign shall be constructed of cloth, canvas,
light fabric, cardboard, wallboard or other like materials unless a sign permit
is obtained from the Zoning Officer. [Amended 5-13-2003 by Ord. No. 1107; 8-13-
2019 by Ord. No. 19-1355, § 3]
   N.   Temporary signs shall not be erected in the sign setback area or on
Township property. Tacking, posting or otherwise affixing temporary signs upon
poles, trees, buildings, fences or other structures shall be prohibited without
the consent of the property owner. [Amended 5-13-2003 by Ord. No. 1107]
   O.   Temporary business signs, such as special event signs, banners,
portable signs and commemorative flags, containing commercial speech, including
the announcement of a grand opening, going-out-of-business sale or other
special promotional event, shall comply with the following additional
standards: [Amended 5-13-2003 by Ord. No. 1107]
      (1)   The area of the temporary business sign shall not exceed 25 square
feet.
      (2)   The property or business shall display only one temporary business
sign at any one time.
      (3)   The following display frequencies for temporary business signs
shall be observed:
         (a)   Portable signs may be displayed only once during the calendar
year for a period of time not exceeding 14 calendar days.
         (b)   All other temporary business signs, such as special event signs,
banners or commemorative flags, may be displayed no more than two times during
the calendar year for periods of time not exceeding 14 calendar days.
      (4)   The property or business owner shall obtain a permit from the
Township to display a temporary sign and shall deposit with the Township the
sum of $100, which sum shall be returned to the owner upon removal of the sign
or shall be retained by the Township upon the failure to remove within the time
limits prescribed herein.
      (5)   For purposes of this subsection, "commercial speech" is that which
does no more than propose a commercial transaction, e.g., an undertaking
intended for profit, directly or indirectly, in connection with any business.
   P.   Public use areas. No freestanding sign can occupy a designated parking
area or intended parking area, walkway, cartway, driveway or area designated
for any other use.
   Q.   Removal of signs: [Amended 8-13-2019 by Ord. No. 19-1355, § 3]
      (1)   The Township shall have the authority to remove and dispose of
signs under the following circumstances:
         (a)   When it is determined that the sign has deteriorated to the
point of becoming a danger to the public.
         (b)   When the sign is erected in the sign setback area.
      (2)   The Township shall have the authority to require the removal and/or
demolition of signs under the following circumstances:
         (a)   When a sign is erected without an approved sign permit.
         (b)   When a sign permit has expired.
         (c)   When a sign is erected which does not comply with the
requirements of this chapter and/or
Chapter 255.
      (3)   Where the Township seeks to require the removal of a sign, the
removal procedure will be initiated by a letter to the owner or lessee by the
Code Enforcement Officer requiring the removal of such sign within seven days.
      (4)   Owner or lessee's remedial action for each circumstance:
         (a)   Deteriorated sign: rehabilitation/repair of sign within 15 days.
         (b)   No sign permit: obtain permit within seven days.
         (c)   Prohibited signs shall conform to this Chapter and
Chapter 255 within 30 days.
         (d)   Nonconforming signs shall be brought into conformity with the
provisions of this Chapter and
Chapter 255 within 90 days.
         (e)   Expired permit: remove within seven days.
   R.   Signs and their supporting structures shall maintain clearance and
noninterference with all surface and underground utility and communications
lines or equipment. [Added 8-13-2019 by Ord. No. 19-1355, § 3]
§ 196-4.   Illumination.
   A.   Definitions. As used in this section, the following definitions shall
apply:
      EXTERNALLY ILLUMINATED SIGN — A sign illuminated with a light source of
an even intensity and so shielded that no direct rays therefrom are visible
elsewhere on the lot where said illumination occurs.
      INTERNALLY ILLUMINATED SIGN — A sign designed to give forth artificial
light directly (or through transparent or translucent material) from a source
of light within such sign, including but not limited to neon and exposed lamp
signs. Illumination shall only be of an even intensity.
   B.   Sign illumination shall be governed by the following regulations:
      (1)   Illumination is to be controlled by a timer which shall turn off
the sign light not later than one hour after the close of regular business
hours. Emergency directional signs and physicians providing emergency care upon
the premises, as well as governmental signs, shall be exempted.
      (2)   The external light source shall be shaded, hooded or otherwise
screened to prevent the direct rays of light from shining on adjacent property
causing glare to traveling motorists on a public street or access drive used by
the public.
      (3)   The intensity of internal illumination shall not exceed six
footcandles at a distance of eight feet from the center line of the sign. When
illuminated, light or pale colors and the color white shall not exceed 50% of
the sign area.
      (4)   Electrical components of internally illuminated signs shall bear
the Underwriters Laboratories (UL) label of approval.
      (5)   External illumination shall not exceed 17 footcandles at the face
of the sign, shall consist only of white or amber color range and shall consist
of uniform distribution of the light intensity.
   C.   In all residential zoning districts, as defined in
Chapter 255, and properties used for residential purposes, the following
permitted signs may be illuminated and no other:
      (1)   Professional sign of a physician, dentist and such other person
whose services in emergency are customarily considered essential to the public
health, safety and welfare, provided that the illumination is white light only,
and provided further that the total illumination for any such light shall not
exceed the equivalent of that given by a twenty-five-watt incandescent light
source.
      (2)   Sign of a school, church, hospital, sanitarium, club or other
institution of a similar nature, laboratory or municipal building, provided
that the illumination is white light only, and provided further that the total
illumination for any such sign shall not exceed the equivalent of that given by
a sixty-watt incandescent light source.
      (3)   Signs for regulation of traffic, marking of hazards and the like.
   D.   In commercial districts and shopping center districts, as defined in
Chapter 255, excluding property used for residential purposes, any permitted
sign may be illuminated, provided that no sign shall be illuminated by any type
of illumination, whether internal or external, more than 1/2 hour before the
time at which the premises is opened to the public or more than 1/2 hour after
the time at which the premises is closed to the public.
   E.   Floodlighting of any sign shall be so shielded that the source of the
light shall not be visible from any point off the lot on which the sign is
erected and so that only the sign is directly illuminated. Reflectors and
lights permitted in conjunction with signs shall be equipped with restraining
hoods to concentrate the illumination upon the area of the sign to prevent
glare upon a street or adjoining property.
   F.   All outside lighting, including sign lighting, shall be arranged,
designed and shielded or directed so as to protect an adjoining property or
street from direct glare so that the light does not constitute a nuisance to an
adjoining property or a hazardous condition on a street.
   G.   No outside illumination by an unshielded bare bulb shall be permitted.
§ 196-5. Enforcement.
The Director of Code Enforcement and the duly designated officials of the
Township shall have the power to enforce the provisions of this chapter.
§ 196-6.   Violations and penalties.
   A.   Any owner, lessee, person, firm, association or corporation who shall
violate any of the provisions of this chapter, or who shall fail to comply with
the conditions or requirements of any permit granted in accordance with the
provisions of this chapter, shall, upon conviction thereof, be liable to pay a
fine or penalty not exceeding $600 for each and every offense.
   B.   A new and separate offense shall be deemed to have been committed for
each day that said violation exists. All fines and penalties imposed by this
chapter are recoverable by summary proceeding before any District Justice in
the Township of Upper Dublin, and all suits or actions at law instituted for
the recovery thereof are to be in the name and for the use of the Township of
Upper Dublin, against which offense is committed, and upon recovery thereof,
all such fines and penalties are to be paid into the treasury of the Township.
Chapter 198
SNOW AND ICE REMOVAL
§
198-1.   Title.
§
198-2.   Definitions.
§
198-3.   Public nuisance.
§
198-4.   Responsibility to clear sidewalk.
§
198-5.   Method of removal.
§
198-6.   Enforcement.
§
198-7.   Violations and penalties.
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Board of Commissioners of the Township of Upper Dublin
5-13-1986 as Title 7, Ch. 7, of the 1986 Code. Amendments noted where
applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
 
Nuisances — See             Streets and sidewalks — See
Ch. 158.                      Ch. 207.
Property maintenance — See
Ch. 180.
 
§ 198-1.   Title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as "the Township of Upper Dublin
Snow and Ice Sidewalk Clearing Ordinance of 1966."
§ 198-2.   Definitions.
   A.   When not inconsistent with the context, words used in the singular
include the plural, and words in the plural include the singular, and words
used in the present tense include the future. The word "shall" is always
mandatory.
   B.   The following words, terms and phrases as used in this chapter shall
have the meanings given herein.
      BOARD OF COMMISSIONERS — The Board of Township Commissioners, Department
of Public Works, Department of Public Safety, the Township Secretary, Chief of
Police, Township Engineer or their authorized representatives.
      PERSON or PERSONS — Any person or persons, male or female, corporation,
partnership, association, company, individual, owner, occupant, lessee, tenant
or any organi nation.
      SIDEWALK — The footway or that part of the sidewalk area that is paved.
SIDEWALK AREA -- The area between the curbline and the side of the right-of-
way.
      STREET — Any highway or street within the Township of Upper Dublin opened
to public use and maintained by the state, county or Township.
      TOWNSHIP — The Township of Upper Dublin, Montgomery County, Pennsylvania.
§ 198-3.   Public nuisance.
The allowance or permitting of or the causing of snow or ice to lie upon,
remain upon or be piled or accumulated upon the sidewalks of the township shall
constitute a public nuisance.
§ 198-4.   Responsibility to clear sidewalk.
It shall be the duty of the tenant, occupant or occupiers of occupied property
or premises or the person in charge of unoccupied property or premises and
vacant ground within the township, not later than 24 hours after snow has
ceased to fall or the formation of ice, to clear or cause to be cleared a
pathway in the paved footway or sidewalk of the street or highway upon which
such premises or property abuts. Such pathway shall not be less than 30 inches
in width and shall be thoroughly cleared to that extent of snow and ice or
other obstructions.
§ 198-5.   Method of removal.
   A.   Snow or ice removed from sidewalk areas shall be placed on the abutting
property.
   B.   If there shall be an excessive amount of snow or ice, and there is no
longer any place on the abutting property to shovel the snow, then it may be
placed along the curbline. It is hereby declared to be unlawful to shovel,
plow, throw or deposit snow or ice into or upon any street within the township
in a manner which allows the snow to remain on such street. [Amended 5-8-2001
by Ord. No. 1062]
   C.   Should the snow and ice on the sidewalk be frozen so hard that it
cannot be removed without injury to the pavement or damaging the base of the
footpath, the person charged with the responsibility of the snow and ice
removal shall cause the sidewalk abutting or adjacent to such premises to be
strewn and to be kept strewn with sand, salt or any suitable abrasive material
and shall, as soon thereafter as the weather shall permit, thoroughly clean
such sidewalks [Amended 1-10-1995 by Ord. No. 879]
   D.   It shall be illegal to throw or pile any snow around or upon any fire
hydrant.
§ 198-6. Enforcement.
The enforcement of the provisions of this chapter shall be that of the
Department of Public Safety, which includes the Police Department of the
township.
§ 198-7.   Violations and penalties.
[Amended 8-9-1988 by Ord. No. 753; 12-19-1989 by Ord. No. 776]
   A.   Any person who shall violate or fail to refuse to comply with any
provision of this chapter shall, upon conviction in a summary proceeding before
a District Justice of the Township of Upper Dublin, be sentenced to pay a fine
of not less than $100 nor more than $1,000, plus costs of prosecution.
   B.   For the first offense under this chapter, any person can avoid
prosecution by reporting to the police station within 72 hours after receipt of
such notice and paying the sum of $25; for a second offense, such prosecution
may be avoided by reporting to the police station within 72 hours after receipt
of such notice and by paying the sum of $50; for a third offense, such
prosecution may be avoided by reporting to the police station within 72 hours
after receipt of such notice and by paying the sum of $100; for a fourth and
subsequent offenses, the owner shall be prosecuted in accordance with
Subsection A above.
   C.   A new and separate offense shall be deemed to have been committed for
each day that any violation of the provisions of this chapter shall continue to
exist.
Chapter 203
MUNICIPAL SOLID WASTE AND RECYCLABLE MATERIALS
ARTICLE I
General Refuse Storage and Collection
§
203-1.   Definitions.
§
203-2.   Purpose.
§
203-3.   Appropriation of funds.
§
203-4.   Establishment of collection programs.
§
203-5.   Unauthorized collection prohibited.
§
203-6.   Private responsibility.
§
203-7.   Obstructions in streets and highways.
§
203-8.   Ownership of materials.
§
203-9.   Establishment of regulations.
§
203-10.   Emergency orders.
§
203-11.   Right of entry.
§
203-12.   Unlawful conduct, violations and required notices.
§
203-13.   Enforcement.
§
203-14.   Penalties.
§
203-15.   Construal of provisions.
ARTICLE II
Municipal Solid Waste (MSW) Collection
§
203-16.   General provisions.
§
203-17.   Acceptable municipal solid waste (MSW).
§
203-18.   Unacceptable municipal solid waste (MSW).
ARTICLE III
Mixed-Recycling Collection
§
203-19.   General provisions.
§
203-20.   Acceptable recyclable materials.
§
203-21.   Unacceptable recyclable materials.
ARTICLE IV
Yard Waste Collection
§
203-22.   General provisions..
§
203-23.   Acceptable yard waste.
§
203-24.   Unacceptable yard waste.
§
203-25.   Fall leaf waste collection.
ARTICLE V
Single Use Plastic Regulations
§
203-48.   Purpose and findings.
§
203-49.   Definitions.
§
203-50.   Single-use plastic bags and non-reusable plastic bags prohibited.
§
203-51.   Single-use paper bags prohibited.
§
203-52.   Signage requirement.
§
203-53.   Temporary exemptions.
§
203-54.   Enforcement.
 
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Board of Commissioners of the Township of Upper Dublin
3-12-2024 by Ord. No. 24-1389 and 10-8-2024 by Ord. No. 24-1395 as indicated in
article histories. Amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
 
Brush, grass and weeds — See  Junkyards — See
Ch. 69.                         Ch. 135.
Dumping — See                 Littering — See
Ch. 91.                         Ch. 145.
Fees — See fee schedule.      Property maintenance — See
                                Ch. 180.
 
ARTICLE I
General Refuse Storage and Collection
[Adopted 10-8-2024 by Ord. No. 24-1395]
§ 203-1.   Definitions.
For the purposes of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have
the meanings ascribed to them in this section:
   ALUMINUM CANS — All empty beverage and food containers made from aluminum.
   CLEAN AND UNCONTAMINATED NEWSPAPER — Newspaper which has not been exposed to
substances or conditions which rendered it unfit for recycling purposes.
   CODE ENFORCEMENT — The Township of Upper Dublin Department of Code
Enforcement.
   COMMERCIAL ESTABLISHMENT — Those properties used primarily for commercial or
industrial purposes and those multiple-dwelling residential buildings
containing three or more dwelling units.
   CORRUGATED CARDBOARD — Structural paper material with an inner core shaped
in rigid parallel furrows and ridges.
   GLASS — All products made from silica or sand, soda ash and limestone (the
product may be transparent, translucent, or colored) and may be used as a
container for packaging or bottling of various matter, and all other material
commonly known as “glass.”
   HIGH-GRADE OFFICE PAPER — All white paper, bond paper and computer paper
used in commercial, institutional and municipal establishments.
   INDUSTRIAL ESTABLISHMENT — A building or other enclosure used or intended
for use, in whole or in part, in the operation of one business enterprise for
manufacturing, fabricating, processing, cleaning, laundering, or assembling any
product, commodity or article, and from which industrial (a/k/a residual) waste
is generated.
   INSTITUTIONAL ESTABLISHMENT — Facilities that house or serve groups of
people such as schools, hospitals, day-care centers and nursing homes.
   LEAF WASTE — Leaves and foliage of trees and shrubs and foliar garden
residues, but not including grass clippings or tree or shrubbery branches.
   MUNICIPAL SOLID WASTE (MSW) — All garbage and refuse normally placed by a
resident for regular collection by the Township. It specifically excludes
recyclable materials.
   MUNICIPAL SOLID WASTE COLLECTION — Collection of municipal solid waste by
the Township pursuant to Article II of this chapter.
   MUNICIPAL WASTE PLANNING, RECYCLING AND WASTE REDUCTION ACT — (Act 101 of
1988), 53 P.S. §§ 4000.101 – 4000.1904.
   NEWSPAPER — Paper of the type commonly referred to as “newsprint” and
distributed at stated intervals, usually daily or weekly, having printed
thereon news and opinions and containing advertisements and other matters of
public interest.
   PERSON — Any institution, public or private corporation, individual,
partnership or other entity. Person includes a lessee, as well as an owner of a
residence and includes a person, firm or corporation which owns or occupies a
residence, commercial or institutional establishment.
   PREMISES — Land, buildings or other structures, vehicles or parts thereof
upon or in which refuse is stored.
   RECYCLABLE MATERIALS — All recyclable materials identified in Article III of
this chapter, including glass, aluminum cans, newspapers, high-grade office
paper, corrugated cardboard, and any other materials as may be determined by
the Township.
   RECYCLING CONTAMINANTS — Any non-recyclable material within a recyclable
container such as food particles or other debris that can be rinsed or washed
away.
   REFUSE — All solid waste generated in the township, including garbage,
rubbish, ashes, bottles, cans, and plastics, but not including body wastes.
   RESIDENCE — Any single-family or other dwelling with four or fewer units,
from which the Township collects municipal solid waste.
   RESPONSIBLE AUTHORITY The legally designated authority of Upper Dublin
Township who shall be authorized and directed to implement and enforce this
chapter, or his authorized representative.
   SOLID WASTE MANAGEMENT ACT — Act 97 of 1980, 35 P.S. §§ 6018.101 —
6018.1003.
   TOWNSHIP — The Township of Upper Dublin.
   YARD WASTE — Grass clippings, brush and tree and shrubbery branches, but not
including leaves.
§ 203-2.   Purpose.
The Board of Commissioners of Upper Dublin Township, in order to protect the
health and safety of the people of the Township, is authorized to implement and
enforce the provisions of this chapter to control the storage, collection and
disposal of municipal solid waste within the Township, to provide a public
refuse collection service within the Township so that the type, quantity and
placement of MSW can be safely and expeditiously disposed at approved MSW
resource recovery facilities and landfills.
§ 203-3.   Appropriation of funds.
The Board of Commissioners of Upper Dublin Township is authorized to make funds
available by appropriation, by borrowing or by other means, in accordance with
the laws and procedures of the Township, for equipment for the collection or
disposal of MSW and for the establishment, maintenance and operation of
collection systems and disposal methods and sites.
§ 203-4.   Establishment of collection programs.
The Township hereby establishes mandatory programs for the separate collections
of trash, recycling, yard waste, and Fall leaves from all residents in the
Township for which municipal solid waste collection is provided by the
Township. Collection hereof shall be made on a regularly schedule as determined
and published by the Public Works Department.
§ 203-5.   Unauthorized collection prohibited.
It shall be a violation of this chapter for any person, firm or corporation,
other than the Township, to collect MSW placed by a resident for collection by
the Township, unless such person, firm or corporation has prior written
permission to make such collection. Each unauthorized collection in violation
hereof from one or more residences on any one calendar day shall constitute a
separate and distinct offense.
§ 203-6.   Private responsibility.
   A.   The owner or his agent or the occupant of any premises within the
Township shall be responsible for the sanitary condition of the premises
occupied by him, and it shall be unlawful for any person to place, deposit or
allow to be placed or deposited on his premises any refuse except as designated
by the terms of this chapter.
   B.   Any owner, occupant, tenant, person, firm, association or corporation
responsible for refuse on premises not served by the refuse collection system
of the Township or for refuse not acceptable for collection by the Township
shall make arrangements for the collection and disposal of such refuse and
shall see that any refuse container lids are kept closed at all times and shall
not permit the overloading of said containers at any time.
§ 203-7.   Obstructions in streets and highways.
It shall be unlawful for any person to place refuse carts, cardboard bundles,
yard waste or leaf waste beyond the residential curb line encroaching upon any
part of any public street or highway in the Township.
§ 203-8.   Ownership of materials.
All refuse placed by the residents for collection by the Township pursuant to
this chapter and regulations hereunder shall, from the time of placement,
become the property of the Township.
§ 203-9.   Establishment of regulations.
   A.   The Public Works Department is hereby authorized and empowered to
establish and promulgate regulations setting forth the manner of refuse
collection days and times and acceptable and unacceptable cart contents,
loading, location and time of placement for collection.
   B.   The Public Works Department is further authorized to establish
regulations governing the compliance with this chapter by all commercial,
institutional and municipal establishments.
   C.   The regulations promulgated under this article shall include but not be
limited to:
      (1)   The manner and method of collection.
      (2)   The manner and method of residential MSW cart use.
   D.   The Director of Code Enforcement is authorized and empowered to enforce
this chapter and the regulations adopted under this chapter.
§ 203-10.   Emergency orders.
Whenever the Code Enforcement Department finds that an emergency exists
involving a serious health hazard which requires immediate action to protect
the public health, it may, without notice or hearing, issue a written order
citing the existence of such an emergency and the conditions violating this
article which require corrective action to remove such health hazard. If such
corrective action has not been taken, the Code Enforcement Department may take
such action as may be necessary to protect the public health, including
stoppage or processing operations. Notwithstanding other provisions of this
article, such order shall be effective immediately.
§ 203-11.   Right of entry.
The Public Works Director and the Director of Code Enforcement shall have the
power to enter at reasonable times upon private or public property for the
purpose of inspecting and investigating conditions relating to the enforcement
of the provisions of this article through the Director of Code Enforcement.
§ 203-12.   Unlawful conduct, violations and required notices.
   A.   Unlawful conduct. It shall be unlawful for any person to:
      (1)   Violate, cause or assist in the violation of any provision of this
chapter, any rule, regulation or order promulgated hereunder or any rule,
regulation or order promulgated by the Township consistent with this chapter.
   B.   Notice. Whenever the Code Enforcement Department determines that there
are reasonable grounds to believe that there has been a violation of any
provisions of this chapter or any regulation adopted pursuant thereto, notice
of such alleged violation shall be given to the person or persons responsible
therefor as hereinafter provided. Such notice shall:
      (1)   Be put into writing.
      (2)   Include a statement of the reasons why it is being issued.
      (3)   Allow a reasonable time for the performance of any act it requires.
   C.   Collection cart violations. Any cart that is deemed unacceptable at
time of collection due to inappropriate location, timing, or contents, or is
considered to be overloaded or has contents protruding from the lid preventing
safe dumping of the cart, shall be considered a violation of this chapter.
      (1)   Notice. Whenever the Public Works Department determines that there
has been a collection cart violation, notice of such alleged violation shall be
given to the person or persons responsible therefor as hereinafter provided.
Such notice shall:
         (a)   Be put into writing and placed on the handle of the collection
cart.
         (b)   Include a statement of the reasons why it is being issued.
         (c)   Allow a reasonable time for the performance of any act it
requires.
         (d)   The collection shall be skipped.
§ 203-13.   Enforcement.
Authorized members of the Code Enforcement Department are hereby empowered to
enforce all provisions of this chapter and to write citations for any
violations.
§ 203-14.   Penalties.
Any person who violates any provision of this chapter or any regulations
adopted thereunder, upon conviction, shall be punished by a fine of not more
than $1,000, and each day’s failure to comply with any such provision shall
constitute a separate offense.
§ 203-15.   Construal of provisions.
The terms and provisions of this chapter are to be liberally construed so as
best to achieve and to effectuate the goals and purposes hereof. This chapter
shall be construed in pari materia with Act 97 and Act 101.
ARTICLE II
Municipal Solid Waste (MSW) Collection
[Adopted 10-8-2024 by Ord. No. 24-1395]
§ 203-16.   General provisions.
   A.   Collection frequency. Residential MSW is collected once each week and
is scheduled based on MSW collection zones that are determined and mapped by
the Public Works Director and kept on file at the Township building. Residents
may find the collection zone and corresponding collection day in which they
reside by visiting the Township website or by calling Township reception.
   B.   Placement and retrieval of brown trash cart:
      (1)   Carts. All MSW must be placed in the brown trash cart and the lid
must close. Carts shall not have any contents that protrude from the closed lid
and contents shall not be overloaded or overpacked preventing the efficient
dumping of its contents.
      (2)   Timing. Brown trash carts must be placed at the curb line no
earlier than 24 hours ahead of the assigned collection day.
      (3)   Location. Place carts at the curb line one foot away from one
another and three feet away from other obstructions (i.e.: utility poles,
mailboxes, cars, etc.).
      (4)   Retrieval. Carts must be retrieved from the curb line no later than
24 hours following the assigned collection day.
§ 203-17.   Acceptable municipal solid waste (MSW).
The following MSW shall be considered to be acceptable for regular residential
trash collection by the Township:
   A.   Garbage. Putrescible animal and vegetable wastes resulting from the
handling, preparation, cooking and/or consumption of foods that is contained in
a plastic bag.
   B.   Ashes. The residue from the burning of wood, coal, coke or other
combustible materials.
   C.   Rubbish. Non-putrescible solid wastes, excluding ashes, consisting of
paper, cardboard, tin cans, wood, glass, bedding, crockery, metals and similar
materials.
§ 203-18.   Unacceptable municipal solid waste (MSW).
   A.   The following MSW shall be considered not acceptable for regular MSW
collection by the Township:
      (1)   Hazardous materials or substances such as medical waste, oils,
liquid paint, poisons, acids, caustics, infected materials and explosives.
      (2)   E-waste including TVs, computers, and similar electronic waste.
      (3)   Materials resulting from the repair, excavation or construction of
buildings or structures, such as earth, asphalt, concrete, plaster, lumber,
drywall, mortar or roofing material.
      (4)   Materials which have not been prepared for collection in accordance
with this chapter and any implementing regulations.
      (5)   Solid wastes resulting from industrial processes.
      (6)   Bulk trash such as appliances, carpet, furniture, corrugated
cardboard, tires, windows, doors, and auto parts.
   B.   No refuse will be collected from commercial or industrial
establishments.
   C.   No refuse will be collected from properties improved with three or more
dwelling units.
ARTICLE III
Mixed-Recycling Collection
[Adopted 10-8-2024 by Ord. No. 24-1395]
§ 203-19.   General provisions.
   A.   Collection frequency. Recyclable materials are collected once each week
and is scheduled based on waste collection zones that are determined and mapped
by the Public Works Director and kept on file at the Township building.
Residents may find the collection zone and corresponding collection day in
which they reside by visiting the Township website or by calling Township
reception.
   B.   Placement and retrieval of blue mixed-recycling cart:
      (1)   Carts. All recyclable materials must be placed in the blue mixed-
recycling cart and the lid must close. Carts shall not have any contents that
protrude from the closed lid and contents shall not be overloaded or overpacked
preventing the efficient dumping of its contents.
      (2)   Timing. Blue recycling carts must be placed at the curb line no
earlier than 24 hours ahead of the assigned collection day.
      (3)   Location. Place carts at the curb line one foot away from one
another and three feet away from other obstructions (i.e.: utility poles,
mailboxes, cars, etc.).
      (4)   Retrieval. Carts must be retrieved from the curb line no later than
24 hours following the assigned collection day.
§ 203-20.   Acceptable recyclable materials.
   A.   The following are considered acceptable recyclable materials for
regular mixed-recycling collection by the Township:
      (1)   All clear and colored glass bottles and jars that have been cleaned
of recycling contaminants.
      (2)   Aluminum cans, tin cans and bi-metal cans that have been cleared of
recycling contaminants.
      (3)   Cardboard — Thin chipboard such as cereal boxes, corrugated
cardboard cut into one foot by one foot pieces.
      (4)   Paper — Newspaper, office paper, magazines, catalogues, junk mail
and paperback books.
      (5)   Cartons — Food and beverage cartons for milk, juice, soup, broth,
dry goods and wine that have been cleaned of recycling contaminants.
      (6)   Plastics that have been cleaned of contaminants.
         (a)   #1 — Polyethylene terephthalate (PET, PETE) used for soda
bottles.
         (b)   #2 — High density polyethylene (HDPE) used for milk jugs,
detergent containers and shampoo bottles.
         (c)   #3 — Vinyl or polyvinyl chloride (V) used for cleaning product
containers.
         (d)   #4 — Some low-density polyethylene (LDPE) used to make plastic
tubs and lids such as butter and margarine tubs.
         (e)   #5 — Some polypropylene (PP) used for yogurt and butter
containers.
         (f)   #6 — Some polystyrene (PS) used for food storage and serving
products.
         (g)   #7 — Other mixed plastics.
§ 203-21.   Unacceptable recyclable materials.
   A.   The following recyclable materials are not acceptable for mixed-
recycling collection by the Township:
      (1)   Recyclable materials that have not been cleaned of recycling
contaminants.
      (2)   Plastics — Plastic bags, loose plastic caps, plastic six-pack
holders, syringes, Tupperware, P.V.C., plastic toys and large plastic tub
containers are not accepted. If there is any recycle number other than #1 – #7
OR no markings at all, discard the item with regular household trash.
         (a)   #4 — Low-density polyethylene (LDPE) packing materials such as
shrink wrap, film, or bubble wrap are not accepted.
         (b)   #5 — Polypropylene (PP) bags or fabric are not accepted.
         (c)   #6 — Polystyrene (PS) (Styrofoam®) is not accepted in any form,
including packing peanuts.
      (3)   Aerosol cans or any container that was used for hazardous
materials.
      (4)   Scrap metal, including soiled tin foil and disposable foil tins.
      (5)   Frozen food boxes, pizza boxes, napkins, paper towels, paper plates
or any other food contaminated paper/cardboard.
      (6)   Paper — Carbon paper, wax paper, or photographs.
      (7)   Ceramics or flower pots.
      (8)   Coat hangers and curtain rods.
      (9)   Glass — Drinking glasses, lead crystal, mirrors, light bulbs, plate
or window glass, ovenware, or Pyrex.
   B.   No recyclable materials will be collected from commercial or industrial
establishments.
   C.   No recyclable materials will be collected from properties improved with
three or more dwelling units.
ARTICLE IV
Yard Waste Collection
[Adopted 10-8-2024 by Ord. No. 24-1395]
§ 203-22.   General provisions.
   A.   Collection frequency. Yard waste is collected once each week between
the seasons of Spring, Summer, and Fall and is scheduled based on waste
collection zones that are determined and mapped by the Public Works Director
and kept on file at the township building. Residents may find the collection
timeline, zone and corresponding collection day in which they reside by
visiting the Township website or by calling Township reception.
   B.   Placement and retrieval of green yard waste carts:
      (1)   Carts. All yard waste must be placed in the green yard waste cart
and the lid must close. Carts shall not have any contents that protrude from
the closed lid and contents shall not be overloaded or overpacked preventing
the efficient dumping of its contents.
      (2)   Timing. Green yard waste carts must be placed at the curb line no
earlier than 24 hours ahead of the assigned collection day.
      (3)   Location. Place carts at the curb line one foot away from one
another and three feet away from other obstructions (i.e.: utility poles,
mailboxes, cars, etc.).
      (4)   Retrieval. Carts must be retrieved from the curb line no later than
24 hours following the assigned collection day.
   C.   Placement of contained yard waste for manual rear-loader collection
areas.
      (1)   Containers. A maximum of nine containers, paper bags and/or bundles
total may be placed curbside.
         (a)   Brush and/or tree limbs must be placed in biodegradable paper
bags or tied into bundles (with twine) not exceeding four feet in length and 50
pounds.
      (2)   Timing. Contained yard waste must be placed at the curb line no
earlier than 24 hours ahead of the assigned collection day.
      (3)   Location. Place contained yard waste at the curb line one foot away
from refuse carts and three feet away from other obstructions (i.e.: utility
poles, mailboxes, cars, etc.).
      (4)   Retrieval. Yard waste containers must be retrieved from the curb
line no later than 24 hours following the assigned collection day.
§ 203-23.   Acceptable yard waste.
The following refuse is considered acceptable for yard waste collection by the
Township:
   A.   Brush and tree limbs — not to exceed four feet in length, six inches in
diameter, and 50 pounds (per bundle).
   B.   Leaves, grass clippings, garden residue, tree clippings, shrubbery and
vegetative material.
§ 203-24.   Unacceptable yard waste.
   A.   The following refuse is not acceptable for yard waste collection by the
Township:
      (1)   Brush or branches exceeding four feet in length, six inches in
diameter, or 50 pounds (per bundle).
      (2)   Dirt, sod, or rocks.
      (3)   Tree stumps, logs, root balls, or wood chips.
      (4)   Any plastic or compostable bags that do not quickly break down.
   B.   Kitchen waste such as paper coffee filters, tea bags and food waste.
   C.   No refuse will be collected from commercial or industrial
establishments.
   D.   No refuse will be collected from properties improved with three or more
dwelling units.
§ 203-25.   Fall leaf waste collection.
   A.   The Township shall collect leaf waste in bulk throughout the months of
October to December on a regular schedule as determined and mapped by the
Public Works Director and kept on file at the Township building.
   B.   During the published bulk leaf collection period, all persons for whom
the Township provides MSW collection shall place their leaf waste in piles or
windrows at curbside, and/or provide for private collection where the leaves
will be composted.
   C.   Leaves shall be kept separate from other yard waste during the
published bulk leaf collection period. Leaves shall be set out for bulk
collection loose in piles or windrows rather than bagged or containerized as
usually required. All other yard waste shall be collected pursuant to the other
provisions of this article during the published bulk leaf collection period. No
branches, evergreen boughs, shrubbery trimmings, or the like may be mixed in
the leaf piles or windrows.
   D.   Leaf piles or windrows shall be placed directly behind the curb line or
the edge of the property where the property meets the paved street or highway.
Leaves shall not be raked or placed into the street or gutter.
   E.   Residents are responsible for ensuring that hired or contracted
gardeners, landscapers, and other lawn maintenance workers comply with this
Article IV.
   F.   Hired contractors/landscapers are not permitted to dump leaves at the
Township’s compost site on Camp Hill Road.
   G.   Township collected leaf waste shall be disposed of exclusively by
composting.
ARTICLE V
Single Use Plastic Regulations
[Adopted 3-12-2024 by Ord. No. 24-1389]
§ 203-48.   Purpose and findings.
   A.   Purpose.
      (1)   The purpose of this article is to reduce the use of single-use
plastic bags by retail establishments within the Township.
      (2)   To curb litter on the streets, in the parks, and in the trees,
protect the local streams, rivers, waterways and other aquatic environments,
reduce greenhouse gas emissions, reduce solid waste generation, promote the use
of reusable, compostable, and recyclable materials within the Township, and to
preserve the natural, scenic, historic, and esthetic values of the Township.
      (3)   To relieve the pressure for landfills and resource recovery
facilities to manage the disposition of single-use products.
   B.   Findings.
      (1)   The use of single-use plastic bags has severe environmental
impacts, including greenhouse gas emissions, litter, harm to wildlife and
aquatic life, ground level ozone formation, atmospheric acidification, water
consumption, and solid waste generation.
      (2)   There are numerous retail establishments within the Township which
provide single-use plastic bags to their customers.
      (3)   The majority of such single-use plastic bags are made from plastic
or other material that does not readily decompose.
      (4)   Approximately one hundred billion single-use plastic bags are
discarded by United States consumers each year. Given the difficulty of
recycling these materials, less than 1 percent of single-use plastic bags are
returned for recycling in the United States and in the Township, such bags are
not curbside recyclable.
      (5)   Numerous studies have documented the prevalence of single-use
plastic bags littering the environment, blocking storm drains, entering local
waterways, and becoming stuck in or upon natural resources and public property.
      (6)   The taxpayers of the Township pay the costs related to the cleanup
of single-use plastic bags from the roadways, trees, sewers, waters, and parks
within the Township.
      (7)   From an overall environmental and economic perspective, the best
alternative to single-use plastic bags is a shift to reusable bags or
recyclable paper bags.
      (8)   There are several alternatives to single-use plastic bags readily
available in and around the Township.
      (9)   An important goal of the Township is to procure and use sustainable
products and services.
      (10)   An important goal of the Township is to preserve the natural,
scenic, historic, and esthetic values of the Township.
      (11)   It is the Township’s desire to conserve resources, reduce the
amount of greenhouse gas emissions, waste, litter, water pollution, and to
protect the public health and welfare, including wildlife and aquatic life, all
of which increases the quality of life for the Township’s residents and
visitors to the Township.
      (12)   As required by the Environmental Rights Amendment to the
Pennsylvania Constitution, the Board seeks to preserve the natural, scenic,
historic, and aesthetic values of the Township.
      (13)   It is the Board’s desire to conserve resources, reduce the amount
of greenhouse gas emissions, waste, litter, water pollution and to protect the
public health and welfare, including wildlife and aquatic life, all of which
increases the quality of life for the Township’s residents and visitors.
§ 203-49.   Definitions.
CUSTOMER — Any person purchasing goods or services from a retail establishment.
EFFECTIVE DATE — The effective date of this ordinance is one hundred and eighty
(180) days from adoption by the Board of Commissioners of Upper Dublin
Township.
EXEMPTED BAG — A bag used inside a retail establishment by a customer to
deliver perishable items to the point-of-sale at that establishment. “Exempted
bag” shall include:
   (1)   a bag used to package bulk items such as fruit, vegetables, nuts,
grains, or candy;
   (2)   a bag used to contain or wrap meats or fish; to contain unwrapped
prepared foods or bakery goods;
   (3)   a bag used solely to contain live animals, such as fish or insects
sold in a pet store; or
   (4)   a bag sold in packaging containing multiple bags and packaged at the
time of manufacture of the bag.
NON-RECYCLABLE PAPER BAG — A non-recyclable paper bag means a paper bag that is
not a recyclable paper bag.
PLASTIC — A synthetic material made from linking monomers through a chemical
reaction to create a polymer chain that can be molded or extruded at high heat
into various solid forms that retain their defined shapes during their life
cycle and after disposal, including material derived from either petrochemicals
or a biologically based polymer, such as corn or other plant sources.
RECYCLABLE PAPER BAG — A paper bag that meets the following, but not including
an exempted bag:
   (1)   Is 100% recyclable;
   (2)   Contains no old growth fiber;
   (3)   Contains a minimum of 40% post-consumer recycled content; and
   (4)   Displays the word “Recyclable” in a highly visible manner on the
outside of the bag and is labeled in a highly visible manner on the outside of
the bag with the name of the manufacturer, the location where manufactured, and
the percentage of post-consumer recycled content of the bag in an easy-to-read
font size.
RETAIL ESTABLISHMENT — Any store, commercial establishment, or any other
location that sells perishable or nonperishable goods, including, but not
limited to, clothing, food, and personal items, directly to the customer and is
located within or doing business within the geographical limits of Upper Dublin
Township. Retail establishments include, but are not limited to: a business
establishment that generates a sales or use tax; a drugstore, pharmacy,
supermarket, grocery store, farmers market, convenience food store, food mart,
food truck, or other commercial entity engaged in the retail sale of a limited
line of goods such as milk, bread, soda and snack foods; a public eating
establishment (i.e., a restaurant, take-out food establishment, or any other
business that prepares and sells prepared food to be eaten on or off its
premises); and a business establishment that sells clothing, hardware, or any
other nonperishable goods.
REUSABLE BAG — A carryout bag that is designed and manufactured for multiple
uses and is:
   (1)   Made of cloth or other machine-washable fabric that has stitched
handles; or
   (2)   A polypropylene bag that has stitched handles.
SINGLE-USE PLASTIC BAG/NON-REUSABLE PLASTIC BAG — A bag made from plastic
through a blown-film extrusion process, but not including a reusable bag or an
exempted bag.
§ 203-50.   Single-use plastic bags and non-reusable plastic bags prohibited.
Beginning after the effective date, retail establishments are prohibited from
providing a single-use plastic bag or a bag that does not qualify as a reusable
bag to a customer at the retail establishment or through a delivery.
§ 203-51.   Single-use paper bags prohibited.
   A.   Beginning after the effective date, retail establishments are
prohibited from providing a non-recyclable paper bag to a customer at a retail
establishment or through a delivery.
   B.   A retail establishment may provide a customer a recyclable paper bag at
the point of sale if the bag is provided to the customer for a maximum charge
of $0.10 per recyclable paper bag.
   C.   All monies collected by a retail establishment under this section for
provision of a recyclable paper bag shall be retained by the retail
establishment.
   D.   Any charge for a recyclable paper bag shall be separately stated on any
receipt provided to the customer at the time of sale and shall be identified
thereon as the “carry-out bag charge” or through use of equivalent language as
deemed acceptable by the Township.
§ 203-52.   Signage requirement.
Beginning 30 days after the effective date, and for six months thereafter,
retail establishments shall post at all points of sale conspicuous signage:
informing customers that single-use plastic bags and non-recyclable paper bags
will no longer be provided by the establishment as of the date the prohibition
begins; explaining what types of bags and purchases are impacted; and providing
any other information the Township may require by regulation or written policy.
§ 203-53.   Temporary exemptions.
The Board of Commissioners or its designee may, in its sole discretion, upon
written request of a retail establishment, exempt a retail establishment from
the requirements of this article for a period of not more than one year from
the effective date upon a finding by the Board or its designee that the
requirements of this article would cause undue hardship to the retail
establishment. The Board or its designee may make a finding of undue hardship
only in the following circumstances or situations, and any exemptions that may
be provided by the Board pursuant hereto may, in the Board’s discretion,
contain conditions:
   (1)   The retail establishment has a unique circumstance or situation such
that there are no reasonable alternatives to single-use plastic bags and/or
non-recyclable paper bags; or
   (2)   Additional time is necessary to draw down an existing inventory held
by the retail establishment of single-use plastic bags, non-reusable bags or
non-recyclable paper bags.
§ 203-54.   Enforcement.
   A.   The Township Manager or his/her designee(s) shall have the primary
responsibility for enforcement of this article.
   B.   A person, store, or food service establishment that violates the
requirements of this Chapter 203, Article V shall:
      (1)   Be issued a written warning for a first offense;
      (2)   Be subject to a civil penalty of $100 for a second offense;
      (3)   Be subject to a civil penalty of $200 for a third offense; and
      (4)   Be subject to a civil penalty of $500 for a fourth or any
subsequent offense.
   C.   For the purposes of enforcement under this article, an offense shall be
each day a person, store, or food service establishment is violating a
requirement of this article.
   D.   In addition to the penalties set forth in this article, the Township
may seek legal, injunctive, or other equitable relief to enforce the
requirements of this article.
   E.   The failure of the Township to enforce any provision of this article
shall not constitute a waiver by the Township of its rights to future
enforcement hereunder.
Chapter 205
SPRAYING
§
205-1.   Findings.
§
205-2.   Prohibited actions.
§
205-3.   Enforcement.
§
205-4.   Violations and penalties.
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Board of Commissioners of the Township of Upper Dublin
1-11-1994 as Ord. No. 863. Amendments noted where applicable.]
§ 205-1.   Findings.
The Board of Commissioners of Upper Dublin Township hereby finds that the
emission of particulate matter, mist, spray or droplets onto property without
the permission of the owner thereof creates a high level of concern over the
detrimental nature of such products due to the possibility of such emissions
having toxic, noxious or hazardous characteristics. Those affected by such
emissions are without power to determine the potential harmful effects thereof
and are thus justifiably placed in a position of anxiety and fear. The Board of
Commissioners has determined, therefore, that any such emission which causes
perceptible quantities of particulate matter, mist, spray or droplets to fall
or otherwise be deposited on the property of another without such person's
permission is a public nuisance.
§ 205-2.   Prohibited actions.
No device emitting particulate matter, mist, spray or droplets may be used in
such manner as to allow such emission in perceptible quantities to fall, drift
or otherwise be deposited on another's property without that person's
permission.
§ 205-3.   Enforcement.
The Township Code Enforcement Director, or his duly authorized representative,
or any officer of the Upper Dublin Township Police Department shall have the
power to inspect and investigate conditions relating to the enforcement of the
provisions of this chapter, to enforce the provisions of this chapter and to
write citations for any violation of this chapter.
§ 205-4.   Violations and penalties.
Any person, firm, association or corporation, or employee or representative
thereof, who violates any provision of this chapter, upon conviction thereof,
shall be subject to a fine or penalty not exceeding six hundred dollars ($600.)
for each and every offense. Such fines or penalties shall be collected as like
fines or penalties are now collected by law and shall be in addition to any
other penalty provided herein.
Chapter 206
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT
ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§
206-1.   Short title.
§
206-2.   Statement of findings.
§
206-3.   Purpose.
§
206-4.   Statutory authority.
§
206-5.   Applicability.
§
206-6.   Compatibility with other requirements.
§
206-7.   Severability.
§
206-8.   (Reserved)
§
206-9.   (Reserved)
§
206-10.   (Reserved)
§
206-11.   (Reserved)
§
206-12.   (Reserved)
§
206-13.   (Reserved)
§
206-14.   (Reserved)
§
206-15.   (Reserved)
§
206-16.   (Reserved)
§
206-17.   (Reserved)
§
206-18.   (Reserved)
§
206-19.   (Reserved)
§
206-20.   (Reserved)
ARTICLE II
Definitions
§
206-21.   Word usage.
§
206-22.   Terms defined.
§
206-23.   (Reserved)
§
206-24.   (Reserved)
§
206-25.   (Reserved)
§
206-26.   (Reserved)
§
206-27.   (Reserved)
§
206-28.   (Reserved)
§
206-29.   (Reserved)
§
206-30.   (Reserved)
 
ARTICLE III
Stormwater Management for Water Quality
§
206-31.   General requirements for stormwater management.
§
206-32.   Permit requirements by other government entities.
§
206-33.   Erosion and sediment control during regulated activities.
§
206-34.   Water quality requirements after regulated activities are complete.
§
206-35.   Water quality requirement.
§
206-36.   Groundwater recharge requirement
§
206-37.   Stormwater design standards and criteria.
§
206-38.   (Reserved)
§
206-39.   (Reserved)
§
206-40.   (Reserved)
ARTICLE IV
Stormwater Management Plan Requirements
§
206-41.   General requirements for stormwater management plans.
§
206-42.   Exemptions.
§
206-43.   Stormwater management plan contents.
§
206-44.   Plan submission.
§
206-45.   Plan review and approval.
§
206-46.   Permit requirements and procedures.
§
206-47.   (Reserved)
§
206-48.   (Reserved)
§
206-49.   (Reserved)
§
206-50.   (Reserved)
ARTICLE V
Stormwater Management Operations and Maintenance Plan Requirements
§
206-51.   General requirements.
§
206-52.   Responsibilities for stormwater management operations and
maintenance.
§
206-53.   Review of stormwater management operations and maintenance plan.
§
206-54.   Adherence to stormwater management operations and maintenance plan.
§
206-55.   Operations and maintenance agreement for privately owned stormwater
management facilities.
§
206-56.   Stormwater management easements.
§
206-57.   Recording of approved stormwater management operations and
maintenance plan and related agreements.
§
206-58.   Township Stormwater Management Operation and Maintenance Fund.
§
206-59.   (Reserved)
§
206-60.   (Reserved)
ARTICLE VI
Inspections and Right of Entry
§
206-61.   Inspections.
§
206-62.   Right of entry.
§
206-63.   Schedule of inspections.
§
206-64.   (Reserved)
§
206-65.   (Reserved)
§
206-66.   (Reserved)
§
206-67.   (Reserved)
§
206-68.   (Reserved)
§
206-69.   (Reserved)
§
206-70.   (Reserved)
ARTICLE VII
Fees and Expenses
§
206-71.   General.
§
206-72.   Expenses covered by fees.
§
206-73.   Financial and maintenance guaranties.
§
206-74.   (Reserved)
§
206-75.   (Reserved)
§
206-76.   (Reserved)
§
206-77.   (Reserved)
§
206-78.   (Reserved)
§
206-79.   (Reserved)
§
206-80.   (Reserved)
ARTICLE VIII
Prohibitions
§
206-81.   Prohibited discharges.
§
206-82.   Prohibited connections.
§
206-83.   Roof drains, sumps, french drains and underground drains.
§
206-84.   Alteration of stormwater management facilities.
§
206-85.   (Reserved)
§
206-86.   (Reserved)
§
206-87.   (Reserved)
§
206-88.   (Reserved)
§
206-89.   (Reserved)
§
206-90.   (Reserved)
ARTICLE IX
Enforcement and Penalties
§
206-91.   Public nuisance.
§
206-92.   Notification of failure to comply.
§
206-93.   Enforcement generally
§
206-94.   Suspension and revocation of permits and approvals.
§
206-95.   Violations and penalties.
§
206-96.   Appeals.
§
206-97.   (Reserved)
§
206-98.   (Reserved)
§
206-99.   (Reserved)
§
206-100.   (Reserved)
ARTICLE X
Design Schedules
§
206-101.   Schedule I: General Performance Standards.
§
206-102.   Schedule II: Detention Facility Design.
§
206-103.   Schedule 111: Stormwater Conveyance System.
§
206-104.   Schedule IV: Water Quality and Groundwater Recharge Stormwater
Management Facilities.
§
206-105.   (Reserved)
§
206-106.   (Reserved)
§
206-107.   (Reserved)
§
206-108.   (Reserved)
§
206-109.   (Reserved)
§
206-110.   (Reserved)
ARTICLE XI
Low-Impact Development Practices For Managing Stormwater Runoff
§
206-111.   General guidelines for low-impact development.
§
206-112.   Protecting natural drainage features and depression storage areas.
§
206-113.   Avoiding introduction of impervious areas.
§
206-114.   Reducing the hydraulic connectivity of impervious surfaces.
§
206-115.   Routing roof runoff over lawns.
§
206-116.   Reducing the use of storm sewers.
§
206-117.   Reducing street widths.
§
206-118.   Limiting sidewalks to one side of the street.
§
206-119.   Using permeable paving materials.
§
206-120.   (Reserved)
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Board of Commissioners of the Township of Upper Dublin
9-14-2004 by Ord. No. 1141.1 Amendments noted where applicable.]
1. Editor's Note: This ordinance also repealed former
Ch. 206, Stormwater Management, adopted 7-14-1998 by Ord. No. 973.
GENERAL REFERENCES
 
Planning Agency — See                                    Flood damage prevention — See
Ch. 39.                                                    Ch. 122.
Building construction - uniform construction code — See  Subdivision and land development — See
Ch. 73.                                                    Ch. 212.
Excavations — See                                        Watercourses — See
Ch. 99.                                                    Ch. 240.
Fees — See fee schedule.                                 Wells — See
                                                           Ch. 244.
                                                          Zoning — See
                                                           Ch. 255.
 
ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 206-1.   Short title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Upper Dublin Township
Stormwater Management Ordinance."
§ 206-2.   Statement of findings.
The Board of Commissioners of the Township of Upper Dublin finds that:
   A.   Stormwater runoff from lands modified by human activities threatens
public health and safety by causing decreased infiltration of precipitation,
increased runoff flow volume and increased runoff flow velocity, which overtax
the carrying capacity of streams and storm sewers resulting in flooding, and
greatly increases the cost to the public to manage stormwater.
   B.   Inadequate planning and management of stormwater runoff resulting from
land development and redevelopment throughout a watershed harms surface water
resources by changing the natural hydrologic patterns, accelerating stream
flows (which increase scour and erosion of streambeds and streambanks thereby
elevating sedimentation), destroying aquatic habitat and elevating aquatic
pollutant concentrations and loadings such as sediments, nutrients, heavy
metals and pathogens. Groundwater resources are also impacted through loss of
recharge.
   C.   A program of stormwater management, including reasonable regulation of
land development and redevelopment that causes loss of natural infiltration, is
fundamental to the public health, safety, welfare and the protection of the
people of the Township and all the people of the commonwealth, their resources
and the environment.
   D.   Stormwater is an important water resource that provides groundwater
recharge for water supplies and base flow of streams, which also protects and
maintains surface water quality.
   E.   Public education on the control of pollution from stormwater is an
essential component in successfully addressing stormwater.
   F.   Federal and state regulations require the Township to implement a
program of stormwater controls. The Township is required to obtain a permit for
stormwater discharges for its municipal separate storm sewer system (MS4) under
the National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES).
   G.   Nonstormwater discharges to MS4s contribute to pollution of waters of
the commonwealth.
§ 206-3.   Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to promote public health, safety and welfare
within the Township and its watersheds by minimizing the harms and maximizing
the benefits described in §
206-2 of this chapter, through provisions designed to:
   A.   Manage stormwater runoff impacts at their source by regulating
activities that cause the problems.
   B.   Provide review procedures and performance standards for stormwater
planning and management.
   C.   Properly use and preserve existing drainage systems and watercourses.
   D.   Manage stormwater impacts close to the runoff source through reliance
on natural processes and a minimum of structures.
   E.   Maximize infiltration of stormwater to maintain groundwater recharge,
to prevent degradation of surface and groundwater quality, to otherwise protect
water resources, and to promote the natural hydrologic regime.
   F.   Maintain and improve existing flows and quality of streams and
watercourses.
   G.   Meet legal water quality requirements under Pennsylvania law, to
protect and maintain existing uses and maintain the level of water quality to
support those uses in all streams, and to protect and maintain water quality in
special protection streams.
   H.   Prevent scour and erosion of streambanks and streambeds.
   I.   Provide for proper operations and maintenance of all stormwater
management facilities within the Township.
   J.   Provide a mechanism to identify controls necessary to meet NPDBS
requirements.
   K   Implement an illicit discharge detection and elimination program to
address nonstormwater discharges into the Township's MS4 and watercourses
within the Township.
§ 206-4.   Statutory authority.
The Township is empowered to regulate land use activities that affect
stormwater and water quality by the authority of the First Class Township Code
and the Municipalities Planning Code.
§ 206-5.   Applicability.
   A.   This chapter applies to all activities within the Township and all
stormwater runoff entering into the Township's MS4.
   B.   Regulated activities include, but are not limited to, the following:
      (1)   Land development or redevelopment.
      (2)   Land subdivision.
      (3)   Development, construction or reconstruction of impervious,
semipervious or pervious surfaces.
      (4)   Construction of new buildings or structures and additions to
existing buildings or structures.
      (5)   Stormwater discharges to the Township's MS4 or watercourses.
      (6)   Installation or construction of stormwater management structures,
facilities, and appurtenances thereto.
      (7)   Property maintenance, grading and landscaping.
      (8)   Alteration of existing vegetation or land cover.
   C.   Earth disturbance activities and associated stormwater management
controls are also regulated under existing federal and state law and
implementing regulations. This chapter shall operate in coordination with those
parallel requirements; the requirements of this chapter shall be no less
restrictive than federal or state law.
§ 206-6.   Compatibility with other requirements.
   A.   Approvals issued and actions taken under this chapter do not relieve
the applicant of the responsibility to secure required permits or approvals for
activities regulated by any other code, law, regulation or ordinance.
   B.   To the extent that this chapter is inconsistent with or imposes more
rigorous or stringent requirements than any other ordinance or regulation of
the Township, the specific requirements contained in this chapter shall be
followed.
   C.   Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to affect any of the
Township's requirements regarding stormwater matters which do not conflict with
the provisions of this chapter, such as local stormwater management design
criteria (e.g., inlet spacing, inlet type, collection system design and
details, outlet structure design, etc.). Conflicting provisions in other
municipal ordinances or regulations shall be construed to retain the
requirements of this chapter addressing state water quality requirements.
§ 206-7.   Severability.
In the event that any section or provision of this chapter is declared invalid
by a court of competent jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect the
validity of any of the remaining provisions of this chapter.
§ 206-8.   (Reserved)
§ 206-9.   (Reserved)
§ 206-10.   (Reserved)
§ 206-11.   (Reserved)
§ 206-12.   (Reserved)
§ 206-13.   (Reserved)
§ 206-14.   (Reserved)
§ 206-15.   (Reserved)
§ 206-16.   (Reserved)
§ 206-17.   (Reserved)
§ 206-18.   (Reserved)
§ 206-19.   (Reserved)
§ 206-20.   (Reserved)
ARTICLE II
Definitions
§ 206-21.   Word usage.
Unless otherwise expressly stated, the following terms, for the purpose of this
chapter, shall be interpreted as follows:
   A.   Words used in the present tense include the future tense; the singular
number includes the plural, and the plural number includes the singular; words
of masculine gender include the feminine gender, and words of feminine gender
include the masculine gender.
   B.   The words "includes" or "including" shall not limit a term to the
specific example but are intended to extend its meaning to all other instances
of like kind and character.
   C.   The words "shall" and "must" are mandatory; the words "may" and
"should" are permissive.
   D.   The words "used or occupied" include the words "intended, designed,
maintained or arranged to be used or occupied."
§ 206-22.   Terms defined.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
   ACCELERATED EROSION — The removal of the surf ace of the land through the
combination of human activity and natural processes at a rate greater than
would occur due to natural processes alone.
   AGRICULTURAL ACTIVITIES — The work of producing crops and raising livestock,
including tillage, plowing, discing, harrowing, pasturing and installation of
conservation measures. Construction of new buildings or impervious areas in
support of agricultural activities is not considered agricultural activities.
   APPLICANT — A landowner, as herein defined, or agent of the landowner, who
has filed an application for a stormwater management permit or other approval
under this chapter.
   BASE FLOW — Stream flow originating from groundwater seepage into a
streambed and any releases from impoundment structures.
   BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICE (BMP) — Structural and nonstructural measures,
including activities, facilities, designs, measures or procedures, used to
manage stormwater runoff to meet water quality requirements and to reduce
flooding, to promote groundwater recharge and to otherwise meet the purposes of
this chapter and federal and state stormwater regulations. BMPs include but are
not limited to infiltration, filter strips, low-impact design, bioretention,
wet ponds, permeable paving, grassed swales, forested buffers, sand filters and
detention basins.
   BIORETENTION AREA — Stormwater management measure which involves the
shallow, temporary ponding of stormwater runoff in areas with well-drained
soils and native vegetation.
   BUILDING — Any structure, either temporary or permanent, having enclosed
walls and a roof, located on the land, designed or used for the shelter of any
person, animal or property, and occupying more than 100 square feet of area.
   CHANNEL EROSION — The widening, deepening and headward cutting of small
channels and waterways due to erosion caused by water flows.
   CISTERN — An underground reservoir or tank for storing rainwater.
CONSERVATION DISTRICT — The Montgomery County Conservation District.
   CULVERT — A pipe, conduit or similar structure, including appurtenant works,
which carries surface water.
   DAM — A refuse bank, fill, structure or artificial barrier, together with
its appurtenant works, constructed for the purpose of impounding or storing
water or other fluid.
   DEDICATION — The deliberate donation of property by its owner for public
use.
   DEP — The Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection or its
predecessor or successor agencies.
   DESIGN STORM — The magnitude of precipitation from a storm event measured in
probability of occurrence (e.g., fifty-year storm) and duration (e.g., twenty-
four-hour), and used in computing stormwater management control systems.
   DETENTION BASIN — A stormwater management structure with a controlled
release rate which is essentially dry while not receiving stormwater.
   DEVELOPER — Any landowner, agent of such landowner or tenant who, with the
permission of such landowner, makes or causes to be made a subdivision of land
or a land development or who undertakes a regulated activity as defined herein.
   DEVELOPMENT — Any man-made change to improved or unimproved real estate,
including but not limited to buildings or other structures, the placement of
mobile homes, streets and other paving, utilities, filling, grading,
excavation, mining, dredging or drilling operations and the subdivision of
land. This term includes redevelopment.
   DEVELOPMENT SITE — The specific tract of land for which a development is
proposed, conducted or maintained.
   DOWNSLOPE PROPERTY LINE — That portion of the property line of a lot, tract
or parcel of land being developed which is located such that all overland or
pipe (low of stormwater from the site would be directed towards it.
   DRAINAGE EASEMENT — A right granted by a landowner to a grantee, including
an association or the Township, allowing the use of private land for stormwater
management purposes.
   DRAINAGE FACILITY — Any ditch, pipe, culvert, storm sewer, stream, channel,
swale, conduit or other structure or feature designed, intended or constructed
for the purpose of diverting surface water from or carrying surface waters off
streets, public rights-of-way, parks, recreational areas or any part of any
subdivision or land development.
   DRAINAGE PERMIT — A permit issued by the Township after a stormwater
management plan has been approved. Said permit is issued prior to or with a
final land development approval.
   DRY WELL — Below-grade stormwater retention structure that is open at the
base, allowing water to percolate to the underlying soil.
   EARTH DISTURBANCE — Any activity, including, but not limited to, grading,
construction, mining, timber harvesting, clearing and grubbing, and stockpiling
or storage which alters, disturbs and exposes the surface of the land greater
than 5,000 square feet. See also "land disturbance."
   EROSION — The removal or wearing away of the surface of the land by the
action of natural processes, including the action of water, wind and ice, and
chemicals.
   EROSION AND SEDIMENT POLLUTION CONTROL PLAN — A plan, which designates
measures to be employed to minimize accelerated erosion and sedimentation.
   EXISTING CONDITIONS — The initial condition of a project site prior to the
proposed construction, earth disturbance, clearing, grubbing or filling. If the
initial condition of the site is undeveloped land, the land use shall be
considered as meadow unless the natural land cover is proven to generate a
lower curve number or Rational C value, such as forested lands.
   FEMA — Federal Emergency Management Agency.
   FILL —
   A.   (Verb) Any action by which earth, sand, gravel, rock or any other
acceptable material is deposited, placed, pushed, dumped, pulled, transported
or moved to a new location.
   B.   (Noun) Earth, sand, gravel, earth or other material permitted and
acceptable by law to be placed or deposited to form an embankment or raise the
elevation of the land surface. The term includes material used to replace an
area of aquatic life with dry land or to change the bottom elevation of a
regulated water of the commonwealth.
   FLOOD — A temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally
dry land areas from excessive surface water or the overflow of streams, rivers
and other waters of the commonwealth and waters of the United States. The
action by which a flood occurs.
   FLOODPLAIN — The area along a watercourse which is periodically flooded by
water therefrom, as defined by the Township Code,
Chapter 255, Zoning, Article XXII, Floodplain Conservation District.
   FLOODWAY — The channel of a watercourse and those portions of the adjoining
floodplains which are reasonably required to carry and discharge the one-
hundred-year frequency flood. Unless otherwise specified, the boundary of the
floodway is as indicated on maps and flood insurance studies provided by FEMA.
In an area where no FEMA maps or studies have defined the boundary of the one-
hundred-year frequency floodway, it is assumed (absent evidence to the
contrary) that the floodway extends from the watercourse to 50 feet from the
top of the bank of the watercourse or as determined by § 255-161A(4), whichever
distance from the top of bank is greater.
   FREEBOARD — A vertical distance between the elevation of the design high
water and the top of the berm or embankment of a stormwater management
structure. The space is required as a safety margin in a pond or a basin to
prevent overtopping.
   GRADE —
   A.   (Noun) A slope of a street, pipe, culvert, channel or natural ground,
specified as a percentage or ratio and shown on plans as specified herein.
   B.   (Verb) To finish or work the surface of the land, a roadbed, top of
embankment or bottom of excavation.
   C.   GRADE, EXISTING — The vertical elevation of the ground surface prior to
earthmoving, filling or other land disturbance.
   D.   GRADE, FINAL — The final vertical elevation of the ground after
earthmoving, filling or other land disturbance.
   GRASSED WATERWAY — A natural or constructed waterway, usually broad and
shallow, used to convey surface water.
   GROUNDWATER — The water beneath the surface of the ground, the source of
water in springs and wells and base flow in streams.
   GROUNDWATER RECHARGE — Replenishment of the water beneath the surface of the
ground, the source of water in springs and wells. Infiltration of precipitation
and its movement to the water table is one form of natural recharge.
   GROUNDWATER RECHARGE DESIGN STORM — Benchmark rainfall event used as a basis
for establishing compliance with the groundwater recharge requirement of this
chapter: seventy-five-hundredths-inch, twenty-four-hour rainfall.
   IMPERVIOUS SURFACE — Any material placed on or above the earth, or any
material change in the natural surface of the earth, which substantially
reduces or prevents the natural infiltration of water. Examples include but are
not limited to structures, including eaves, roofs, and roof overhangs; roads;
parking areas (whether hard surfaced or not); driveways; sidewalks; walkways;
patios; sports courts; pools; and, the horizontal surface area of aboveground
stormwater management structures, including retention and detention basins.
Stormwater basins designed and constructed to allow for infiltration shall not
be considered as impervious surface. Patios designed and constructed with
pervious materials shall not be considered as impervious surface. [Amended 4-
12-2016 by Ord. No. 16-1316]
   IMPOUNDMENT — A retention or detention basin designed to manage stormwater
runoff by retaining it or releasing it at a controlled rate.
   INFILTRATION STRUCTURE — A structure designed to direct runoff into the
ground, (e.g., seepage pits, infiltration trench).
   LAND DEVELOPMENT — Any of the following activities:
   A.   The improvement of one lot or two or more contiguous lots, tracts or
parcels of land for any purpose involving:
      (1)   A group of two or more residential or nonresidential buildings,
whether proposed initially or cumulatively, or a single nonresidential building
on a lot or lots, regardless of the number of occupants or tenure; or
      (2)   The division, subdivision or allocation of land or space, whether
initially or cumulatively, between or among two or more existing or prospective
parcels, owners, tenants or occupants by means of or for the purpose of lots,
streets, common areas, leaseholds, condominiums, building groups or other
features.
   B.   A subdivision of land.
   C.   Any activity regulated as development in accordance the Municipalities
Planning Code and any amendments thereto.
   LAND DISTURBANCE — Any activity involving grading, tilling, digging, filling
of ground, clearing, grubbing, stripping of vegetation or any other activity
that causes an alteration to the natural condition of the land. See also "earth
disturbance."
   LANDOWNER — The legal, beneficial or equitable owner or owners of land,
including the holder of an option or contract to purchase (whether or not such
option or contract is subject to any condition), a lessee, if he is authorized
under the lease to exercise the rights of the landowner, or other person having
a proprietary interest in land.
   MANNING'S EQUATION — A method for calculation of flow velocity (e.g., feet
per second) and flow rate (e.g., cubic feet per second) in open channels based
upon channel shape, roughness, depth of flow and slope. Open channels may
include closed conduits so long as the flow is not under pressure.
   MUNICIPALITIES PLANNING CODE — Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code,
Act of July 31, 1968, P.L. 805, No. 247, as reenacted and amended December 31,
1988, P.L. 1329, No. 170, as amended, 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq., and any further
amendments thereto.
   MUNICIPAL SEPARATE STORM SEWER SYSTEM (MS4) — A means of conveyance or
system of conveyances (including roads with drainage systems, public streets,
catch basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, channels or storm drains) owned or
operated by the state, a municipality or other public body and designed or used
for collecting or conveying storm water, and which is not a combined sewer and
which is not part of a publicly owned treatment works.
   NONPOINT SOURCE POLLUTION — Pollution that enters a waterway or body from
diffuse origins in the watershed and does not result from a discernible,
confined or discrete conveyance.
   NPDES — National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System, the federal
government's system for issuance of permits under the Clean Water Act, which is
delegated to DEP, and to the Conservation District to a limited extent.
   NRCS — Natural Resource Conservation Service, previously known as the Soil
Conservation Service ("SCS").
   OPEN CHANNEL — A drainage conveyance in which stormwater flows with an open
surface. Open channels include, but shall not be limited to, natural and man-
made drainageways, swales, streams, ditches, canals and pipes flowing partly
full.
   OUTFALL — Point where water discharges from a conduit, pipe, or other
drainage conveyance. "Point source," as described in 40 CFR § 122.2, at the
point where the MS4 discharges to surface waters of the commonwealth.
   OUTLET — Point of water discharge from a watercourse, stream, river, lake or
artificial drain.
   PEAK DISCHARGE — The maximum rate of flow of stormwater runoff at a given
point and time resulting from a specified storm event, expressed as volume per
unit of time (cubic feet per second).
   PERSON — An individual, partnership, public or private association or
corporation, or a governmental unit, public utility or any other legal entity
whatsoever which is recognized by law as the subject of rights and duties.
   PIPE — A culvert, closed conduit or similar structure (including
appurtenances) that conveys stormwater.
   POINT SOURCE — Any discernible, confined and discrete conveyance, including,
but not limited to, any pipe, ditch, channel, tunnel or conduit from which
stormwater is or may be discharged, as defined in state regulations at 25 Pa.
Code § 92.1.
   PROJECT SITE — The specific area of land where any regulated activity in the
Township is planned, conducted or maintained.
   RAPARIAN CORRIDOR — A vegetated or natural area directly adjacent to (or
surrounding) a water body, including watercourses, ponds, lakes and wetlands,
that serves a variety of functions important to the health and welfare of
humans and the environment. A riparian corridor is determined by boundaries set
by a horizontal measurement extending from the top of bank or high water mark
of a water body to one foot above the one-hundred-year base flood elevation,
or, alternatively, a horizontal measurement extending 50 feet from the top of
bank or high water mark of the water body, whichever distance is greater.
   RATIONAL METHOD (FORMULA) — A precipitation-runoff relation used to estimate
peak discharge.
   REDEVELOPMENT — Earth disturbance activity on land which has previously been
disturbed or developed.
   REGULATED ACTIVITIES —
   A.   Actions or proposed actions which affect stormwater runoff and which
are governed by this chapter.
   B.   Earth disturbance activity one acre or more in area with a point source
discharge to surface waters or the Township's MS4, or five acres or more
regardless of the planned runoff. This includes earth disturbance on any
portion of, part of or during any stage of a larger common plan of development.
This only includes road maintenance activities involving 25 acres or more of
earth disturbance.
   RETENTION BASIN — A stormwater management structure with a controlled
release rate which maintains a constant water level while not receiving
stormwater.
   RETENTION VOLUME — The combined storage volume provided by BMPs on a site
for the retention and eventual infiltration or evaporation of precipitation.
   RETURN PERIOD — The average interval, in years, within which a storm event
of a given magnitude can be expected to recur. A storm with a probability of
occurrence of four percent in any year. See "storm frequency."
   RISER — A vertical pipe extending from the bottom of a pond or basin that is
used to control the discharge rate from the pond or basin for a specified
design storm.
   ROAD MAINTENANCE — Earth disturbance activities within the existing road
cross-section and right-of-way, such as grading and repairing existing unpaved
road surfaces, cutting road banks, cleaning or clearing drainage ditches and
other similar activities.
   ROOFTOP DETENTION — Temporary capture and gradual release of precipitation
falling directly onto a roof surface by incorporating controlled flow roof
drains into building designs.
   RUNOFF — The surface water discharge of a given watershed after
precipitation that does not enter the soil but runs off the surface of the
land.
   SEDIMENT — Solid material, both mineral and organic, that is in suspension,
is being transported or has been moved from its site of origin or has been
deposited by water.
   SEDIMENT BASIN — A barrier, dam, retention or detention structure designed
to capture sediment.
   SEDIMENT POLLUTION — The placement, discharge or any other introduction of
sediment into the waters of the commonwealth occurring from the failure to
design, construct, implement or maintain control measures and control
facilities in accordance with the requirements of this chapter.
   SEDIMENTATION — The process by which mineral or organic matter is
accumulated or deposited by wind, water or gravity. Once this matter is
deposited (or remains suspended in water), it is usually referred to as
"sediment."
   SEEPAGE PIT OR SEEPAGE TRENCH — An area of excavated earth filled with loose
stone or similar material and lined with filter fabric into which surface water
is directed for infiltration into the ground. Also known as an "infiltration
pit" or "infiltration trench."
   SEMIPERVIOUS SURFACE — A surface, such as turf, stone, porous paving or
other material, which allows some percolation or infiltration of water into the
ground.
   SHEET FLOW — Runoff which flows over the ground surface as a thin, even
layer not concentrated in a channel.
   SINGLE ENTITY — An association, public or private corporation. partnership,
firm, trust, estate or any other legal entity empowered to own real estate
exclusive of an individual lot owner.
   SOIL COVER COMPLEX METHOD — A method of runoff volume computation developed
by the Natural Resource Conservation Service. Soil type, land use/cover,
rainfall amounts and moisture conditions are related to the predicted runoff
volume for a single rainfall event.
   SOIL GROUP, HYDROLOGIC — A classification of soils by the Natural Resource
Conservation Service into four runoff potential groups. The groups are
distinguished by letters A through D. The soils represent a range of drainage
capabilities from A soils that are very permeable and produce little runoff to
D soils, which are not very permeable and produce much more runoff.
   SPILLWAY — A depression in or a stormwater system through the embankment of
a stormwater management structure which is used to pass peak discharge greater
than the maximum design storm controlled by the structure.
   STATE WATER QUALITY REQUIREMENTS — As defined under state regulations,
protection of "designated" and "existing uses" (see 25 Pa. Code chapters 93 and
96).
   A.   Each stream segment in Pennsylvania has a "designated use," such as
"cold water fishery" or "potable water supply," which are listed in 25 Pa. Code
chapter 93. These uses must be protected and maintained, under state
regulations.
   B.   "Existing uses" are those attained as of November 1975, regardless
whether they have been designated in 25 Pa. Code chapter 93. Earth disturbance
activities must be designed to protect and maintain existing uses and maintain
the level of water quality necessary to protect those uses in all streams and
to protect and maintain water quality in special protection streams.
   C.   Water quality is a function of the chemical, biological and physical
characteristics of surface water bodies. After regulated earth disturbance
activities are complete, these characteristics can be impacted by addition of
pollutants, such as sediment, and changes in habitat through increased flow
volumes and/or rates as a result of changes in land surface area from those
activities. Therefore, permanent discharges to surface waters must be managed
to protect the streambank, streambed and structural integrity of the waterway
to prevent these impacts.
   STORM FREQUENCY — The number of times that a given storm event occurs or is
equaled or exceeded on the average in a given year. See "return period."
   STORM SEWER — A conveyance or system of conveyances (including roads with
drainage systems, municipal streets, catch basins, curbs, gutters, ditches,
man-made channels or storm drains) primarily used for collecting and conveying
stormwater runoff. Excludes domestic sewage and industrial waste systems.
   STORMWATER — The total amount of precipitation reaching the ground surface.
   STORMWATER DETENTION FACILITY — Stormwater detention facilities include all
structural measures whose principle purpose is the attenuation of incoming
runoff peak discharge rates, All stormwater detention facilities incorporate a
method of restricting outflow and a storage volume for the temporary detention
of incoming runoff. Stormwater detention facilities include both above-grade
and below-grade devices. See also "detention basin."
   STORMWATER MANAGEMENT FACILITY OR STRUCTURE — Any structure, natural or man-
made, that, due to its condition, design or construction, conveys, stores or
otherwise controls stormwater runoff. Typical stormwater management facilities
include, but are not limited to, detention and retention basins, open channels,
storm sewers, pipes and infiltration structures, Referred to as a "storm water
management structure" when man-made.
   STORMWATER MANAGEMENT PLAN — The depiction, to scale, of the stormwater
management facilities, BMPs, design and techniques, if any, to be used for a
given development site, including drainage areas, pipes, inlets, culverts,
basins and appurtenances.
   STREAM — A watercourse.
   STREAM ENCLOSURE — A bridge, culvert, pipe or other structure which encloses
a watercourse. A permit to construct such an enclosure is required for an
enclosure greater than 100 feet in length.
   SUBDIVISION — The division or redivision of a lot, tract or parcel of land
by any means into two or more lots, tracts, parcels or other divisions of land,
including changes in existing lot lines for the purpose, whether immediate or
future, of lease, partition by the court for distribution to heirs or devisees,
transfer of ownership or building or lot development; provided, however, that
the subdivision by lease of land for agricultural purposes into parcels of more
than ten acres, not involving any new street or easement of access or any
residential dwelling, shall be exempt.
   SWALE — A low-lying stretch of land which intercepts, collects or carries
surface water runoff.
   TIME OF CONCENTRATION (TC) — The time for surface runoff to travel from the
hydraulically most distant point in the watershed to a point of interest within
the watershed. This time is the combined total of overland flow time and flow
time in pipes or channels, if any.
   TOWNSHIP — The Township of Upper Dublin, Montgomery County, Pennsylvania.
   TOWNSHIP CODE — The Code of the Township of Upper Dublin.
   WATER QUALITY DESIGN STORM — Benchmark rainfall event used as a basis for
establishing compliance with the water quality requirement of this chapter:
one-year, twenty-four-hour rainfall.
   WATERCOURSE — A channel or conveyance of surface water, such as a stream or
creek, having defined bed and banks, whether natural or artificial, with
perennial or intermittent flow.
   WATERSHED — The area contained within a drainage divide above a specified
point on a stream. In water-supply engineering it is termed a watershed, and in
river-control engineering it is termed a drainage area, drainage basin or
catchment area.
   WATERS OF THE COMMONWEALTH — Any and all rivers, streams, creeks, rivulets,
ditches, watercourses, storm sewers, lakes, dammed water, wetlands, ponds,
springs, and all other bodies or channels of conveyance of surface and
underground water, or parts thereof, whether natural or artificial, within or
on the boundaries of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
   WETLAND — Those areas that are inundated or saturated by surface or
groundwater at a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and that under
normal circumstance do support, a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted
for life in saturated soil conditions, including swamps, marshes, bogs, ferns
and similar areas, as defined by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers.
§ 206-23.   (Reserved)
§ 206-24.   (Reserved)
§ 206-25.   (Reserved)
§ 206-26.   (Reserved)
§ 206-27.   (Reserved)
§ 206-28.   (Reserved)
§ 206-29.   (Reserved)
§ 206-30.   (Reserved)
ARTICLE III
Stormwater Management for Water Quality
§ 206-31.   General requirements for stormwater management.
   A.   All regulated activities within the Township shall be designed,
implemented, operated and maintained to meet the purposes of this chapter,
through these two elements:
      (1)   Erosion and sediment control during earth disturbance and
construction activities (e.g., during construction).
      (2)   Water quality protection measures after completion of earth
disturbance and construction activities, including operations and maintenance.
These measures are also known as "postconstruction stormwater management."
   B.   No regulated activities within the Township shall commence until the
requirements of this chapter are met.
   C.   Erosion and sediment control during regulated activities shall be
addressed as required by §
206-33.
   D.   Postconstruction water quality protection shall be addressed as
required by §
206-34. Operations and maintenance of permanent stormwater BMPs shall be
addressed as required by Article IV and Article V of this chapter.
   E.   All BMPs used to meet the requirements of this chapter shall conform to
the state water quality requirements, and any more stringent requirements as
determined by the Township.
   F.   Techniques for low-impact development practices described in Article XI
of this chapter are encouraged because they reduce the impacts on development
and promulgate compliance with the requirements of this chapter and the state
water quality requirements.
   G.   The standards referred to in this article shall apply as minimum design
standards; however, federal and state regulations may impose additional
standards subject to their jurisdiction.
   H.   
Chapter 240 and the following requirements apply to existing watercourses and
natural drainage features:
      (1)   Whenever a watercourse is located within a development site, it
shall remain open in a natural state to maintain pre-development conditions.
This requirement may be waived on a case-by-case basis by the Board to limit
enclosure and disturbance in furtherance of public health, safety and welfare.
      (2)   The existing points of natural drainage discharge onto adjacent
property shall not be altered without the written approval of the affected
landowners and the grant of a permanent drainage easement by the landowners.
      (3)   No stormwater runoff or natural drainage shall be so diverted as to
overload existing drainage systems (including existing stormwater management
facilities) or create flooding.
      (4)   The Township may require a developer to grant to the Township a
permanent drainage easement along any watercourse located within or along the
boundary of any property being subdivided or developed. The purpose of any such
easement shall be for the maintenance of the channel of any watercourse. The
terms of the easement shall prohibit the placing of fill or structures and any
alterations which may adversely affect the watercourse. The required width of
any such easement shall be determined by the Township Engineer, and in no case
shall such easement be less than 50 feet in width. The developer will retain
maintenance responsibility for the easement until such time as the following
are accomplished:
         (a)   The easement is offered for dedication by the developer and
accepted by the Township; and
         (b)   If an easement acceptable to the Township is established and
officially entered upon the deeds of those properties affected by the easement
by the Montgomery County Office for the Recording of Deeds, the maintenance
shall then be the responsibility of the individual lot owners over whose
property the easement passes. For land developments, the maintenance shall then
be the responsibility of the lot owner upon which the watercourse traverses; or
         (c)   A homeowners' association or other approved legal entity,
approved by the Township, assumes responsibility for the maintenance of the
development, including the watercourse easement.
   I.   Developers shall construct and/or install stormwater management
facilities, on and offsite, as necessary to:
      (1)   Prevent erosion damage and to satisfactorily carry off, detain or
retain and control the rate and volume of stormwatcr discharge.
      (2)   Manage the anticipated peak discharge from property being developed
and existing runoff being contributed from all land at a higher elevation in
the same watershed.
      (3)   Manage volume of runoff. Postdevelopment conditions shall not
exceed predevelopment conditions.
      (4)   Convey stormwater along or through the property to an outfall.
         (a)   If diffused flow is proposed to be concentrated and discharged
onto an adjacent property, the developer must document that adequate downstream
conveyance facilities exist to safely transport the concentrated discharge or
otherwise prove that no erosion, sedimentation, flooding or other harm will
result from the concentrated discharge.
         (b)   An outfall shall have sufficient capacity to receive stormwater
without deterioration of the facility and without adversely affecting property
in the Township. This outfall may be a stream or other drainage facility so
designated by the township.
         (c)   Roof runoff.
            [1]   Roof runoff shall be conveyed into watercourses on the
property or to a storm drainage system of the Township. However, a direct
connection of roof drains to watercourses and storm drainage systems is
prohibited unless approved by the Township Engineer. Discharge from roof drains
over a sidewalk, into a driveway, over a parking area or into gutters will not
be permitted.
            [2]   Compliance with groundwater recharge requirements requires
that roof runoff generated by the groundwater recharge design storm be
infiltrated on-site. Infiltration can be achieved locally (e.g., dry wells,
french drain) or in conjunction with other on site BMP's (e.g., infiltration
trench, bioretention area, porous pavement sand filter).
            [3]   Where conditions are not suitable for groundwater recharge,
roof drains are required to discharge onto a vegetated surface (e.g., lawn,
filter strip, swale, grassed waterway). The minimum length of the flow path
between the drain outlet and the point of discharge to a watercourse or storm
sewer inlet shall be 20 feet.
            [4]   Unsuitable groundwater recharge conditions must be documented
to the satisfaction of the Township Engineer.
            [5]   Roof runoff discharge points shall be no closer than 20 feet
to an adjoining property.
         (d)   Water originating from other than natural sources, such as air-
conditioning units, sump pumps or other dry weather flow, wherever practicable,
shall be discharged to infiltration areas or negative BMPs at the direction of
the Township Engineer. Discharge from sump pumps shall be no closer than 20
feet to an adjoining property.
         (e)   Water from swimming pools or similar uses containing chlorine
shall be pretreated to remove chlorine to acceptable limits prior to discharge.
   J.   A horizontal riparian corridor buffer area shall be established between
the top of bank or high water mark of a water body and a line one foot above
the one-hundred-year base flood elevation or from the top of bank or high water
mark of a water body and a line 50 feet from the top of bank or high water mark
of the water body, whichever distance is greater. The riparian corridor may be
part of any lot to meet minimum lot area and minimum yard requirements. No
building or structure of any kind or any work, such as earth disturbance or
excavation, shall be permitted within the riparian corridor except as permitted
within the Floodplain Conservation District under
chapter 255, Article XXII, Floodplain Conservation District.
   K.   Where applicable, construction of stormwater management facilities
shall comply with the requirements of chapter 102 (Erosion Control), chapter
105 (Dam Safety and Waterway Management) and chapter 106 (Flood Plain
Management) of Title 25, Pa Code, Rules and Regulations of DEP. Inquiries
regarding dam safety permit requirements or other concerns shall be addressed
to DEP. Copies of any correspondence to and from DEP must be provided to the
Township.
   L.   Stormwater management facilities which are located in, adjacent to or
that will discharge to a state highway right-of-way shall be subject to the
approval of the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation (PennDOT). Copies of
any correspondence to and from PennDOT must be provided to the Township.
   M.   Stormwater management facilities located within or affecting any
floodplain shall be subject to the requirements of applicable DEP codes and the
Township Code which regulates construction and development within areas which
are subject to flooding. See
Chapter 255, Zoning, Article XXII, Floodplain Conservation District.
   N.   A permanent access easement to stormwater management facilities for
maintenance purposes shall be granted to the Township for maintenance and
operation of the facilities. Accessways shall be cleared and stabilized to a
minimum of 20 feet wide, with an all-weather surface suitable for access for
maintenance equipment and personnel. Proximity of facilities to public rights-
of-way shall be encouraged in order to minimize the length of accessways.
Multiple accessways shall be encouraged for major or regional facilities. The
owner of the servient property shall be responsible for maintenance of the
easement. A deed restriction to the satisfaction of the Township Solicitor
shall be submitted to provide for maintenance, to authorize the Township to
take corrective maintenance measures if necessary and to lien the cost of the
work against the property should corrective measures not be performed by the
homeowner, association or entity owning the property.
0. Additional studies and higher levels of control than the minimum provided in
the requirements and criteria of this chapter may be required by the Board of
Commissioners to ensure adequate protection of life and property and
preservation of water quality.
   P.   A drainage release or easement, in a form approved by the Township
Solicitor, may be required by the Township for discharges to adjoining
properties and watercourses.
   Q.   Landowners shall comply with any future requirements promulgated by the
Township in order to conform with any local, county, state or federal watershed
management plans adopted in the future.
§ 206-32.   Permit requirements by other government entities.
The following permit requirements may apply to certain activities and must be
met prior to commencement of earth disturbance activities, construction or
modifications as applicable:
   A.   All earth disturbance activities subject to permit requirements by DEP
under regulations at 25 Pa. Code Chapter 102.
   B.   Work within natural drainageways subject to permit by DEP under 25 Pa.
Code Chapter 105.
   C.   Any stormwater management facility that would be located in or adjacent
to surface waters of the commonwealth, including wetlands, subject to permit by
DEP under 25 Pa. Code Chapter 105.
   D.   Any stormwater management facility that would be located on a state
highway right-of-way, or that would require access from a state highway, shall
be subject to approval by PennDOT.
   E.   Culverts, bridges, storm sewers or any other facilities which must pass
or convey flows from the tributary area and any facility which may constitute a
dam subject to permit by DEP under 25 Pa. Code Chapter 105.
§ 206-33.   Erosion and sediment control during regulated activities.
   A.   No regulated activities within the Township shall commence until the
Township approves an erosion and sediment control plan for construction
activities and a permit is issued.
   B.   DEP has regulations that require an erosion and sediment control plan
for any earth disturbance activity of 5,000 square feet or more, under 25 Pa.
Code § 102.4(b).
   C.   In addition, under 25 Pa. Code chapter 92, a DEP NPDES construction
activities permit is required for regulated earth disturbance activities on
sites one acre or greater in area.
   D.   Evidence of any and all necessary permit(s) for regulated earth
disturbance activities from DEP or the County Conservation District must be
provided to the Township prior to final approval or commencement of earthmoving
activities.
   E.   A copy of the approved erosion and sediment control plan and narrative,
and any required permit, as required by DEP regulations, shall be available at
the project site at all times.
§ 206-34.   Water quality requirements after regulated activities are complete.
   A.   No regulated activities within the Township shall commence until the
Township approves a plan which demonstrates compliance with state water quality
requirements after construction is complete.
   B.   BMPs must be designed, implemented and maintained to meet state water
quality requirements and any other more stringent requirements as published by
the Township.
   C.   To control postconstruction stormwater impacts from regulated
activities, state water quality requirements can be met by BMPs, including site
design, which provide for replication of preconstruction stormwater
infiltration and runoff conditions, so that postconstruction stormwater
discharges do not degrade the physical, chemical or biological characteristics
of the receiving waters. As described in the DEP Comprehensive Stormwater
Management Policy (No. 392-0300-002, September 28, 2002), this shall be
achieved by the following:
      (1)   Infiltration: replication of preconstruction stormwater
infiltration quantities.
      (2)   Treatment: use of water quality treatment BMPs to ensure filtering
out of the chemical and physical pollutants from the stormwater runoff.
      (3)   Streambank and streambed protection: management of volume and rate
of postconstruction stormwater discharges to prevent physical degradation of
receiving waters (e.g., from scouring).
   D.   DEP has regulations that require municipalities to ensure design,
implementation and maintenance of BMPs that control runoff from new development
and redevelopment after regulated earth disturbance activities are complete.
These requirements include the need to implement postconstruction stormwater
BMPs with assurance of long-term operations and maintenance of those BMPs.
   E.   Evidence of any necessary permit(s) for earth disturbance activities
must be provided to the Township.
   F.   BMP operations and maintenance requirements are described in Article IV
of this chapter.
§ 206-35.   Water quality requirement.
   A.   One of the major objectives of this chapter is to maintain and, if
possible, improve existing water quality by preventing discharge of stormwater
runoff pollutants. In considering issues such as ease of implementation and
cost-effectiveness, the following minimum water quality criteria are
established to meet the objective of this chapter.
   B.   Stormwater detention facilities shall include provisions to detain, for
extended periods of time, runoff from the water quality design storm (one-year,
twenty-four-hour rainfall event), using methodology appropriate for the
drainage area under consideration and approved by the Township Engineer.
   C.   Release of detained stormwater can begin at the start of the storm
(i.e., the stormwater detention facility will not permanently retain a portion
of the runoff). The design of the facility shall consider and minimize the
chances of clogging and sedimentation potential.
   D.   When detention basins are used to satisfy the water quality
requirement, the invert of the water quality orifice may be placed at the
invert of the basin. Because the standard for water quality may result in a
fairly small outlet orifice in detention basins, the Township Engineer will
determine the minimum standard diameter orifice as part of the stormwater
management plan review. In soils nonconducive to infiltration, the addition of
an underdrain is required, although this requirement can be waived upon
determination by the Township Engineer that conditions warrant such a waiver.
   E.   All stormwater management facilities must implement the water quality
requirement of this section. The water quality objective can be obtained
through a variety of approved BMP's or combinations thereof, including
retention basins, detention basins and bioretention areas.
   F.   Below-grade detention facilities may not be used to satisfy the water
quality requirement. Examples include below-grade infiltration beds or
galleries and below-grade detention chambers. In these instances, approved
water quality BMP's which supplement the below-grade stormwater detention
facilities shall be installed. Examples include water quality inlets (including
oil/water separators), filter strips and sand filters. All such water quality
BMP's must be designed to treat runoff derived from the water quality design
storm (one-year, twenty-four-hour rainfall event).
   G.   Unless derived from roofs associated with known or suspected
contamination, roof runoff is exempt from the water quality requirement.
However, this exemption applies only to roof runoff before it is combined with
runoff from other sources.
   H.   Commercial and industrial properties and establishments must
demonstrate compliance with the NPDES (40 CFR, Chapter 1, Part 122), as
administered by DEP. Copies of stormwater pollution prevention plans (SWPPP)
and monitoring reports shall be provided to the Township.
§ 206-36.   Groundwater recharge requirement
   A.   BMP's shall be provided to retain all runoff generated by the
groundwater recharge design storm (seventy-five-hundredths-inch, twenty-four-
hour rainfall event) for infiltration.
   B.   BMP's shall be designed to infiltrate retained runoff within a forty-
eight-hour period. Infiltration rates shall be based on field measurements
using a method approved by the Township Engineer. Tests shall be conducted at
the proposed depth of the bottom of the infiltration device. A factor of safety
of 3, or greater. shall be used when computing infiltration potential of a BNP
from field measurements of infiltration rate.
   C.   Compliance by lot owners; exceptions.
      (1)   Lot owners must comply, individually, with the groundwater recharge
requirement. However, groundwater recharge BMP's will not be required on
properties where:
         (a)   Average slopes for the property exceed 10%.
         (b)   Seasonal high water table is shallower than four feet below
final grade.
         (c)   Soil or bedrock conditions will not permit efficient percolation
(nominal infiltration rate of less than 0.2 inches/hour).
         (d)   Site configuration will require that runoff must be infiltrated
within:
            [1]   One hundred feet of a known or suspected sinkhole.
            [2]   Fifty feet of a water supply well.
            [3]   Fifty feet of a perennial stream.
            [4]   Twenty feet of a basement wall.
            [5]   Fifty feet of a septic system.
      (2)   The groundwater recharge objective can be obtained through a
variety of approved BMP's or combinations thereof, including bioretention
areas, dry wells, french drains, infiltration trenches, porous pavement and
some types of sand filters. Community (multilot) groundwater recharge BMP's may
be approved by the Township Engineer. However, the total upgradient drainage
areas served by any groundwater recharge BMP may not exceed five acres.
   D.   The storage volume of detention basins or retention basins may not be
used to satisfy the required retention volume for groundwater recharge.
   E.   Potentially contaminated runoff may not be infiltrated without
appropriate pretreatment. The Township Engineer will determine whether
contaminated runoff can be satisfactorily treated to permit infiltration. Sites
which generate contaminated runoff must segregate uncontaminated runoff (e.g.,
roof runoff). Measures shall be introduced to infiltrate uncontaminated runoff
generated by a property during the groundwater recharge design storm (e.g.,
roof runoff).
   F.   Above-grade groundwater recharge BMP's which incorporate biofiltration
are required for the infiltration of untreated runoff from public, commercial
or industrial parking lots. Runoff from private or institutional parking lots
may utilize below-grade devices (e.g., infiltration trenches, porous pavement).
   G.   Direct runoff from public roads is exempt from the groundwater recharge
requirement. However, privately owned and maintained roads must comply with
this requirement.
   H.   Procedures used to predict runoff must use standard and accepted
calculation methodology and be satisfactory to the Township Engineer.
   I.   Groundwater recharge BMP's shall be designed to provide storage equal
to 100% of the required retention volume.
§ 206-37.   Stormwater design standards and criteria.
   A.   The design and construction requirements for stormwater management and
stormwater conveyance systems, described in Article VI of this chapter, are
hereby established as indicated in said article.
   B.   Runoff control measures or BMPs.
      (1)   Any selected BMP must meet the required water quality and runoff
peak rate requirements of this chapter.
      (2)   Developers shall consider the use of innovative BMP's (e.g.,
infiltration techniques, wet ponds, riparian buffers, bioretention areas,
underground detention, seepage beds, artificial wetlands), if appropriate, to
provide for water quality improvement and groundwater recharge. Guidelines for
the selection and design of a wide variety of BMP's are available in the
Pennsylvania Handbook of Best Management Practices for Developing Areas
(Pennsylvania Association of Conservation Districts, 1998) and its successor
document or documents when available Other design guides, approved by the
Township, may also be used in preparing stormwater management plans. In
selecting the appropriate BMP's or combinations thereof, the following must be
considered:
         (a)   Contributing drainage area served by the BMP.
         (b)   Hydraulic conductivity of soils and bedrock.
         (c)   Depth to seasonal high water table and bedrock.
         (d)   Erodibility of soils.
         (e)   Land availability and topographic constraints.
         (f)   Existing natural resources which require conservation or
enhancement.
         (g)   Other factors as may be identified by the Township Engineer,
MCCD, DEP, EPA or other state and federal agencies.
      (3)   Exemptions.
         (a)   Any regulated activity specified in Article IV which meets the
stormwater management plan exemption criteria is exempt from meeting the water
quality requirements of §
206-35. This exemption shall apply to the total proposed development even if
development is to take place in stages. Exemption shall not relieve the
applicant from providing adequate stormwater management to meet the purpose of
this chapter. Nevertheless, the following control techniques are encouraged
where appropriate:
            [1]   Small on-site bioretention areas, providing detention
storage, with grassed overflow.
            [2]   Oversized storm sewers with flow constrictions (reduced
orifice) at discharge.
            [3]   Stream channel preservation and protection of vegetation;
energy reduction spillways.
            [4]   Reduction of maintained landscaped areas.
            [5]   Preservation of existing vegetation, especially native
plantings and woodland.
            [6]   Planting of wetland species along drainage swales and
depressions.
            [7]   Fertilization practices minimized/eliminated.
            [8]   Site design criteria which prevent significant alteration of
existing topography.
            [9]   Sites that have suitable soils are encouraged to incorporate
on-site infiltration methods, such as grassed waterways, shrub filter strips,
and french drains and trenches, into the design of the development.
         (b)   All sites with suitable conditions must comply with the
groundwater recharge requirement. The groundwater recharge requirement may be
satisfied using a variety of BMP's.
      (4)   Subregional (combined site) storage.
         (a)   Traditionally, the approach to stormwater management has been to
control the runoff on an individual site basis. However, there is a growing
commitment to finding cost-effective comprehensive control techniques which
both preserve and protect the natural drainage system. In other words, two
developers developing sites adjacent to each other could pool their capital
resources to provide for a community stormwater management facility in the most
hydrologically advantageous location or locations,
         (b)   The goal is the development and use of the most cost effective
and environmentally sensitive stormwater runoff controls which significantly
improve the capability and flexibility of land developers and communities to
control runoff.
         (c)   An advantage to combining efforts is to increase the opportunity
to utilize stormwater management facilities to meet other community needs and
safety considerations. For example, certain stormwater management facilities
could be designed so that recreational facilities, such as ball fields, open
space, sand volleyball courts, etc., could be incorporated. Natural or
artificial ponds and lakes could serve both recreational and stormwater
management objectives.
         (d)   To take this concept a step further, there is also the
possibility that the stormwater could be managed off site; that is, in a
location off the property(s) in question. There could be a regional detention,
retention, lake, pond or other physical facilities to serve multiple
developments. Any such facility shall have a construction, ownership and
maintenance program, in a recordable form.
      (5)   All stormwater management facility designs shall conform to the
applicable standards and specifications of the following governmental and
institutional agencies:
         (a)   American Society of Testing and Materials (ASTM).
         (b)   Asphalt Institute (Al).
         (c)   Montgomery County Conservation District. (MCCD).
         (d)   Federal Highway Administration (FHWA).
         (e)   National Crushed Stone Association (NCSA).
         (f)   National Sand and Gravel Association (NSGA).
         (g)   Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection (DEP).
         (h)   Pennsylvania Department of Transportation (PennDOT).
         (i)   United States Department of Agriculture, Natural Resources
Conservation Service, Pennsylvania (USDA, NRCS, PA)
         (j)   Montgomery County Planning Commission. (MCPC).
         (k)   Environmental Protection Agency. (EPA).
         (l)   Federal Emergency Management Agency. (FEMA).
         (m)   U.S. Army Corps of Engineers (ACOE).
      (6)   If special geological hazards or soil conditions, such as carbonate
derived soils, are identified on the site, the developer's engineer and
geologist shall consider the affect of proposed stormwater management measures
on these conditions. In such cases, the Township may require an in-depth report
by a competent registered professional engineer and/or geologist.
§ 206-38.   (Reserved)
§ 206-39.   (Reserved)
§ 206-40.   (Reserved)
ARTICLE IV
Stormwater Management Plan Requirements
§ 206-41.   General requirements for stormwater management plans.
All subdivision or land development plans prepared for any site within the
Township in accordance with the Municipalities Planning Code requirements or
Township Code requirements shall submit a stormwater management plan for the
site in accordance with the requirements found in §
206-43 of this chapter, unless exempt by §
206-42 below.
§ 206-42.   Exemptions.
   A.   The following activities are exempt from submitting a full stormwater
management plan in accordance with the requirements of this chapter, but
instead shall submit a stormwater management plan in accordance with Subsection
B below. This criterion shall apply to the total development even if
development is to take place in phases. Exemption shall not relieve the
applicant from providing adequate stormwater management to meet the purpose of
this chapter.
      (1)   Land disturbance associated with existing or proposed one- and two-
family dwellings is exempt.
      (2)   Any land disturbance associated with agricultural activities,
including growing crops, rotating crops, tilling of soil and grazing animals,
and activities operated in accordance with a conservation plan or erosion and
sedimentation control plan approved by the Conservation District or the NRCS.
      (3)   Any land disturbance associated with forest management operations
which is following DEP's management practices, including those contained in its
publication "Soil Erosion and Sedimentation Control Guidelines for Forestry,"
and which is operating under an erosion and sedimentation control plan approved
by the Conservation District is exempt.
      (4)   Any land disturbance associated with mining operations approved and
operated in accordance with all applicable rules and regulations of the DEP and
operating under an erosion and sedimentation control plan approved by the
applicable agency is exempt.
      (5)   Use of land for gardening for home consumption is exempt.
      (6)   Any land disturbance which would increase the peak runoff by less
than 0.5 or 1/2 cubic foot per second (CFS) from the existing conditions in a
one-hundred-year storm.
   B.   An applicant for an exempt activity as listed in §
206-42A above shall do the following:
      (1)   Select appropriate stormwater management techniques.
      (2)   Prepare a stormwater management plan showing general features and
locations of proposed stormwater management techniques. The design of the
proposed stormwater management plan shall be provided by a licensed
professional engineer trained and experienced in stormwater management and
erosion and sedimentation control. The design, construction, integrity and
installation of the control measures are the responsibility of the landowner/
developer and the developer's professional.
      (3)   Submit two copies of the stormwater management plan to the Township
Engineer and one copy to the township for review and approval.
   C.   For exempt activities, the stormwater management plan must be approved
by the Township Engineer before issuance of any building or zoning permits.
   D.   No exemption from the plan requirements shall be provided for regulated
activities.
§ 206-43.   Stormwater management plan contents.
The stormwater management plan shall be prepared by a licensed professional
engineer experienced in stormwater management and erosion and sedimentation
control. The following items shall be included in the stormwater management
plan:
   A.   Written report, including the following information:
      (1)   Narrative description of project.
      (2)   Narrative description of proposed stormwater management controls
and facilities, both during and after development, including construction
specifications.
      (3)   Narrative description of erosion and sedimentation controls,
including those contained in any required erosion and sedimentation control
plan, including construction specifications and all necessary calculations.
      (4)   Complete hydrologic, hydraulic and structural computations for all
stormwater management facilities accompanied by a narrative description of the
computations, including an explanation of all assumptions, estimations and
design criteria.
      (5)   Expected project time schedule, including anticipated start and
completion dates.
      (6)   Written maintenance plan for postconstruction time frame,
   B.   Maps, including or prepared in accordance with the following:
      (1)   Drafting standards. The drafting standards, including requirements
for scale, dimensions, sheet numbering and plan size, shall be the same
standards as those listed in the Township Code,
Chapter 212, Subdivision and Land Development.
      (2)   General information.
         (a)   Name or identifying title of project and tax parcel number.
         (b)   Name and address of the record owner, applicant and developer.
         (c)   Name and address of the individual who prepared the plan.
         (d)   A location map for the purpose of locating the site, at a scale
not less than 800 feet to the inch, showing the relation of the tract to
adjoining property and to all streets, roads and municipal boundaries existing
within 1,000 feet of any part of the tract.
         (e)   Plan date and date of latest revision to plan, North point,
graphic scale and written scale.
         (f)   Note on plan indicating any area that is to be offered for
dedication.
         (g)   Certificate, signed and sealed by an individual registered in
the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania and qualified to perform such duties,
indicating compliance with the stormwater management plan application.
         (h)   Total acreage of tract.
         (i)   Existing and proposed impervious area.
      (3)   Existing features.
         (a)   Complete outline survey of the property to be subdivided or
developed shall be provided showing all courses, distances and area and tie-ins
to all adjacent intersections.
         (b)   The location, names and widths of streets; the location of
property lines and names of owners; the location' of sanitary sewers, storm
drains and similar features within 400 feet of any part of the land to be
subdivided or developed; the location of streams, lakes, ponds or other
watercourses outside the project area which will be affected by runoff from the
project.
         (c)   The location, size and ownership of all underground and
aboveground utilities and services (e.g., wells, on-site sewage disposal
systems) and any rights-of-way or easements within the property. Include the PA
One-Call serial number
         (d)   The location of existing buildings, streets and other
significant features within the property; the location and area of all
floodplains, riparian corridors, woods, forests, lakes, ponds, watercourses
(including drainage swales), wetlands, slopes 10% to 15%, steep slopes 15% to
25%, steep slopes 25% or steeper.
         (e)   Contours at vertical intervals of two feet. One-foot intervals
shall be shown on lands with any slope of 5% or less. Contouring shall be in
compliance with the National Map Accuracy Standards.
         (f)   An overlay showing soil types, boundaries, limitations for
proposed uses and a statement as to how the soils data was obtained. Include
soil data from Montgomery County Soil Survey.
         (g)   Watershed boundaries applicable to the site.
         (h)   All trees eight inches in diameter or larger.
         (i)   Tree masses.
         (j)   Boundary monumentation.
         (k)   Easements and restrictions of record.
      (4)   Proposed features.
         (a)   Proposed land use, total number of lots and dwelling units and
extent of commercial, industrial or other nonresidential uses.
         (b)   Locations and dimensions of all proposed streets, sidewalks, lot
lines, setbacks, building locations, parking compounds, impervious and
semiimpervious surfaces (total area), sanitary sewer facilities, water
facilities and areas proposed for public dedication.
         (c)   Proposed changes to land surface and vegetative cover, including
areas to be cut or filled as shown on a plan for surface drainage.
         (d)   Final contours at vertical intervals of two feet. One-foot
intervals shall be shown on lands with any slope of 5% or less.
         (e)   Plans and profiles of proposed stormwater management facilities,
including horizontal and vertical location, size and type of material. This
information shall be of the quality required for the construction of all
facilities and include all calculations, assumptions and criteria used in the
design of the facilities; a schedule for installation of such facilities; and a
proposed schedule of inspections which will be performed by the applicant's
engineer or designee in company with the Township Engineer.
         (f)   The locations of septic tank infiltration areas and wells when
infiltration methods, such as cisterns, seepage beds or trenches, infiltration
basins or porous pavement are used. Also soil percolation tests and submission
of the percolation data and test locations to substantiate percolation rates
used in the drainage calculations.
         (g)   Plans and profiles of all erosion and sedimentation control
measures, temporary as well as permanent, including all calculations,
assumptions and criteria used in designing the controls and a schedule for
their implementation.
         (h)   An encroachment map which illustrates all natural features and a
preliminary regrading plan which illustrates all disturbance of the identified
natural feature areas; the amount of each natural feature disturbed indicated
and illustrated on the encroachment map.
         (i)   Rights-of-way and/or easements proposed to be created for all
drainage purposes, utilities or other reasons.
         (j)   Construction sequence.
         (k)   Street and parking lot grades.
         (l)   Landscaping.
         (m)   Features to be demolished.
   C.   Description of an ownership and maintenance program, in a recordable
form, that clearly sets forth the ownership and maintenance responsibility for
all temporary and permanent stormwater management facilities to the
satisfaction of the Township Solicitor, including the following:
      (1)   Description of the method and extent of the maintenance
requirements.
      (2)   When maintained by a private entity, identification of a
responsible individual, corporation, association or other entity for ownership
and maintenance. Deed covenants and restrictions must be submitted to provide
for maintenance by this entity, and the legally handing document must provide
that the Township shall have the right to:
         (a)   Enter the property and inspect the facilities at any time.
         (b)   Require the private entity to take corrective measures and
assign the private entity reasonable time periods for any necessary action.
         (c)   Authorize maintenance to be done by the Township and lien the
cost of the work against the properties of the private entity responsible for
maintenance.
         (d)   Be provided with a yearly maintenance report by a qualified
professional. Two copies to be forwarded to the township and one copy to the
Township Engineer.
      (3)   Where the stormwater management plan proposes that the Township own
or maintain the facilities, a description of the methods, procedures and the
extent to which any facilities shall be turned over to the Township.
      (4)   Stormwater management easement area shown and recorded in the
Office of the Recorder of Deeds.
   D.   Financial security for the completion of stormwater management
facilities.
   E.   Maintenance guaranty.
   F.   When a stormwater management plan is submitted in sections, a
generalized stormwater management plan for the entire project site shall be
submitted in addition to the detailed stormwater management plan for the
proposed section. This generalized plan shall demonstrate how the stormwater of
the proposed section will relate to the entire development. If temporary
facilities are required for construction of a section, such facilities shall be
included in the submitted stormwater management plan.
§ 206-44.   Plan submission.
   A.   For subdivision and land development:
      (1)   The stormwater management plan shall be submitted by the developer
to the Office of Code Enforcement as part of the preliminary plan submission
for a subdivision or land development.
      (2)   Eighteen copies of the stormwater management plan and any reports
shall be submitted.
      (3)   Distribution of the stormwater management plan shall be as follows:
Distribution Number of Copies
Distribution                            Number of Copies
Township                                1
Commissioners Planning Committee        7
Township Engineer                       2
Township Manager                        1
Township Solicitor                      1
Code Enforcement Office                 1
Planning Advisory Board                 1
Environmental Protection Advisory Board 1
Public Works Department                 1
Parks and Recreation Department         1
Montgomery County Planning Commission   1
 
      (4)   Developer is responsible for submitting plans and reports to
Montgomery County Conservation District, Pennsylvania Department of
Environmental Protection, Army Corps of Engineers, Montgomery County Planning
Commission and other agencies as required for permitting.
   B.   For new or additional construction of impervious or semi-pervious
surfaces, buildings or structures that do not require action by the Board of
Commissioners under §
206-44A, six copies of the stormwater management plan shall be submitted by the
developer to the Office of Code Enforcement as part of the building permit
application. Distribution of the stormwater management plan and any reports
shall be as follows:
 
Distribution            Number of Copies
Code Enforcement Office 1
Public Works Department 1
Township Engineer       2
 
   C.   For diversion or piping of stream channel and installation of
stormwater systems:
      (1)   The stormwater management plan shall be submitted by the developer
to the Office of Code Enforcement, the Montgomery County Planning Commission
and the Montgomery County Conservation District for coordination with the DEP
permit application process under chapter 105 (Dam Safety and Waterway
management) or chapter 106 (Flood Plain Management) of DEP' s rules and
regulations.
      (2)   Six copies of the stormwater management plan shall be submitted to
the Office of Code Enforcement for distribution as follows:
 
Distribution            Number of Copies
Code Enforcement Office 1
Public Works Department 1
Township Engineer       2
 
   D.   The stormwater management plan shall be accompanied by the permit
application and requisite permit fee, in accordance with the fee schedule
adopted by the Board of Commissioners and found in the Township fee schedule.
§ 206-45.   Plan review and approval.
   A.   Following receipt of the Township Engineer's review of the stormwater
management plan, the Board of Commissioners shall review and approve or
disapprove a stormwater management plan submitted pursuant to §
206-44A.
   B.   The Township Engineer shall review and approve or disapprove a
stormwater management plan submitted pursuant to §
206-44B and C.
   C.   The Township Engineer shall review all stormwater management plans for
consistency with this chapter and any additional stormwater management
provisions contained in the Township Code, as applicable, as well as accepted
engineering practices.
   D.   No stormwater management plan for a regulated activity shall be
approved if the stormwater management plan has been found to be inconsistent
with this chapter as determined by the Township Engineer.
   E.   The developer shall be responsible for completing a certified as-built
survey prepared by a professional land surveyor of all stormwater management
facilities included in the approved stormwater management plan. Criteria for
the as-built plan will be provided at the preconstruction meeting. The
certified as-built survey and explanation of any discrepancies with the design
plans shall be submitted to the Township Engineer for review and approval. In
no case shall the Township Engineer approve the as-built survey until the
Township Engineer receives a copy of an approved declaration of adequacy,
highway occupancy permit from PennDOT and any applicable permits from DEP.
   F.   Modification of plans.
      (1)   A modification to a submitted stormwater management plan for a
proposed development site which involves a change in control methods or
techniques or which involves the relocation or redesign of control measures or
which is necessary because soil or other conditions are not as stated on the
stormwater management plan as determined by the Township Engineer shall require
the resubmission of a modified stormwater management plan consistent with §
206-43 and subject to review per this chapter.
      (2)   Minor design changes may be permitted as authorized by the Board of
Commissioners and as recommended by the Township Engineer without resubmission
consistent with the requirements of this chapter.
      (3)   A modification to an approved stormwater management plan shall
require a new stormwater management permit. The permit shall be issued
following approval of the revised plan.
   G.   Resubmission of disapproved stormwater management plan. A disapproved
stormwater management plan may be resubmitted, with the revisions addressing
the Township Engineer's concerns documented in writing, to the Township
Engineer in accordance with the plan submittal requirements of this chapter and
subject to the plan review requirements of this chapter. The applicable
Township Engineer's review security must accompany a resubmission of a
disapproved stormwater management plan.
§ 206-46.   Permit requirements and procedures.
   A.   A regulated activity as defined in this chapter shall not be initiated
nor any disturbance, clearing or cutting of trees until a Township stormwater
management permit has been issued, regardless of the receipt of permits of
other regulatory agencies.
   B.   Application requirements.
      (1)   The landowner shall obtain the required stormwater management
permit for regulated activities related to land development and subdivision
after obtaining the required subdivision or land development plan approval and
stormwater management plan approval as specified in Article IV of this chapter.
The stormwater management permit will be issued by the Township Engineer.
      (2)   The landowner shall obtain the required stormwater management
permit for regulated activities specified in §
206-5B(3) and (4) after obtaining the required building permit approval and
stormwater management plan approval as specified in Article IV of this chapter.
The stormwater management permit will be issued by the Township Engineer
concurrently with the issuance of the building permit.
      (3)   The landowner shall obtain the required stormwater management
permit for regulated activities specified in §
206-5B(5) and (6) from the Office of Code Enforcement after obtaining any
necessary county, state and/or federal permits, copies of which shall be
provided to the Office of Code Enforcement.
   C.   Application for permit.
      (1)   Applications for stormwater management permits required by this
chapter shall be made by the landowner on forms supplied by the Township
Engineer. Such applications shall provide a brief description of the stormwater
management controls and regulated activities. This application shall become
part of the stormwater management plan submission required by Article IV of
this chapter.
      (2)   Any incomplete application submission shall be rejected by the
Township Engineer without any further processing or review.
   D.   Modification of plans. A modification to an approved stormwater
management plan shall require a new stormwater management permit. The permit
shall be issued following approval of the revised plan.
   E.   Expiration and renewal.
      (1)   All stormwater management permits shall expire 24 months from the
date of issuance unless construction is commenced prior to this date, an
extension of time is approved or if more than 12 months is required for
completion of site work, as incorporated into the construction escrow
documentation.
      (2)   All extension requests must be submitted in writing to the Township
Engineer at least 60 days prior to permit expiration.
      (3)   A stormwater management permit shall not expire while a request for
an extension is pending.
      (4)   An extension of an expired stormwater management permit may be
issued by the Board of Commissioners following the submission of a written
request if, in the opinion of the Township Engineer, the subject property or
affected surrounding area has not been altered in a manner which requires
alteration to the stormwater management plan.
      (5)   A renewal of an expired stormwater management permit may be issued
by the Board of Commissioners following a resubmittal of the permit application
form and review by the Township Engineer to determine if any changes have
occurred in project site conditions or stormwater management plan requirements
since the original permit was issued. If such changes have occurred, the Board
of Commissioners may require the applicant to resubmit the stormwater
management plan for a new review pursuant to Article IV of this chapter.
      (6)   The refusal of the Board of Commissioners to reissue an expired
stormwater management permit shall be in writing and contain the reasons for
such refusal.
   F.   Suspension and revocation.
      (1)   Any stormwater management permit issued under this chapter may be
suspended or revoked by the Board of Commissioners or Township Engineer for:
         (a)   Noncompliance with or failure to implement any provision of the
permit.
         (b)   A violation of any provision of this chapter or any other
applicable law, ordinance, rule or regulation relating to the project.
         (c)   The creation of any condition or the commission of any act
during construction or development which constitutes or creates a hazard or
nuisance or which endangers the life or property of others.
      (2)   Suspension of a stormwater management permit requires owner/
contractor to stabilize all disturbed areas, restore all erosion and
sedimentation controls, stop all site activity and perform all needed
maintenance operations to the satisfaction of the Township Engineer.
      (3)   A suspended stormwater management permit shall be reinstated by the
Township Engineer when:
         (a)   The Township Engineer has inspected and approved the corrections
to the stormwater management control measures(s) or the elimination of the
hazard or nuisance; and/or
         (b)   The Township Engineer is satisfied that the violation of the
ordinance, law or rule and regulation has been corrected.
      (4)   A stormwater management permit which has been revoked by the
Township cannot be reinstated. The applicant may apply for a new permit under
the procedures outlined in this chapter.
      (5)   All construction activities must cease when a stormwater management
permit has been suspended or revoked.
§ 206-47.   (Reserved)
§ 206-48.   (Reserved)
§ 206-49.   (Reserved)
§ 206-50.   (Reserved)
ARTICLE V
Stormwater Management Operations and Maintenance Plan Requirements
§ 206-51.   General requirements.
   A.   No regulated activities within the Township shall commence until the
Township Engineer approves a stormwater management operations and maintenance
plan which describes how the permanent (e.g., postconstruction) stormwater
management facilities will be properly operated and maintained.
   B.   The following items shall be included in the stormwater management
operations and maintenance plan:
      (1)   Plan(s) of the project area, in a form that can be recorded at the
Offices of the Recorder of Deeds of Montgomery County, submitted on twenty-
four-inch-by-thirty-six-inch sheets. The contents of the maps(s) shall include,
but not be limited to:
         (a)   Clear identification of the location and nature of all permanent
stormwater management facilities.
         (b)   The location of the project site relative to watercourses,
roads, municipal boundaries or other identifiable landmarks.
         (c)   Existing and final contours at intervals of two feet, or others
as appropriate.
         (d)   Existing wetlands, floodplains, streams, lakes, ponds or other
watercourses within the project site area.
         (e)   Other physical features, including flood hazard boundaries,
sinkholes, existing drainage courses and areas of natural vegetation to be
preserved.
         (f)   The locations of all existing utilities, sanitary sewers, and
water lines within 100 feet of property lines of the project site.
         (g)   Proposed final changes to the land surface and vegetative cover,
including the type and amount of impervious area that would be added, and the
type, amount and depth of fill material to be placed.
         (h)   Proposed structures, roads, paved areas and buildings.
         (i)   A twenty-foot wide access easement to all stormwater management
facilities for ingress to and egress from a public right-of-way.
      (2)   A description of how each permanent stormwater facility will be
operated and maintained and the identity of the person(s) responsible for
operations and maintenance,
      (3)   The name of the project site, the name and address of the owner of
the property and the name of the individual or firm preparing the plan.
      (4)   A statement, signed by the landowner, acknowledging that the
stormwater management facilities are fixtures that can be altered or removed
only after approval by the Township.
      (5)   Legal document to be recorded that subjects the alteration or
removal of stormwater management facilities to the approval of the Township.
§ 206-52.   Responsibilities for stormwater management operations and
maintenance.
   A.   The stormwater management operations and maintenance plan for the
project site shall establish landowner responsibilities for the continuing
operation and maintenance of all permanent stormwater management facilities as
follows:
      (1)   If a plan includes structures or lots which are to be separately
owned and in which streets, sewers and other public improvements are to be
dedicated to the Township, stormwater management facilities may also, at the
option of the township, be dedicated to and maintained by the Township.
      (2)   If a plan includes operations and maintenance by a single
ownership, or if sewers and other public improvements are to be privately owned
and maintained, then the operation and maintenance of stormwater management
facilities shall be the responsibility of the owner or private management
entity.
   B.   The Township shall make the final determination on the continuing
operations and maintenance responsibilities. The Township reserves the right to
accept or reject the operations and maintenance responsibility for any or all
stormwater management facilities.
§ 206-53.   Review of stormwater management operations and maintenance plan.
   A.   The Township Engineer and Solicitor shall review the Stormwater
Management Operations and Maintenance Plan for consistency with the purposes
and requirements of this chapter and any permits issued by DEP.
   B.   The Township Engineer shall notify the applicant in writing whether the
stormwater management operations and maintenance plan is approved.
   C.   The Township will require an as-built survey of all stormwater
management facilities and an explanation of any discrepancies with the
Operations and Maintenance Plan.
   D.   Stormwater management plans shall be reviewed every three years after
initial issuance of plan approval.
§ 206-54.   Adherence to stormwater management operations and maintenance plan.
It shall be unlawful to alter or remove any permanent stormwater management
facility required by an approved stormwater management operations and
maintenance plan or to allow a property to remain in a condition which does not
conform to an approved stormwater management operations and maintenance plan
unless an exception is granted in writing by the Board of Commissioners.
Failure to maintain SWM structures will result in no future U & O of any kind
to be issued by the Zoning Officer until all maintenance items have been
completed.
§ 206-55.   Operations and maintenance agreement for privately owned stormwater
management facilities.
   A.   The property owner shall sign an operations and maintenance agreement
with the Township covering all stormwater management facilities that are to be
privately owned. The Township Solicitor shall determine the form of the
agreement.
   B.   Other items may be included in the agreement where determined necessary
to guarantee the satisfactory operation and maintenance of all permanent
stormwater management facilities. The agreement shall be subject to the review
and approval of the Township Engineer and Township Solicitor.
§ 206-56.   Stormwater management easements.
   A.   Stormwater management easements are required for all areas used for
off-site stormwater discharge and management unless a waiver is granted by the
Township Engineer.
   B.   Stormwater management easements shall be provided by the property owner
if necessary for access for inspections and maintenance or preservation of
stormwater runoff conveyance, infiltration and detention areas and other
facilities by persons other than the property owner. The purpose of the
easement shall be specified in any agreement under
{'{'}missing text{'}'}
§ 206-57.   Recording of approved stormwater management operations and
maintenance plan and related agreements.
   A.   When permanent stormwater management facilities are placed, constructed
or implemented, as described in the stormwater management operations and
maintenance plan, the Township shall record the following documents in the
Office of the Recorder of Deeds for Montgomery County within 15 days of
approval of the stormwater management operations plan by the Township:
      (1)   The operations and maintenance plan, or a summary thereof. If a
summary is recorded, the summary document shall identify a location where the
complete plan may be viewed.
      (2)   Operations and maintenance agreements under §
206-55.
      (3)   Easements under §
206-56.
      (4)   Declaration of covenants and restrictions or other similar
documents under §
206-51.
      (5)   Deeds of dedication or other similar documents under §
206-52.
   B.   The Township may suspend or revoke any approvals granted for the
project site upon discovery of the failure of the owner to comply with this
section.
§ 206-58.   Township Stormwater Management Operation and Maintenance Fund.
   A.   If stormwater management facilities are accepted by the Township for
dedication, the Township may require persons installing stormwater management
facilities to pay a specified amount to the Township Stormwater Management
Operation and Maintenance Fund to help defray costs of operations and
maintenance activities. The amount may be determined as follows:
      (1)   If the stormwater management facility is to be owned and maintained
by the Township, the amount shall cover the estimated annual costs for
operations and maintenance for 10 years, as determined by the Township.
      (2)   The estimated annual costs shall be converted to present value to
determine the payment.
   B.   If a stormwater management facility also serves as a recreation
facility (e.g., ball field), the Township may adjust the amount due
accordingly.
§ 206-59.   (Reserved)
§ 206-60.   (Reserved)
ARTICLE VI
Inspections and Right of Entry
§ 206-61.   Inspections.
   A.   DEP or its designee (e.g., Montgomery County Conservation District), as
well as the Township, monitors compliance with any permits issued, including
those for stormwater management. In addition to DEP compliance programs, the
Township will inspect all phases of the construction, operations, maintenance
and any other implementation of stormwater management facilities.
   B.   During any stage of regulated activities, if the Township determines
that any stormwater management facilities are not being installed, operated or
maintained in accordance with this chapter, the Township may suspend or revoke
any existing permits or other approvals until the deficiencies are corrected.
§ 206-62.   Right of entry.
   A.   Upon presentation of proper credentials, duly authorized
representatives of the Township may enter at reasonable times upon any property
within the Township to inspect the implementation, condition or operation and
maintenance of the stormwater management facilities in regard to any aspect
governed by this chapter.
   B.   Stormwater management facility owners and operators shall allow persons
working on behalf of the Township ready access to all parts of the premises for
the purposes of determining compliance with this chapter.
   C.   Persons working on behalf of the Township shall have the right to
temporarily locate on any stormwater management facility in the Township such
devices as are necessary to conduct monitoring and/or sampling of the
discharges from such stormwater management facility.
   D.   Unreasonable delays in allowing the Township access to a stormwater
management facility is a violation of this chapter.
§ 206-63.   Schedule of inspections.
   A.   Prior to approval of the stormwater management plan, the owner,
applicant or the developer must coordinate a schedule of inspections, including
a final inspection schedule, with the Township Engineer. These inspection
provisions pertain only to construction activities regulated by the plan
preparation provisions of Article IV. Any activities granted exemption from
plan preparation provisions are not exempt from the inspection provisions and
must nonetheless manage stormwater in a manner specified in the other
provisions of this chapter.
   B.   Required inspections,
      (1)   The Township Engineer shall inspect all phases of development of
the site, including, but not limited to:
         (a)   Completion of preliminary site preparation, which includes
clearing and grubbing, stockpiling of topsoil and construction of temporary
stormwater management and erosion control facilities.
         (b)   Completion of rough grading, but prior to placing topsoil,
permanent drainage or other site development improvements and ground covers.
         (c)   Construction of the permanent stormwater management facilities
at such times as specified by the Township Engineer.
         (d)   Completion of permanent stormwater management facilities,
including established ground covers and plantings.
         (e)   Completion of any final grading, vegetative control measures or
other site restoration work done in accordance with the approved stormwater
management plan and permit.
      (2)   There shall be pre-topsoil and a post-topsoil volume checks with
surface basins.
   C.   No work shall begin on a subsequent stage until the preceding stage has
been inspected and approved by the Township Engineer.
   D.   It is the responsibility of the landowner to notify the Township
Engineer at least 48 hours in advance of the completion of each identified
phase of development.
   E.   Any portion of the work that does not comply with the approved
stormwater management plan must be corrected by the landowner within 15 days of
notice. No work may proceed on any subsequent phase of the stormwater
management plan, the subdivision or land development or building construction
until the required corrections have been made.
   F.   If, at any stage of the work, the Township Engineer determines that the
soil or other conditions are not as stated or shown in the approved
application, the same may refuse to approve further work, and the Township may
revoke existing permits until a modified stormwater management plan is
submitted and approved, as required by of this chapter. If the modified
stormwater management plan cannot remedy the situation, then the Township
reserves the right to cancel its approval and halt all work except for that
work required to eliminate the activity and return the site to pre-activity
conditions as much as is reasonably possible.
   G.   If the Township Engineer discovers that the facilities or measures
installed may be in violation of chapter 102 (Erosion Control) of the Clean
Streams Law, the Township Engineer will refer these violations to the
Montgomery County Conservation District.
   H.   When the landowner has completed his inspection of all the required
facilities, he shall notify the Township, in writing, by certified or
registered mail, and shall send a copy of such notice to the Township Engineer.
Within 15 days after receipt of such notice, the Township Engineer shall
inspect the required facilities. Following this final inspection, the Township
Engineer shall promptly file a report, in writing, with the Township and shall
deliver a copy of the report to the developer by actual delivery, certified
mail, registered mail or first class mall. The report shall be made and
delivered within five days after final inspection by the Township Engineer.
   I.   Following final inspection, the landowners shall submit reproducible
drawings bearing the seal and certification of a Pennsylvania registered
professional surveyor indicating the as-built improvements called for in the
approved plan.
§ 206-64.   (Reserved)
§ 206-65.   (Reserved)
§ 206-66.   (Reserved)
§ 206-67.   (Reserved)
§ 206-68.   (Reserved)
§ 206-69.   (Reserved)
§ 206-70.   (Reserved)
ARTICLE VII
Fees and Expenses
§ 206-71.   General.
The Township may charge a reasonable fee for review of a stormwater management
plan and stormwater management operations and maintenance plan to defray review
costs incurred by the Township. The applicant shall pay all such fees.
§ 206-72.   Expenses covered by fees.
The fees required by this chapter may cover:
   A.   Administrative/clerical costs.
   B.   The review of the stormwater management plan and the stormwater
management operations and maintenance plan by the Township Engineer.
   C.   Site inspections, including, but not limited to, pre-construction
meetings, inspections during construction of stormwater management facilities
and final inspection upon completion of the stormwater management facilities.
   D.   Any additional work required to monitor and enforce any provisions of
this chapter, correct violations and assure proper completion of stipulated
remedial actions.
   E.   Video or photographic recording of conditions at preconstruction,
during construction and after construction.
§ 206-73.   Financial and maintenance guaranties.
   A.   Performance guaranties. Financial security shall be provided by the
landowner as a performance guaranty for stormwater management facilities in
accordance with improvement guaranty provisions outlined in § 509 of the
Municipalities Planning Code or any amendment thereto.
   B.   Maintenance responsibility and guaranties.
      (1)   The maintenance responsibilities for permanent stormwater
management facilities shall be determined based upon the type of ownership of
the property that is occupied by the facilities.
         (a)   Single entity ownership. Where the permanent stormwater
management facilities designed to manage runoff from property in a single
entity ownership, the maintenance responsibility for the stormwater management
facilities shall be with the single entity owner. The stated responsibilities
of the entity related to owning and maintaining the facilities shall be
submitted with the stormwater management operations and maintenance plan for
determination of their adequacy. Approval of the stormwater management plan
shall depend upon the approval of these terms. These terms shall be in writing,
shall be in recordable form and shall, in addition to any other terms deemed
necessary by the Board of Commissioners, contain a provision permitting
inspection at any reasonable time by the Township Engineer or other Township
officials of all such facilities deemed critical to the public welfare
consistent with current Township practices.
         (b)   Municipal ownership. Where the Board of Commissioners has
accepted an offer of dedication of the permanent stormwater management
facilities, the Township shall be responsible for maintenance. Upon approval of
the stormwater management facilities by the Board of Commissioners, the
developer shall provide a financial security, in a form approved by the
Township Solicitor for maintenance guaranties, as follows:
            [1]   Construction maintenance bond. The Board of Commissioners may
require the posting of a maintenance bond to secure the structural integrity
and functioning of said facilities, in accordance with the design and
specifications as depicted on the approved stormwater management plan for a
term not to exceed 18 months from the date of acceptance of dedication. Said
financial security shall be the same type as required in accordance with the
improvement guaranty provisions in the Municipalities Planning Code or any
amendment thereto, and the amount of the financial security shall not exceed
10% of the actual cost of installation of said facilities. A cash contribution
can be used as the financial security in lieu of a maintenance bond, although
the contribution must be equivalent to the amount that would be estimated for
the maintenance bond.
            [2]   Operation and Maintenance Fund. Long-term maintenance shall
be secured through a payment to the Township stormwater management operation
and maintenance fund in an amount equal to the present worth of maintenance of
the facilities for a ten-year period. This amount shall be determined by the
Township Engineer.
            [3]   Documentation.
               [a]   The terms of the maintenance guaranties shall be
documented as part of the stormwater management plan.
               [b]   For certain types of facilities, the Board of
Commissioners may benefit by transferring the maintenance responsibility to an
individual or group of individuals residing within the controlled area. These
individuals may have the permanent stormwater management facilities adjacent to
their lots or otherwise have an interest in the proper maintenance of the
facilities. In these instances, the Board of Commissioners and the individual
(s) may enter into a formal agreement for the maintenance of the facilities
whereby the Township shall maintain ownership of the facilities and be
responsible for periodic inspections.
               [c]   Individual lot ownership. Where any stormwater management
facility is located on an individual lot, and maintenance thereof is the
responsibility of that landowner, a description of the facility or systems and
the terms of the required maintenance shall be noted on the record plan and
incorporated as a part of the deed to the property. The deed shall be recorded
with the Montgomery County Office for the Recording of Deeds within 90 days
following the Board of Commissioners approval. In addition, the Board of
Commissioners may require as a condition of approval that a deed conveying any
interest in such lot contain language indicating that the conveyance is subject
to an express covenant by the grantee that the grantee will maintain the
stormwater management facility.
               [d]   Multientity ownership. In cases where property is in
multiple ownership (i e , many individual interests in various portions of the
property on which stormwater facilities are located), the developer(s) shall
enter into an agreement with the Township to determine the maintenance of the
permanent stormwater facilities. If maintenance is prescribed for each
individual lot owner, the requirements above for single-entity ownership shall
apply.
      (2)   The failure of any person, individual lot owner or private entity
to properly maintain any stormwater management facility shall be construed to
be a violation of this chapter and is declared to be a public nuisance, subject
to penalties as set forth in this chapter.
   C.   Liability insurance. If, in the opinion of the Board of Commissioners
based upon a recommendation from the Township Engineer, the nature of the work
is such that it may create a hazard to human life or endanger adjoining
property or streets, the Board of Commissioners shall, before issuing the
stormwater management permit, require that the applicant file a certificate of
insurance showing that there exists insurance against claims for damages for
personal injury, bodily injury and property damage, including damage to the
Township by surface water flow which has been altered on the site. The
liability insurance shall be to the amount prescribed by the Board of
Commissioners in accordance with the nature of risks involved and include the
Township of Upper Dublin as an additional insured. Such insurance shall be
written by a company licensed to do business in the commonwealth. Neither
issuance of the stormwater management permit nor compliance with the provisions
hereto or any conditions imposed by the Township shall relieve any person from
any responsibility for damage otherwise imposed by law nor impose any liability
upon the Township or its officers and employees for damages to persons or
property.
§ 206-74.   (Reserved)
§ 206-75.   (Reserved)
§ 206-76.   (Reserved)
§ 206-77.   (Reserved)
§ 206-78.   (Reserved)
§ 206-79.   (Reserved)
§ 206-80.   (Reserved)
ARTICLE VIII
Prohibitions
§ 206-81.   Prohibited discharges.
   A.   No person in the Township shall allow, or cause to allow, discharges
into the Township's MS4 that are not composed entirely of stormwater except as
provided in Subsection B below and discharges allowed under a state or federal
permit.
   B.   Permissible discharges which the Township finds do not significantly
contribute to pollution to surface waters of the commonwealth, are:
      (1)   Discharges from fire-fighting activities.
      (2)   Potable water sources, including dechlorinated water line and fire
hydrant flushings.
      (3)   Irrigation drainage.
      (4)   Routine external building washdown (that does not use detergents or
other compounds).
      (5)   Air-conditioning condensate.
      (6)   Water from individual residential car, boat or other vehicle
washing (that does not use detergents or other compounds.
      (7)   Springs.
      (8)   Water from crawl space pumps.
      (9)   Uncontaminated water from foundation or from footing drains.
      (10)   Flows from riparian habitats and wetlands.
      (11)   Lawn watering.
      (12)   Pavement wash waters where spills or leaks of toxic or hazardous
materials have not occurred (unless all spill material has been removed) and
where detergents are not used.
      (13)   Dechlorinated swimming pool discharges.
      (14)   Uncontaminated groundwater.
   C.   In the event that the Township determines that any of the discharges
identified in Subsection B significantly contribute to pollution of waters of
the commonwealth, or is so notified by DEP, the Township will notify the
responsible person to cease the discharge.
   D.   Upon notice provided by the Township under Subsection C, the discharger
will have a reasonable time, as determined by the Township, to cease the
discharge consistent with the degree of pollution caused by the discharge.
   E.   Nothing in this section shall affect a discharger's responsibilities
under federal or state law.
   F.   Permitee must notify Township at least 7 days prior to any discharges.
Township reserves the right to sample any discharges.
§ 206-82.   Prohibited connections.
The following connections are prohibited except as provided in § 206-SUB.
above:
   A.   Any drain or conveyance, whether on the surface or subsurface, which
allows any nonstormwater discharge, including sewage, process wastewater and
wash water, to enter the MS4, and any connections to the storm drain system
from indoor drains, washers, slop tubs and sinks
      (1)   Any drain or conveyance connected from a nonresidential land use to
the municipal separate storm sewer system which has not been documented in
plans, maps or equivalent records and approved by the Township.
§ 206-83.   Roof drains, sumps, french drains and underground drains.
   A.   Roof drains, sumps, french drains and underground drains shall not
directly discharge to watercourses or be connected to streets, sanitary or
storm sewers or roadside ditches except as provided in §
206-83B.
   B.   Connections of roof drains, sumps, french drains and underground drains
to streets or roadside ditches may be permitted by the Township if the Township
finds the connection does not significantly contribute to pollution to surface
waters of the commonwealth.
   C.   Roof drains, sumps, french drains and underground drains shall
discharge to infiltration areas or vegetative BMPs to the maximum extent
practicable.
§ 206-84.   Alteration of stormwater management facilities.
   A.   No person shall modify, remove, fill, landscape or alter any existing
stormwater management facility or easement, unless it is part of an approved
maintenance program, without the written approval of the Township Engineer.
   B.   No person shall place any structure, fill, landscaping or vegetation
into a stormwater management facility or within a drainage easement which would
interfere with the access and maintenance or limit or alter the functioning of
the facility without the written approval of the Township Engineer.
   C.   Landowners shall properly maintain existing stormwater management
facilities located on their property.
§ 206-85.   (Reserved)
§ 206-86.   (Reserved)
§ 206-87.   (Reserved)
§ 206-88.   (Reserved)
§ 206-89.   (Reserved)
§ 206-90.   (Reserved)
ARTICLE TX
Enforcement and Penalties
§ 206-91.   Public nuisance.
   A.   The violation of any provision of this chapter is hereby deemed a
public nuisance.
   B.   Each day that a violation continues shall constitute a separate
violation.
§ 206-92.   Notification of failure to comply.
In the event that an owner, subdivider, developer or his agent fails to comply
with the requirements of this chapter or fails to conform to the requirements
of any permit issued hereunder, the Township shall provide written notification
of violation. Such notification shall set forth the nature of the violation(s)
and establish a time limit for correction of the violation(s). Upon failure to
comply within the time specified, the owner, subdivider, developer or his agent
shall be subject to the penalty provisions of this chapter or other penalty
provisions where applicable.
§ 206-93.   Enforcement generally
   A.   Whenever the Township finds that a person has violated a prohibition or
failed to meet a requirement of this chapter. the Township may order compliance
by written notice to the responsible person. Such notice may require without
limitation:
      (1)   The performance of monitoring, analyses and reporting.
      (2)   The elimination of prohibited connections or discharges.
      (3)   Cessation of any violating discharges, practices or operations.
      (4)   The abatement or remediation of stormwater pollution or
contamination hazards and the restoration of any affected property.
      (5)   Payment of a fine to cover administrative and remediation costs.
      (6)   The implementation of stormwater management measures.
      (7)   Operation and maintenance of stormwater management facilities.
   B.   Such notification shall set forth the nature of the violation(s) and
establish a time limit for correction of these violations(s). Said notice may
further advise that, if applicable, should the violator fail to take the
required action within the established deadline, the work will be done by the
Township and the expense thereof shall be charged to the violator.
   C.   Failure to comply within the time specified shall also subject such
person to the penalty provisions of this chapter. All such penalties shall be
deemed cumulative and shall not prevent the Township from pursuing any and all
other remedies available in law or equity.
§ 206-94.   Suspension and revocation of permits and approvals.
   A.   Any building, land development, grading or other permit or approval
issued by the Township may be suspended or revoked by the Township for:
      (1)   Noncompliance with or failure to implement any provision of the
permit;
      (2)   A violation of any provision of this chapter; or
      (3)   The creation of any condition or the commission of any act during
construction or development which constitutes or creates a hazard, nuisance or
pollution or which endangers the life or property of others.
   B.   A suspended permit or approval shall be reinstated by the Township
when:
      (1)   The Township Engineer or designee has inspected and approved the
corrections to the stormwater management facilities, or the elimination of the
hazard or nuisance; and/or
      (2)   The Township is satisfied that the violation of the chapter, law or
rule and regulation has been corrected.
   C.   A permit or approval which has been revoked by the Township cannot be
reinstated. The applicant may apply for a new permit under the procedures
outlined in this chapter.
§ 206-95.   Violations and penalties.
   A.   Any person violating the provisions of this chapter or who fails to
comply with any written notice from the Township that describes a condition of
noncompliance shall, upon being found liable therefor in a civil enforcement
proceeding commenced by the Township, pay a judgment of not more than $600 for
each violation, plus all court costs, including reasonable attorney fees
incurred by the Township as a result thereof.
   B.   If the defendant neither pays nor appeals the judgment in a timely
manner, the Board of Commissioners may enforce the judgment pursuant to the
applicable rules of civil procedure.
   C.   Each day that a violation continues shall constitute a separate
violation, unless the District Justice determining that there has been a
violation further determines that there was a good faith basis for the person,
partnership or corporation violating this chapter to have believed that there
was no such violation, in which event there shall be deemed to have been only
one such violation until the fifth day following the date of the determination
of a violation by the District Justice, and thereafter each day that a
violation continues shall constitute a separate violation.
   D.   No judgment shall commence or be imposed, levied or payable until the
date of the determination of a violation by the District Justice.
   E.   The Township, though the Township Solicitor, may institute injunctive,
mandamus or any other appropriate action or proceeding at law or in equity for
the enforcement of this chapter. Any court of competent jurisdiction shall have
the right to issue restraining orders, temporary or permanent injunctions,
mandamus or other appropriate forms of remedy or relief.
   F.   All judgments, costs and reasonable attorney fees collected for the
violation of this chapter shall be paid over to the Board of Commissioners.
   G.   The Montgomery County Court of Common Pleas, upon petition, may grant
an order of stay, upon cause shown, tolling the per diem fine pending a final
adjudication of the violation and judgment.
   H.   Nothing contained in this section shall be construed or interpreted to
grant to any person or entity other than the township the right to commence any
action for enforcement pursuant to this section.
§ 206-96.   Appeals.
Any person aggrieved by any action of the Township or its designee, relevant to
the provisions of this chapter, may appeal to the relevant judicial or
administrative body within the time period allowed.
§ 206-97.   (Reserved)
§ 206-98.   (Reserved)
§ 206-99.   (Reserved)
§ 206-100.   (Reserved)
ARTICLE X
Design Schedules
§ 206-101.   Schedule I: General Performance Standards.
All erosion and sedimentation controls are to be in place prior to the start of
construction. Measures used to collect and convey stormwater on any site shall
be designed to meet the following minimum performance standards:
   A.   Prevent erosion damage and satisfactorily convey and control the rate
and volume of discharge of stormwater to waters of the commonwealth.
   B.   When soil conditions are suitable, require runoff control measures to
infiltrate the stormwater into the ground to aid in the recharge of
groundwaters and the preservation of baseflow.
   C.   Control/accommodate not only the anticipated peak discharge from the
on-site disturbed area, but also the existing runoff being contributed from all
land at a higher elevation in the same watershed.
   D.   Maintain the adequacy of the natural stream channels. Accelerated bank
erosion shall be prevented by controlling the rate and velocity of runoff
discharged to these watercourses so as to avoid increasing the occurrence of
streambank overflow.
   E.   Preserve the adequacy of existing culverts and bridges by suppressing
the new flood peaks created by the new earth disturbances and new increased
imperiousness.
   F.   If, in the course of preparing or reviewing the stormwater management
plan, the Township Engineer determines that off-site improvements are necessary
to satisfactorily control the stormwater from the site, the applicant shall be
responsible for such off-site improvements.
   G.   All stormwater detention and retention facilities shall be in place and
functioning prior to the creation of any impervious surface.
   H.   Whenever a watercourse, stream or intermittent stream is located within
a grading site, it shall remain open in its natural state and location and
shall not be piped unless permitted by DEW and the Township Board of
Commissioners. See Upper Dublin
chapter 240 for activity in and near a watercourse,
   I.   The existing points of natural drainage discharge from and onto
adjacent properties shall not be altered without the written approval of and a
drainage easement from the affected upstream and downstream landowners.
   J.   No stormwater runoff or natural drainage shall be so diverted as to
overload existing drainage systems or create flooding or the need for
additional drainage structures on other private properties or public lands.
§ 206-102.   Schedule II: Detention Facility Design.
   A.   Stormwater detention facilities. Stormwater detention facilities
include all structural measures which can reliably and predictably achieve the
peak discharge requirements of this chapter. Stormwater detention facilities
include, but are not necessarily limited to, detention basins, retention
basins, bioretention areas, open (at-grade) sand filters, closed (below-grade)
sand filters, water quality inlets, dry wells, below-grade detention chambers
and rooftop detention.
   B.   Peak discharge design storms. The design storm criteria to be used in
calculations for the watershed is to limit the post-development runoff for the
one-, two-, ten-, fifty- and one-hundred-year storms to the corresponding
predevelopment rates. Any stormwater detention facilities required by this
chapter and subject to the water quality requirements and stormwater runoff
peak rate requirements herein shall meet the applicable water quality and peak
rate requirement for the one-, two-, ten-, fifty- and one-hundred-year return
period runoff events (design storms) consistent with the standard and accepted
calculation methodology and engineering standards and be satisfactory to the
Township Engineer.
   C.   Runoff calculation methodology.
      (1)   Any stormwater runoff calculation involving drainage areas greater
than 20 acres, including on- and off site areas, shall use a generally accepted
calculation technique that is based on the NRCS soil cover complex method. It
is assumed that all methods will be selected by the design professional based
on the individual limitations and suitability of each method for a particular
site.
      (2)   All calculations consistent with this chapter using the soil cover
complex method shall use the appropriate design rainfall depths for the various
return periods cited.
      (3)   For purposes of predevelopment flow rate determination, undeveloped
land shall be considered as meadow, in good condition, unless the natural
ground cover generates a lower curve number or Rational C value. Landowner is
to use the lower runoff coefficient value.
      (4)   All calculations using the Rational Method shall use rainfall
intensities consistent with appropriate times of concentration for overland
flow and return periods from NCRS Methodology. Time of concentration for sheet
flow (maximum 150 feet) and concentrated flow shall both be calculated using
NRCS methodology. Times of concentration for channel and pipe flow shall be
computed using Manning's Equation or NCRS Methodology.
      (5)   The design of any stormwater detention facilities intended to meet
the performance standards of this chapter shall be verified by routing the
design storm hydrograph through these facilities using accepted methods of
practice. The Township Engineer may approve the use of any generally accepted
reservoir routing technique which shall use a total runoff volume that is
consistent with the volume from a method that produces a full hydrograph. The
computer routing program used must take into account the tailwater effect of
the discharge pipe on the outlet design as well as the submergence of the
discharge pipe outlet.
      (6)   Outlet structures for stormwater management facilities shall be
designed to meet the performance standards of this chapter using any generally
accepted hydraulic analysis technique or method approved by the Township
Engineer.
   D.   Stormwater detention and retention facilities, Stormwater detention and
retention facilities shall meet the following minimum design/construction
standards:
      (1)   Detention basins shall be designed to allow regular maintenance,
mowing and periodic silt removal and reseeding. Shallow broad basins are
preferred to steep sided basins.
      (2)   The maximum slope of the basin embankment shall be 3 to 1. Whenever
possible, the side slope and basin shape shall conform to the natural
topography.
      (3)   Unless approved as a conditional use, detention basins shall not be
located within riparian corridors, floodplains nor within areas of floodplain
or alluvial soils.
      (4)   Detention basins shall be designed so they return to normal
conditions within approximately 24 hours after termination of the storm, unless
the Township Engineer finds that downstream conditions may warrant other design
criteria for stormwater release.
      (5)   If retention basins are used, the applicant shall demonstrate that
such ponds are designed to protect public health, safety and welfare.
      (6)   Fences may be required for any detention or retention basins where
there is a permanent water surface or conditions warrant.
      (7)   The minimum top width of a basin berm shall be 10 feet. A cut-off
trench (keyway) of relative impervious material shall be provided beneath all
embankments requiring fill material. The keyway shall be a minimum 8 feet wide,
minimum three feet deep and have 1 to 1 side slopes.
      (8)   Unless designed to be a naturalized basin, in order to ensure
proper drainage on a basin bottom, a minimum grade of 2% shall be maintained
for sheet flow. If deemed necessary by the Township Engineer, an underdrain
shall be placed in the basin floor to help dry the basin.
      (9)   All basin embankments shall be placed in eight-inch maximum lifts
to a minimum dry density of 95%. Prior to proceeding to the next lift,
compaction shall be checked by the Township Engineer or an approved soils
engineer who shall provide the Township Engineer with a written report.
Compaction tests shall be performed using the modified proctor method in
accordance with ASTM D-1557. Compaction tests shall be run on the leading and
trailing edge as well as the top of the berm.
      (10)   Emergency overflow facilities shall be provided for facilities to
accommodate runoff in excess of design flows. Emergency spillways for basins
shall be constructed on undisturbed ground. If the emergency spillway is
constructed on filled ground, the emergency spillways shall be constructed of
concrete payers, gabions or other similar materials approved by the Township
Engineer. All emergency spillways shall be constructed so that the detention
basin berm is protected against downstream embankment erosion if the basin berm
is overtopped. The minimum capacity of the emergency spillways shall be the
peak flow rate of the one-hundred-year design storm after development. The
construction material of the emergency spillway shall extend along the upstream
and downstream berm embankment slopes. The upstream edge of the emergency
spillway shall be a minimum of three feet below the spillway crest elevation.
The downstream slope of the spillway shall, as a minimum, extend to the toe of
the berm embankment. The emergency spillway shall not discharge over earthen
fill or easily erodible material.
      (11)   The minimum freeboard shall be one foot as measured from the top
of the post-development one-hundred-year flood elevation over the spillway and
the top of the berm.
      (12)   Antiseep collars shall be installed around the pipe barrel within
the normal saturation zone of the detention basin berms. The antiseep collars
and their connections to the pipe bands shall be watertight. The antiseep
collars shall extend a minimum of two feet beyond the outside of the principle
pipe barrel. The maximum spacing between collars shall be 14 times the minimum
projection of the collar measured perpendicular to the pipe. A minimum of two
antiseep collars shall be installed on each outlet pipe.
      (13)   All outlet pipes through a basin berm shall be reinforced concrete
pipe, designed to withstand the loading caused by a fully saturated berm and
shall have watertight joints using 0-ring joint pipe. Outlet pipes shall be
backfilled with material similar to the core material (semi-impervious).
      (14)   The invert of the inlet pipe(s) into a basin shall be above the
basin floor or lining so that it can adequately drain after rainstorms. Inlet
pipe(s) shall discharge to areas of the basin that slope toward the outlet
structure, having the minimum slope as prescribed in Subsection D(8) above.
      (15)   Energy dissipaters and/or level spreaders shall be installed at
points where pipes or drainageways drain to or from the basin. Energy
dissipaters shall comply with criteria in Hydraulic Engineering Circular No. 15
- Design of Stable Channels with Flexible Linings, published by the Federal
Highway Administration of the United States Department of Transportation or the
Engineering Field Manual for Conservation Practices, NCRS energy dissipating
device calculations shall be submitted for township review and approval.
      (16)   Inlet and outlet structures shall be located at a maximum distance
from one another in order to promote water quality benefits. The Township
Engineer may require a rock filter or rock-filled gabion for entrapping
sediments carried in stormwater if sufficient separation of inlet and outlet
structures cannot be achieved. The use of forebays as a sediment removal
feature is encouraged for all basins.
      (17)   A perforated riser or similar sediment control device shall be
provided at each outlet of all detention basins during construction for
sediment control. The riser shall be constructed of metal or concrete. The
riser shall extend to a maximum elevation of two feet below the crest elevation
of the emergency spillway. The perforated riser shall be designed so that the
rate of outflow is controlled by the pipe barrel through the basin berm when
the depth of water within the basin exceeds the height of the riser. Circular
perforations with a maximum diameter of one inch shall be spaced 12 inches
vertically. The horizontal spacing shall be in accordance to DEP Soil Erosion
and Sedimentation Control Manual Specifications. The perforations shall be
cleanly cut and shall not be susceptible to enlargement. All metal risers shall
be suitably coated to prevent corrosion. A trash rack or similar appurtenance
shall be provided to prevent debris from entering the pipe. All risers shall
have a concrete base attached with a watertight connection. The base shall be
of sufficient weight to prevent flotation of the riser. An antivortex device
consisting of a thin vertical plate normal to the base and berm shall be
provided at the top of the riser. Unless this structure is part of the
permanent outlet control, it shall be removed from the site when it has been
adequately stabilized as determined by the Township Engineer.
      (18)   All drainage channels shall be designed to prevent erosion of the
bed and banks. The maximum permissible flow velocity shall not exceed the
design requirements outlined in the current Soil Erosion and Sedimentation
Control Manual, published by the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental
Protection. Suitable stabilization shall be provided where required to prevent
erosion of the drainage channels. The design procedure used shall be that
contained in the current Soil Erosion and Sedimentation Control Program Manual,
published by the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection.
      (19)   Any vegetated drainage channel requiring mowing of the vegetation
shall have a maximum grade of three horizontal to one vertical on those areas
to be mowed.
      (20)   Because of the critical nature of vegetated drainage channels, the
design of all vegetated channels shall, as a minimum, conform to the design
requirements outlined in the current Soil Erosion and Sedimentation Control
Program Manual, published by the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental
Protection.
§ 206-103.   Schedule 111: Stormwater Conveyance System.
   A.   General.
      (1)   Storm sewers, culverts, bridges and related installations shall be
provided to:
         (a)   Permit unimpeded flow of natural watercourses and in such a
manner as to protect the natural character of the watercourses and to provide
regulated discharge.
         (b)   Ensure adequate drainage of all low points along the line of
streets.
         (c)   Intercept stormwater runoff along streets at intervals
reasonably related to the extent and grade of the area drained and to prevent
substantial flow of water across intersections.
      (2)   All storm sewer system components shall conform to current Upper
Dublin Township Engineering and Construction Standards and PennDOT standards
for materials, manufacture and construction.
      (3)   Drainage structures, which drain watershed areas in excess of one-
half square mile (320 acres) or which have a span of eight feet or more, shall
be designed for a maximum expected runoff as calculated using the Soil
Conservation Service Technical Release 55, Urban Hydrology for Small Watersheds
(Less Than 2000 Acres).
      (4)   The design storm of all cross roadway culverts shall be one-, two-,
five-, ten-, twenty-five, fifty- and one-hundred-year storm. A water
obstruction permit shall be obtained from DEP for the waterway opening before
final design is undertaken.
      (5)   The cartway over a culvert or bridge shall be as wide as the
ultimate width of the roadway approaches. Additional width may be required to
provide sidewalks on one or both sides of the cartway.
   B.   Storm sewer design and construction requirements.
      (1)   Minimum pipe size is 18 inches.
      (2)   Minimum pipe slope shall be 0.005 foot per foot.
      (3)   Minimum drop across junctions shall be two inches. At changes in
pipe diameter, pipe crowns shall be matched at junctions (manhole, inlet or
junction box).
      (4)   Maximum distance between junctions shall be 300 feet.
      (5)   Runoff to proposed storm sewers and inlets shall be calculated
using the Rational Method.
      (6)   The time of concentration shall be assumed five minutes for pipes
under 30 inches. For pipes 30 inches or greater, the calculated time of
concentration can be utilized.
      (7)   The time of concentration to inlets for grate capacity calculations
shall be five minutes.
      (8)   All storm sewer pipes shall be designed at a minimum to accommodate
a ten-year storm. Twenty-five-year storms shall be used if required by the
Township Engineer.
      (9)   All storm sewer pipes downstream of inlets in sump condition shall
be designed to accommodate the fifty-year storm.
      (10)   All storm sewer pipes and inlets intended to drain to detention
facilities shall be designed to accommodate the one-hundred-year storm if any
of the stormwater runoff bypass or overflow will not reach the basin by
overland flow. In cases where the bypass or overflow will flow over land, a
stable swale shall be constructed to accommodate the excess floods in a non-
erosive manner
      (11)   All inlets in sump condition shall be six-foot inlets or dual
four-foot inlets, as needed.
      (12)   All storm sewer systems shall be analyzed for both inlet and
outlet control (including tailwater effects) by using the equations and
nomographs as shown in the FHA's Hydraulic Design Services No. 5. In lieu of
this, computer programs that calculate the actual hydraulic grade line for the
storm sewer system can be used, provided that all losses (friction, bend,
junction, etc.) are taken into account. Documentation for the program must be
submitted for approval.
      (13)   Minimum cover over pipes is two feet from finished grade to
outside of pipe bell.
      (14)   Inlet capacities shall be calculated using PennDOT or
manufacturer's nomographs. Documentation for manufacturer's nomograph must be
provided to the Township Engineer.
   C.   Shoulders in cut areas (without swales).
      (1)   Water flowing in the shoulder shall not encroach more than two-
thirds the shoulder width during a twenty-five-year frequency storm of five-
minute duration.
      (2)   The maximum velocity as determined by Manning's Equation shall not
exceed the allowable velocities for the specific type of shoulder material.
      (3)   Inlets shall be provided to control the shoulder encroachment and
water velocity.
   D.   Swales adjacent to shoulders.
      (1)   Swales in cut areas shall be designed to prevent the passage of
water on the cartway during a twenty-five-year frequency storm of five-minute
duration.
      (2)   The maximum velocity as determined by Manning's Equation shall not
exceed the allowable velocities for the specific type of shoulder material.
   E.   Curbed sections.
      (1)   Inlets shall be provided to control the encroachment of water on
the pavement.
   F.   Inlets, general.
      (1)   At street intersections, inlets shall be placed in the tangent
portion, rather than the curved portion, of the curbing.
      (2)   If the capacity of the shoulder, swale, curb section or depressed
median section exceeds the assumed inlet capacities, the inlet capacities shall
govern the spacing of inlets.
      (3)   If the capacity of the shoulder, swale, curb section or depressed
median section is less than the inlet capacities, then the shoulder, swale,
curb section or depressed section capacity shall govern the spacing of inlets.
§ 206-104.   Schedule IV: Water Quality and Groundwater Recharge Stormwater
Management Facilities.
   A.   Development, which increases runoff, poses a significant threat to the
environmental resources of Pennsylvania's groundwater, streams and wetlands.
Therefore, attention is being turned to methods of increasing infiltration and
groundwater recharge to offset the loss of infiltration and increased runoff
due to development.
   B.   All stormwater management facilities shall be designed to satisfy the
following requirements.
      (1)   All facilities shall be provided with the capability to withstand
the discharge associated with the one-hundred-year return rainfall event,
without failing or resulting in damage to downstream areas. Some nondetention
facilities may be designed to bypass stormwater discharges which are in excess
of the appropriate design storm. In this case, conveyance must be provided to
transport the one-hundred-year surcharge flow to a downstream facility, natural
watercourse or storm drainage system inlet.
      (2)   All groundwater recharge devices shall be protected from
sedimentation. Areas designated for recharge shall not receive runoff until the
contributory drainage areas have achieved final stabilization.
      (3)   Groundwater recharge requirement. The recommended criterion for
addressing groundwater recharge is to maintain the annual volume of total
runoff at predevelopment levels. This approach is implemented by requiring that
a minimum retention volume be completely infiltrated on the site during every
storm. The retention volume for Upper Dublin Township is 0.75 inches.
Therefore, all rainfall events of less than 0.75 inches of rainfall should be
completely retained on the site and infiltrated. If an analysis shows that
runoff from the site will be negligible during this event, then the groundwater
recharge requirement is satisfied. Controlling runoff from the groundwater
recharge design storm is the only requirement for preserving the overall water
budget for the watershed.
   C.   For design of BMPs, refer to the Pennsylvania Handbook of Best
Management Practices for Developing Areas, or its successor document.
§ 206-105.   (Reserved)
§ 206-106.   (Reserved)
§ 206-107.   (Reserved)
§ 206-108.   (Reserved)
§ 206-109.   (Reserved)
§ 206-110.   (Reserved)
ARTICLE XI
Low-Impact Development Practices For Managing Stormwater Runoff
§ 206-111.   General guidelines for low-impact development.
   A.   Natural hydrologic conditions may be altered unnecessarily by poorly
planned development practices, such as introducing unneeded impervious
surfaces, destroying existing drainage swales, constructing unnecessary storm
sewers and changing local topography. A traditional approach has been to remove
runoff from a site as quickly as possible and capture it in a detention basin.
This leads ultimately to the degradation of water quality as well as
expenditure of additional resources for detaining and managing concentrated
runoff at some downstream location.
   B.   Developers shall use design practices that minimize postdevelopment
runoff rates and volumes, which minimize artificial conveyance and storage
facilities and which simulate predevelopment hydrologic conditions. Forced
infiltration is often necessary to offset the loss of infiltration by creation
of impervious surfaces.
   C.   Preserving natural hydrologic conditions requires careful alternative
site design practices that include preserving natural drainage features,
minimizing impervious surface area, reducing the hydraulic connectivity of
impervious surfaces, and protecting natural depression storage.
   D.   A careful consideration of the existing topography and implementation
of a combination of the above-mentioned techniques mentioned in this section
may avoid construction of costly stormwater management facilities. Other
benefits include reduced potential of downstream flooding, water quality
degradation of receiving streams/water bodies and enhancement of aesthetics and
reduction of development costs. Beneficial results include more stable
baseflows in receiving streams, improved groundwater recharge, reduced flood
flows, reduced pollutant loads and reduced costs for conveyance and storage.
§ 206-112.   Protecting natural drainage features and depression storage areas.
   A.   Natural drainage features, particularly vegetated drainage swales and
channels, shall be protected because of their ability to infiltrate and
attenuate flows and to filter pollutants. Runoff and pollutants generated from
impervious surfaces shall not flow directly into storm sewers with no
opportunity for attenuation, infiltration or filtration. Developments shall be
designed to fit site topography and minimize the amount of grading on site.
   B.   Depressional storage areas have no surface outlet or drain very slowly
following a storm event. They can be commonly seen as ponded areas in farm
fields during the wet season or after large runoff events. The volume and
release-rate characteristics of depressions should be protected in the design
of the development site. The depressions shall be protected by simply avoiding
the depression or by incorporating its storage as additional capacity in
required detention facilities.
§ 206-113.   Avoiding introduction of impervious areas.
Site planning shall consider reducing impervious coverage to the maximum extent
possible. Building footprints, sidewalks, driveways and other features
producing impervious surfaces shall be evaluated to minimize impacts on runoff.
Porous pavement and open graded pavers are two alternate methods.
§ 206-114.   Reducing the hydraulic connectivity of impervious surfaces.
Impervious surfaces shall not be directly connected to an impervious conveyance
system (such as storm sewer). Roof runoff shall be directed over lawns and
infiltrated where appropriate, and the use of storm sewers shall be minimized.
Site grading shall promote increasing travel time of stormwater runoff and
shall reduce concentration of runoff to a single point in the development.
§ 206-115.   Routing roof runoff over lawns.
Roof runoff shall be routed over lawns. Direct connections of downspouts to
storm sewers or parking lots is discouraged. The practice also discourages
sloping driveways, and parking lots shall be minimized. Driveways shall be
crowned direct to run off to lawn areas.
§ 206-116.   Reducing the use of storm sewers.
The use of storm sewers for draining streets, parking lots and backyards shall
be minimized to reduce the potential for accelerating runoff from the
development.
§ 206-117.   Reducing street widths.
Street widths may be reduced by either eliminating on-street parking or by
reducing roadway or cartway widths. Developers who desire to reduce street
widths should consult with the Township Engineer prior to application for
subdivision/land development approval regarding any waivers or deviations from
the requirements of
chapter 212 that may be needed for reduced street widths.
§ 206-118.   Limiting sidewalks to one side of the street.
A sidewalk on one side of the street may be considered in low-traffic
neighborhoods. The deleted sidewalk may be replaced with bicycle/recreational
trails that follow back-of-lot lines. Where appropriate, backyard trails should
be constructed using pervious materials. Developers who desire to reduce
sidewalks should consult with the Township Engineer prior to application for
subdivision/land development approval regarding any waivers or deviations from
the requirements of
chapter 212 that the Board of Commissioners may need to grant for limited
sidewalks.
§ 206-119.   Using permeable paving materials.
These materials include permeable interlocking concrete paving blocks or porous
bituminous concrete. Such materials should be considered as alternatives to
conventional pavement surfaces, especially for low-use surfaces such as
driveways, overflow parking lots and emergency access roads.
§ 206-120.   (Reserved)
Chapter 207
STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
ARTICLE I
Drainage
§
207-1.   Connecting roads.
§
207-2.   Drainage onto roads prohibited.
§
207-3.   Violations and penalties.
ARTICLE II
Street Occupation
§
207-4.   Permit, compliance required.
§
207-5.   Permit application; bond.
§
207-6.   Regulations.
§
207-7.   Fees.
§
207-8.   Issuance of permit; term.
§
207-9.   Barricades and guards.
§
207-10.   Violations and penalties.
ARTICLE III
Obstructions in Highway Boundaries
§
207-11.   Prohibited obstructions; clear passage required.
§
207-12.   Mailboxes.
§
207-12.1.   Signs.
§
207-13.   Violations and penalties.
ARTICLE IV
Street Openings
§
207-14.   Permit required.
§
207-15.   Permit application; bond.
§
207-16.   Fees.
§
207-17.   Permit issuance; term.
§
207-18.    Measurements.
§
207-19.   Tunneling.
§
207-20.   Refilling.
§
207-21.   Utility poles.
§
207-22.   Barricades and guards.
ARTICLE V
Curb Cuts
§
207-23.   Changes in pipes, conduit or poles.
§
207-24.   Violations and penalties.
§
207-25.   Permit required.
§
207-26.   Permit application; bond.
§
207-27.   Fees.
§
207-28.   Issuance; term.
§
207-29.   Barricades and guards.
§
207-30.   Violations and penalties.
ARTICLE VI
Sidewalk Construction
§
207-31.   Duty of property owners; failure; costs.
§
207-32.   Permit required.
§
207-33.   Permit application.
§
207-34.   Supervision.
§
207-35.   Grade and lines.
§
207-36.   Barricades and guards.
§
207-37.   Construction standards.
§
207-38.   Violations and penalties.
ARTICLE VII
Hauling; Deposits
§
207-39.   Prohibited acts.
§
207-40.   Removal of materials.
§
207-41.   Violations and penalties.
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Board of Commissioners of the Township of Upper Dublin
5-13-1986 as Title 8, Chs. 1, 3 through 6 and 8, and Title 3, Ch. 2, of the
1986 Code. Amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
 
Excavations — See      Sewers — See
Ch. 99.                  Ch. 192.
Fees — See fee schedule 
 
ARTICLE I
Drainage
§ 207-1.   Connecting roads.
[Amended 9-14-2004 by Ord. No. 1142]
Every driveway, lane, alley and entrance road connecting with any public
highway, street, road or avenue of the Township of Upper Dublin shall be so
constructed, maintained and repaired or replaced that the water and surface
drainage in the public right-of-way shall not be blocked or diverted from the
course of the gutter or other roadside stormwater conveyance and that the
surface drainage from such driveway, lane, alley or entrance road shall flow
into the gutter or other stormwater conveyance of said public highway, road,
street or avenue and not upon the roadbed thereof.
§ 207-2.   Drainage onto roads prohibited.
[Amended 1-10-1995 by Ord. No. 879]
It shall be unlawful for any person owning or occupying property along any
public highway, road, street, avenue, lane or alley in the Township of Upper
Dublin to drain or to allow the flow into or upon any highway, road, street,
avenue, lane or alley, by pipes or any other channel, either natural or
artificial, any water or drainage from swimming pools, sinks, bathtubs, wash
stands, lavatories, water closets, privies or cesspools of any kind or nature
whatsoever, or any other foul or offensive water, or to allow any such water or
drainage to percolate into or upon said highway, road, street, avenue, lane or
alley.
§ 207-3.   Violations and penalties.
[Amended 8-9-1988 by Ord. No. 753]
   A.   Any owner, person, firm, association or corporation who shall violate
any of the provisions of this article, or who shall fail to comply with the
conditions or requirements of any permit granted in accordance with the
provisions of this article, shall, upon conviction thereof, be liable to pay a
fine or penalty not exceeding $600 for each and every offense. [Amended 1-10-
1995 by Ord. No. 879]
   B.   A new and separate offense shall be deemed to have been committed for
each day that said violation exists. All fines and penalties imposed by this
article are recoverable by summary proceeding before any District Justice in
the Township of Upper Dublin, and all suits or actions at law instituted for
the recovery thereof are to be in the name and for the use of the Township of
Upper Dublin, against which offense is committed, and upon recovery thereof all
such fines and penalties are to be paid into the Treasury of the Township. 1
1. Editor's Note: Former Sec. 1.03, third unnumbered paragraph, which provided
for imprisonment on default of payment of fines and which immediately followed
this subsection, was deleted 1-10-1995 by Ord. No. 879.
ARTICLE II
Street Occupation
§ 207-4.   Permit, compliance required.
It shall be unlawful for any person or persons, firm, association or
corporation to occupy a portion of the highway, street or sidewalk with
building or other materials or for any other purpose without first obtaining
from the said Board of Commissioners a permit therefor before such work is
begun and complying with the other requirements herein specified.
§ 207-5.   Permit application; bond.
   A.   Before such permit is issued and said work begun, a written application
on a blank form, to be furnished for that purpose by the said Board of
Commissioners, must be filed with the proper official of the Township, setting
forth the purpose for which said highway, road, street, avenue, lane, alley,
sidewalk or footpath is to be occupied and the location of the said proposed
work, and in such application the applicant shall agree to assume all
liabilities for all or any damages to person or property accruing to the public
or to the said Township which may or might result from the occupying of said
highway, road, street, avenue, lane, alley, sidewalk or footpath.
   B.   The said application must be signed by a person, firm, association or
corporation who shall have filed with the Board of Commissioners a bond in
amount not less than $1,000 under such conditions and with surety as shall be
approved by the Solicitor of the Board of Commissioners to save harmless the
Township of Upper Dublin from any and all damages to person or property
accruing by reason of the work for which permits may be issued from time to
time hereunder, and who also shall have filed with the Board of Commissioners a
certificate showing that liability insurance is carried in the amount of
$1,000,000.
§ 207-6.   Regulations.
No permit for occupying a portion of a highway with building materials or for
other purposes shall be issued except with the approval of and upon such terms
and conditions as may be required by the proper official. No such permit shall
authorize the occupying of more than one-third (1/3) of the width of the
roadway between curbs, nor shall the occupied area exceed in extent the
dimensions of the frontage of the premises about to be built upon or repaired,
except that when no objection is made by the adjoining property owners and the
space is not to be used for storage of materials other than that to be used in
construction, the permittee shall be permitted to occupy an additional 30 feet
on each side of the building frontage for which the permit is granted.
Provision shall be made by the applicant for such a permit, for maintaining at
all times a clear and unobstructed passage along the sidewalk, at least six
feet in width, and a free passage for water in the gutter. No building or other
materials or other obstruction shall, at any time, be placed in the highway
within 25 feet of any fire hydrant. All the materials or other obstructions
occupying the highway shall be removed prior to the expiration of the time for
which the permit was issued or for which it was renewed.
§ 207-7.   Fees.
Before the issuance of a permit, the applicant shall make payment to the
Township of fees in accordance with a fee schedule adopted by the Board of
Commissioners and found in the Township fee schedule.
§ 207-8.   Issuance of permit; term.
   A.   The permit shall be issued only after the application has been approved
by the designated official of the Township.
   B.   The permit shall be operative for no more than 60 days from the date of
issue.
§ 207-9.   Barricades and guards.
All materials, openings or excavations made or obstructions created under such
permit must be properly marked by barricades and flashing amber lights so
placed as to indicate from the roadway in both directions the exact location
and limits of said work or obstruction and at all times must be properly
guarded.
§ 207-10.   Violations and penalties.
[Amended 8-9-1988 by Ord. No. 753]
   A.   Any owner, person, firm, association or corporation who shall violate
any of the provisions of this article or who shall fail to comply with the
conditions or requirements of any permit granted in accordance with the
provisions of this article shall, upon conviction thereof, be liable to pay a
fine or penalty not exceeding $600 for each and every offense. [Amended 1-10-
1995 by Ord. No. 879]
   B.   A new and separate offense shall be deemed to have been committed for
each day that said violation exists. All fines and penalties imposed by this
article are recoverable by summary proceedings before any District Justice in
the Township of Upper Dublin, and all suits or actions at law instituted for
the recovery thereof are to be in the name and for the use of the Township of
Upper Dublin, against which offense is committed, and, upon recovery thereof,
all such fines and penalties are to be paid into the Treasury of the Township.
2
2. Editor's Note: Original Sec. 1.07, third unnumbered paragraph, which
provided for imprisonment on default of payment of fines and which immediately
followed this subsection, was deleted 1-10-1995 by Ord. No. 879.
ARTICLE III
Obstructions in Highway Boundaries
§ 207-11.   Prohibited obstructions; clear passage required.
[Amended 3-9-2004 by Ord. No. 1126]
It shall be unlawful and a violation of this chapter to erect, set up, bury,
place, maintain or allow any gasoline pump, oil tank, wall, fence, pillar,
electric fence, sprinkler system or other obstruction, whether above or below
ground, within the boundaries of any public highway or public right-of-way, in
the Township of Upper Dublin, or to allow the branches of trees, shrubs or
hedges overhanging or adjacent to the same to obstruct a clear passage of not
less than 14 feet above the traveled portion of the highway, of not less than
eight feet above the sidewalk, or of not less than the full width of any
highway or sidewalk. Any such obstruction shall be removed promptly by the
adjacent property owner whenever written notice to remove the same is given by
the Township. If the owner fails to comply with such notice, the Township shall
remove the obstruction and charge the cost thereof to the owner. In default of
prompt payment, the Township may file a municipal claim in the amount of such
charges.
§ 207-12.   Mailboxes.
[Amended 5-9-1989 by Ord. No. 767]
   A.   The Township shall not be responsible for the repair or replacement of
any mailbox placed within the legal right-of-way of any public highway, road,
street, avenue, lane or alley. However, to alleviate the possibility of damage
due to snow plowing and vehicular traffic, the following guidelines must be
complied with:
      (1)   Mailboxes must be erected so that the front of curbside boxes be
set back 12 inches from the face of the concrete curb. The structure supporting
the box must not encroach on this setback distance.
      (2)   Additionally, the bottom of the mailbox must be between 42 inches
to 48 inches above the finished road surface.
      (3)   Mailboxes and the standards upon which they are erected must be
designed and installed to withstand the impact of snow hurled from a passing
snowplow. [Added 3-9-2004 by Ord. No. 1126]
   B.   If placement of a standard (18 inches long) mailbox, according to these
standards, would cause the back of the box to overhang a public sidewalk, the
aforementioned setback would be waived. However, the box must then be placed as
far as possible from the road without encroaching on the public sidewalk.
§ 207-12.1.   Signs.
[Added 7-10-2001 by Ord. No. 1066; amended 12-10-2002 by Ord. No. 1100]
No sign, other than official Township street or directional signs or street
banner signs, shall be erected or maintained within the legal right-of-way.
Where a sign is not erected in the sign setback area, as defined in
Chapter 255, it shall be presumed, unless proven otherwise, not to be in the
legal right-of-way. No sign shall project over any public sidewalk, nor shall
any sign extend beyond any property line, except a street banner for which a
permit has been issued pursuant to
Chapter 196.
§ 207-13.   Violations and penalties.
[Amended 8-9-1988 by Ord. No. 753]
   A.   Any owner, person, firm, association or corporation who shall violate
any of the provisions of this article or who shall fail to comply with the
conditions or requirements of any permit granted in accordance with the
provisions of this article shall, upon conviction thereof, be liable to pay a
fine or penalty not exceeding $600 for each and every offense. [Amended 1-10-
1995 by Ord. No. 879]
   B.   A new and separate offense shall be deemed to have been committed for
each day that said violation exists. All fines and penalties imposed by this
article are recoverable by summary proceedings before any District Justice in
the Township of Upper Dublin, and all suits or actions at law instituted for
the recovery thereof are to be in the name and for the use of the Township of
Upper Dublin, against which offense is committed, and, upon recovery thereof,
all such fines and penalties are to be paid into the Treasury of the Township.
3
3. Editor's Note: Original Sec. 1.03, third unnumbered paragraph, which
provided for imprisonment on default of payment of fines and which immediately
followed this section, was deleted 1-10-1995 by Ord. No. 879.
ARTICLE IV
Street Openings
§ 207-14.   Permit required.
It shall be unlawful for any person or persons, firm, association or
corporation to open or break the surface of the ground within the boundaries of
any public highway, road, street, avenue, lane, alley, sidewalk or footpath for
the purpose of laying pipes, sewers, drains or conduits of any description, for
making connections therewith or repairs thereto or for the setting or planting
of telegraph, telephone, electric light or other poles or for repairs thereto
or renewals thereof or for any other purpose without first obtaining from the
said Board of Commissioners a permit therefor before such work is begun and
complying with the other requirements herein specified.
§ 207-15.   Permit application; bond.
   A.   Before such permit is issued and said work begun, a written application
on a form to be furnished by the Township must be filed with the Upper Dublin
Township Engineering Department. Each application for a permit shall contain
and/or be accompanied by the following:
      (1)   The purpose for which the said highway, road, street, avenue,
public lane, public alley, sidewalk or footpath is to be opened or excavated.
      (2)   The location, including depth, of any underground facility and/or
the height of any aboveground facility; and fees as required in this article.
   B.   By the acceptance of a permit so issued, the applicant agrees, with the
Township of Upper Dublin, to assume any and all liability for all or any
damages to person or property accruing to the public or to the said Township
which may or might result from the opening or excavating of said highway, road,
street, avenue, public lane, public alley, sidewalk or footpath.
   C.   Should the location and/or depth of any underground facility be changed
from the location and/or depth indicated in the application, the applicant
agrees to file, upon completion of the installation, as-built plans in a form
acceptable to the Township Engineer.
   D.   The said application must be signed by a person, firm, association or
corporation who shall have filed with the Board of Commissioners a bond or a
certified check in amount not less than $5,000 under such condition and with
surety as shall be approved by the Solicitor of the Board of Commissioners to
guarantee completion of the work and to save harmless the Township of Upper
Dublin from any and all damages to person or property accruing by reason of the
work for which permits may be issued from time to time hereunder, and who also
shall have filed with the Board of Commissioners a certificate showing that
liability insurance is carried in the amount of $1,000,000. Upon completion of
the work, a bond of $2,500 shall be filed to guarantee maintenance of the
highway when excavated for a period of one year. [Amended 5-10-1988 by Ord. No.
745]
   E.   Whenever the exigencies of public health or safety require that instant
repairs be made, and the procurement of a permit prior to the commencement of
the work is impracticable, it shall be unlawful for the said work to be begun
without permit, provided that an application for said permit be filed and the
proper fee paid therefor within 48 hours from the time when the emergency
arose, and provided further that any person or persons, firm, association or
corporation beginning said work under the provisions of this section shall do
so subject to the conditions and obligations imposed by this article upon
person, firms, associations and corporations opening or excavating highways,
avenues or streets as though an application for a permit had been filed.
§ 207-16.   Fees.
Before the issuance of a permit, the applicant shall make payment to the
Township of a fee in accordance with the fee schedule for excavation set forth
in the Township fee schedule.
§ 207-17.   Permit issuance; term.
   A.   The permit shall be issued only after the application has been approved
by the designated official of the Township.
   B.   The permit shall be operative for no more than 60 days from the date of
issue.
§ 207-18. Measurements.
All measurements required to be made in applying the above fees shall be made
by the Engineering Department and shall include any enlargement of openings
which may be required to be made as an incident to the repair of such paving to
restore the same to its former condition.
§ 207-19.   Tunneling.
No highway, road, street, avenue, alley, lane, sidewalk or footpath shall be
tunneled, except where special written permission therefor shall have been
granted by the Township Engineer.
§ 207-20.   Refilling.
All breaks or openings shall be refilled by the applicant for the permit, to
the approval of the Township Engineer, replacing all the excavated materials in
the opening without raising the surface of the highway, road, street, avenue,
lane, alley, sidewalk or footpath, due allowance being made for the structures
being placed in the trench. All refilling must be done with suitable materials,
thoroughly compacted, tamping in uniform layers, not exceeding six inches in
depth, and all surplus dirt must be removed from the job. The work of replacing
the surface of the highway shall be done by the Township, except that the
Commissioners may waive such requirements when the work is to be undertaken by
or under the direction of a municipality or public utility, and provided that a
satisfactory guaranty is furnished, in writing, guaranteeing that the
restoration of the highway is done in accordance with the requirements of the
Township's proper official and will be maintained for a period of one year from
the date of completion of permanent restoration. The restoration and
maintenance shall be to the satisfaction of the Township Engineer.
§ 207-21.   Utility poles.
All telegraph, telephone, trolley, electric light and similar poles erected
within the boundaries of any public highway, road, street avenue, lane or alley
in the Township of Upper Dublin, shall be lettered or stenciled with the
initials of the owners or with some other designation of ownership, together
with a number for the same. A complete record showing the location and number
of each pole in the Township of Upper Dublin shall be filed by the owner or
owners of said poles with the Township Secretary annually on or before July
First.
§ 207-22.   Barricades and guards.
All materials, openings or excavations made or obstruction created under such
permit must be properly marked by barricades and flashing amber lights so
placed as to indicate from the roadway in both directions the exact location
and limits of said work or obstruction and at all times must be properly
guarded.
§ 207-23.   Changes in pipes, conduit or poles.
   A.   The filing of an application by a public service corporation and the
issuance of a permit for laying of water or gas pipe or conduit for electric
wires shall constitute an agreement on the part of the applicant that it will
at any time thereafter, upon notice from the proper official of the Township,
at its own expense, make such change in location or construction of such pipe
or conduit as may be required.
   B.   The filing of an application by a public service corporation, and the
issuance of a permit for the erection of an electric light, telephone,
telegraph, trolley or any other pole, shall constitute an agreement on the part
of the applicant that it will at any time thereafter, upon notice from the
proper official of the Township, at its own expense, make such change in
location or construction of such pole as may be required.
§ 207-24.   Violations and penalties.
[Amended 8-9-1988 by Ord. No. 753] 4
Any owner, person, firm, association or corporation who shall violate any of
the provisions of this article, or who shall fail to comply with the conditions
or requirements of any permit granted in accordance with the provisions of this
article, shall, upon conviction thereof, be liable to pay a fine or penalty not
exceeding $600 for each and every offense. A new and separate offense shall be
deemed to have been committed for each day that said violation exists. All
fines and penalties imposed by this article are recoverable by summary
proceedings before any District Justice in the Township of Upper Dublin, and
all suits or actions at law instituted for the recovery thereof are to be in
the name and for the use of the Township of Upper Dublin, against which offense
is committed, and, upon recovery thereof, all such fines and penalties are to
be paid into the Treasury of the Township. 5
4. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see
Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
5. Editor's Note: Former Sec. 1.10, second unnumbered paragraph, which provided
for imprisonment on default of payment of fines and which immediately followed
this subsection, was deleted at time of adoption of Code; see
Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
ARTICLE V
Curb Cuts
§ 207-25.   Permit required.
It shall be unlawful for any person or persons, firm, association or
corporation to break the surface of any improved sidewalk or curb for the
purposes of building any driveway across the same without first obtaining from
the said Board of Commissioners a permit therefor before such work is begun and
complying with the other requirements herein specified.
§ 207-26.   Permit application; bond.
   A.   Before such permit is issued and said work begun, a written application
on a form to be furnished by the Township must be filed with the Upper Dublin
Township Engineering Department. Each application for a permit shall contain
and/or be accompanied by the following: The purpose for which the said
sidewalk, or footpath is to be opened or excavated.
   B.   The said application must be signed by a person, firm, association or
corporation who shall have filed with the Board of Commissioners a bond in
amount not less than $1,000, under such condition and with surety as shall be
approved by the Solicitor of the Board of Commissioners to save harmless the
Township of Upper Dublin from any and all damages to person or property
accruing by reason of the work for which permits may be issued from time to
time hereunder, and who also shall have filed with the Board of Commissioners a
certificate showing liability insurance is carried in the amount of $100,000.
§ 207-27.   Fees.
Before the issuance of a permit, the applicant shall make payment to the
Township of a fee in accordance with the fee schedule for excavations set forth
in the township fee schedule.
§ 207-28.   Issuance; term.
   A.   The permit shall be issued only after the application has been approved
by the designated official of the Township.
   B.   The permit shall be operative for no more than 60 days from the date of
issue.
§ 207-29.   Barricades and guards.
All materials, openings or excavations made or obstruction created under such
permit must be properly marked by barricades and flashing amber lights so
placed as to indicate from the roadway, in both directions, the exact location
and limits of said work or obstruction and at all times must be properly
guarded.
§ 207-30.   Violations and penalties.
[Amended 8-9-1988 by Ord. No. 753]
   A.   Any owner, person, firm, association or corporation who shall violate
any of the provisions of this article or who shall fail to comply with the
conditions or requirements of any permit granted in accordance with the
provisions of this article shall, upon conviction thereof, be liable to pay a
fine or penalty not exceeding $600 for each and every offense. 6
   B.   A new and separate offense shall be deemed to have been committed for
each day that said violation exists. All fines and penalties imposed by this
article are recoverable by summary proceedings before any District Justice in
the Township of Upper Dublin, and all suits or actions at law instituted for
the recovery thereof are to be in the name and for the use of the Township of
Upper Dublin, against which offense is committed, and, upon recovery thereof,
all such fines and penalties are to be paid into the Treasury of the Township.
7
6. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see
Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
7. Editor's Note: Former Sec. 1.06, third unnumbered paragraph, which provided
for imprisonment on default of payment of fines and which immediately followed
this subsection, was deleted at time of adoption of Code; see
Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
ARTICLE VI
Sidewalk Construction
§ 207-31.   Duty of property owners; failure; costs.
[Added 8-11-1992 by Ord. No. 826]
   A.   It shall be the duty of all owners of property abutting upon any public
street within the Township, upon receipt of a notice to do so from the Township
Public Works Department and within 30 days after receipt thereof, to construct
in front of their respective properties and at the owner's expense a sidewalk
and curb, or either of them, of the kind, quality and dimensions set forth in
the notice and in accordance with the Township's engineering standards.
   B.   It shall be the duty of all owners of property abutting upon any public
street within the Township to keep and maintain the sidewalk and curb in front
of their respective properties in good order, condition and repair in
accordance with the Township's criteria for replacement of existing concrete
curb, sidewalk or driveway apron. Within 90 days after receipt of a notice from
the Township, and at the owner's expense, the sidewalk and curb, or either of
them, shall be replaced or repaired as specified in the notice and in
accordance with the Township's engineering standards. In emergency
circumstances, within 30 days after receipt of a notice from the Township, and
at the owner's expense, the sidewalk and curb, or either of them, shall be
replaced or repaired as specified in the notice and in accordance with the
Township's engineering standards. [Amended 6-13-2000 by Ord. No. 1036; 9-12-
2000 by Ord. No. 1043]
   C.   Upon failure of the property owner to do the work set forth in the
notice as mentioned in Subsections A and B above, the Township shall have the
work performed and charge the costs thereof to the owner. The Township, either
by its own employees or by an independent contractor, shall do the work and
charge the costs thereof to the owner. Upon failure of the owner to pay the
costs of this sidewalk or curb work within 30 days after demand, the Township
shall, in addition to all other remedies, file a municipal lien or claim
against the premises involved, with such additional charges and penalties as
are prescribed by law.
   D.   Any person failing or refusing to comply with the provisions of this
article or who shall unlawfully construct or reconstruct any curb or sidewalk
not in accordance with the provisions hereof or to the lines and grades
furnished by the Township Public Works Department shall forfeit and pay a sum
of not more than $600 for each and every offense, to be recovered as such
penalties are now collectible by law.
§ 207-32.   Permit required.
[Amended 1-12-1999 by Ord. No. 986]
Sidewalks, curbs, driveway aprons and gutters shall not be placed or replaced
within the boundaries of any public highway, road, street, avenue, lane or
alley in the Township of Upper Dublin by an owner, person, firm, association or
corporation without first obtaining from the Board of Commissioners a permit
for such purpose, which shall be fully set forth in a written application
showing such purpose and assuming all liability for all and any damage which
might result from the performance of such work.
§ 207-33.   Permit application.
[Amended 1-10-1995 by Ord. No. 879]
Before any construction or reconstruction of any curbs or sidewalks shall be
begun, a permit must be obtained by the property owner or his agent from the
Township Engineering Department, and the said permit shall be issued without
cost; the applicant shall state the following:
   A.   The actual owner of the real estate.
   B.   The number of feet to be constructed or reconstructed.
   C.   The name of the contractor.
   D.   The location of the sidewalk relative to the curb and property line.
§ 207-34.   Supervision.
All curbs and sidewalks shall be constructed under the supervision of the
Highway Committee of the Township Commissioners or its authorized
representative and shall be made to conform strictly with requirements herein
set forth.
§ 207-35.   Grade and lines.
   A.   For giving or defining grades or lines for the placing or replacing of
sidewalks, curbs or gutters within the boundaries of any public highway, road,
street, avenue, lane or alley, a charge, payable to the Township, will be made
in accordance with standards rates adopted by the Engineering Department.
[Amended 1-10-1995 by Ord. No. 879]
   B.   The Township Engineer is hereby empowered to give or define grades or
lines for the placing or replacing of sidewalk, curb and gutter within the
boundaries of any public highway, road, street, avenue, lane or alley within
said Township, and no act on the part of any official or employee shall bind
the Township or make it liable therefor.
   C.   The Township Engineer, after making the necessary survey, shall fix the
lines and grade of sidewalk, curb and gutter proposed to be placed or replaced
in conformity with the lines and grades fixed by this Board, and no sidewalk,
curb and gutter shall be placed or replaced except after a permit is thus
obtained and after the Township Engineer shall have given the line and grade.
§ 207-36.   Barricades and guards.
Property owners and their contractors or agents shall protect the public by
proper guards and lights against any danger or injury while the highway is open
in the work of placing or replacing of sidewalk, curb and gutter or any matter
pertaining thereto, including the guarding against injury by materials that may
be placed in the highway for that purpose.
§ 207-37.   Construction standards.
Curbs and sidewalks constructed in accordance with the requirements of the
ordinances of the Township of Upper Dublin shall be as follows:
   A.   Curbs. Curbs shall be constructed to conform to Class A concrete curb
in accordance, except as noted below, with specifications as set forth in
Pennsylvania Department of Transportation, Form 408, for plain, cement or
concrete curb, and shall be eight inches wide, tapered to seven inches at the
top in curb, and shall be eight inches, and 18 inches deep, formed front and
back for the full depth. Upon removal of the forms and correction of the minor
surface irregularities, the concrete shall be sprayed with an approved white
pigmented curbing compound. Where it is deemed advisable by the Public Works
Committee of the Board of Commissioners of Upper Dublin Township, due to grades
or ground conditions, an additional depth of six inches shall be excavated and
coarse stone shall be laid in the trench and well tamped before constructing
the curb. One-fourth-inch expansion joints of premolded asphalt shall be placed
at intervals not exceeding 30 feet and at all changes of grade and at ends or
curved sections. Curbs are to be in uniform lengths or blocks of 10 feet, being
separated during construction by sheet steel templates 1/8 inch thick
conforming to the size of the curbing, to be placed vertical and removed as
soon as the concrete develops initial set. The upper edge of the curbing shall
be finished with a round nosing with a radius of one inch. [Amended 1-10-1995
by Ord. No. 879]
   B.   Sidewalks Sidewalks, as required by the ordinances of the Township of
Upper Dublin, shall be constructed of the same type of concrete as required for
curbs in this article. The thickness shall be at least four inches. However,
the areas to be used for driveways shall have a minimum thickness of six
inches, and they shall be cured, as the curb is to be cured, using an approved
white pigmented curbing compound. [Amended 1-10-1995 by Ord. No. 879]
   C.   All concrete curbs and concrete sidewalks shall be constructed of
concrete having a minimum compressive strength of 3,300 pounds per square inch
when tested at 28 days; the costs of such a test or tests shall be borne by the
owner, except that the requirement of the test may be waived when concrete is
supplied by a producer of concrete employing a registered professional engineer
certifying the minimum strength of each batch of concrete manufactured.
[Amended 9-9-1997 by Ord. No. 950]
§ 207-38.   Violations and penalties.
[Amended 8-9-1988 by Ord. No. 753; 1-10-1995 by Ord. No. 879]
Any violation of any provision of this article shall be a misdemeanor and in
summary conviction shall be punishable by a fine of not less than $250 and not
more than $600.
ARTICLE VII
Hauling; Deposits
[Added 12-8-1992 by Ord. No. 830]
§ 207-39.   Prohibited acts.
   A.   It is hereby declared a public nuisance for any person, when hauling
soil, bedrock, concrete, waste material or other material over any public
street, road, alley or public property, to allow such material to blow or spill
over and upon such street, road, alley or public property or adjacent private
property.
   B.   It is hereby declared unlawful for any person, to haul soil, bedrock,
concrete, waste material or other material over any public street, road, alley
or public property, in any vehicle, unless such vehicle shall be provided with
a cover which shall be of such material and shall be so secured upon such
vehicle as to prevent such material from falling, blowing, spilling or dropping
therefrom upon such street, road, alley or public property or adjacent private
property.
   C.   It is hereby declared a public nuisance for any person, being the owner
of real property or the owner or operator of any vehicle, to permit a vehicle
entering upon a public street, road or alley or upon public property to deposit
or track dirt, mud, rock or other material from such property.
§ 207-40.   Removal of materials.
Any person violating the provisions of this article shall cause any deposited
material to be removed from the public property or way within six hours from
the occurrence. In the event of an immediate danger to the public health or
safety, the material shall be removed immediately. In the event that deposited
material is not so removed, the Township shall cause such removal, and the cost
thereof shall be charged to the person responsible.
§ 207-41.   Violations and penalties.
Any person violating the provisions of this article shall be subject to the
following nonexclusive fines and penalties, one or more of which may be pursued
by the Township concurrently:
   A.   A fine or penalty not exceeding $600 for each and every offense, such
fine or penalty to be collected as provided by law.
   B.   The Township may suspend or revoke any permit issued by the Township to
a person responsible for the violation of this article if the materials
unlawfully deposited are a product of such work, such suspension or revocation
to continue:
      (1)   Until the Township has been compensated for any charges incurred by
the Township in cleaning up or removing the unlawfully deposited material.
      (2)   Until the person responsible has paid or deposited in escrow any
fines or penalties which a District Justice determines to be due by reason of a
violation of this article.
      (3)   Until such time as the Township determines that the person
responsible has taken adequate precautions to assure that the unlawful
depositing of materials will not reoccur.
   C.   Any person whose permit shall have been revoked by the Director of
Public Works may, within 30 days of such suspension or revocation, appeal such
decision to the Board of Commissioners. [Amended 1-10-1995 by Ord. No. 879]
Chapter 212
SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT
ARTICLE I
Title; Purpose; Interpretation
§
212-1.   Title.
§
212-2.   Purposes.
§
212-3.   Interpretation.
ARTICLE II
Terminology
§
212-4.   Word usage.
§
212-5.   Definitions.
ARTICLE III
General Provisions
§
212-6.   Compliance required.
§
212-7.   Plan approval required.
§
212-8.   Dedication of improvements.
§
212-9.   Official Map.
§
212-10.   Ownership of improvements.
§
212-11.   Prerequisites to sale or issuance of permit.
§
212-12.   Review of plans; appeals.
§
212-13.   Condominiums.
ARTICLE IV
Design Standards
§
212-14.   General principles, requirements and standards.
§
212-15.   Streets.
§
212-16.   Driveways.
§
212-17.   Parking areas.
§
212-18.   Sidewalks.
§
212-19.   Curbs.
§
212-20.   Blocks.
§
212-21.   Lots on public and private streets.
§
212-22.   Existing structures.
§
212-23.   Grading.
§
212-24.   Drainage.
§
212-25.   Erosion and sediment control.
§
212-26.   Sanitary sewers and on-site disposal.
§
212-27.   Water supply.
§
212-28.   Utilities.
§
212-29.   Streetscape improvements
§
212-30.   Survey monuments.
§
212-31.   Natural or historic feature preservation.
§
212-32.   Landscaping.
§
212-33.   Reserve strips; rights-of-way and/or easements; deeds.
§
212-34.   Recreational areas and community assets.
§
212-35.   Construal of standards; recommendations.
§
212-35.1.   Transportation impact study.
§
212-35.2.   Manual of design standards – GFW Greater Fort Washington District.
Appendix A   General Manual of Written and Graphic Design Standards
ARTICLE V
Condominiums and Condominium Conversions
§
212-36.   Applicability.
§
212-37.   Declaration.
§
212-38.   Plats and plans of condominiums.
§
212-39.   Bylaws.
ARTICLE VI
Plan Submission Requirements and Processing Procedures
§
212-40.   Applicability.
§
212-41.   Plans required for approval.
§
212-42.   Tentative sketch requirements.
§
212-43.   Preliminary plan requirements.
§
212-44.   Minor subdivision plan (final).
§
212-44.1.   Minor land development plan.
§
212-45.   Final plan.
§
212-46.   Land development plans.
§
212-47.   Plan processing procedures.
§
212-47.1.   Plans provided on magnetic media.
§
212-48.   Plan recording.
ARTICLE VII
Improvement Construction Requirements
§
212-49.   Required improvements.
§
212-50.   Release of construction security.
§
212-51.   Public utilities and laterals.
§
212-52.   Inspections.
§
212-53.   Modifications.
ARTICLE VIII
Fees and Conditions of Acceptance
§
212-54.   Fees and costs.
§
212-55.   Conditions of acceptance.
ARTICLE IX
Amendments; Enforcement
§
212-56.   Amendments.
§
212-57.   Referral to Planning Commission.
§
212-58.   Violations and penalties.
Table 1 Minimum Planting Requirements
Table 2 Screen Buffer Requirements
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Board of Commissioners of the Township of Upper Dublin
5-13-1986 as Title 9 of the 1986 Code. Amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
 
Planning Agency — See         Flood damage prevention —See
Ch. 39.                         Ch. 122.
Building construction — See   Streets and sidewalks — See
Ch. 73.                         Ch. 207.
Numbering of buildings — See  Zoning — See
Ch. 76.                         Ch. 255.
 
ARTICLE I
Title; Purpose; Interpretation
§ 212-1.   Title.
This chapter shall be known as the “Upper Dublin Township Subdivision and Land
Development Ordinance.”
§ 212-2.   Purposes.
This chapter and the regulations herein are adopted for the following purposes:
   A.   To assure sites suitable for building purposes and human habitation.
   B.   To assist the orderly, efficient, integrated and harmonious development
of the Township in order to provide the highest quality environment obtainable.
   C.   To coordinate existing streets with proposed streets , parks or other
features of the Township’s official plan of streets and highways.
   D.   To provide adequate open spaces for traffic, recreation, light, water
and air and for proper distribution of population, thereby creating conditions
favorable to the health, safety, morals and general welfare of the citizens of
the Township.
   E.   To ensure conformance of subdivision and land development plans with
the public improvement  plans of the Township and coordination of
intermunicipal public improvement  plans and programs which include counties
and the state.
   F.   To secure equitable handling of all subdivision and land development
plans by providing uniform procedures and design standards , plan requirements,
processing procedures, improvement construction and conditions of acceptance of
public improvements by the Township.
§ 212-3.   Interpretation.
The provisions of this chapter shall be held to be minimum requirements for the
promotion of the above purposes. Where the provisions of this chapter impose
greater restrictions than those of any other ordinances or regulations or
resolution, the provisions of this chapter shall be controlling. Where the
provisions of any other ordinance, regulation or resolution impose greater
restrictions than this chapter, the provisions of such other ordinance,
regulation or resolution shall be controlling.
ARTICLE II
Terminology
§ 212-4.   Word usage.
[Amended 6-14-2011 by Ord. No. 11-1240, § 1]
Unless otherwise expressly stated, the following terms shall, for the purpose
of these regulations, have the meanings given herein:
   A.   Words used in the singular include the plural, and words in the plural
include the singular.
   B.   The word “person,” “subdivider” or “owner” includes a corporation and a
partnership as well as an individual.
   C.   The word “building” includes “structure” and shall be construed as if
followed by the words “or part thereof.”
   D.   The word “street” includes “road,” “land,” “avenue,” and “highway” and
shall mean the whole or any part thereof, and shall include “bridge” or
“culvert,” “cartway,” “gutter,” “curb,” “sidewalks” and the whole legal width
of the right-of-way .
   E.   “Watercourse” includes a “drain,” “ditch” and “stream.”
   F.   The word “lot” includes “plot” and “parcel.”
   G.   The names of reviewing entities, such as the name of an advisory
commission or a state agency, shall be construed as if followed by the words
“or its successor.” [Added 6-14-2011 by Ord. No. 11-1240]
§ 212-5.   Definitions.
[Amended 3-11-2008 by Ord. No. 1195, § 1]
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
   ACCEPTED ENGINEERING PRACTICE — That which conforms to accepted principles,
tests or standards of nationally recognized technical or scientific
authorities.
   AGENT — Any person other than the subdivider who, acting for the subdivider
, submits to the Township subdivision  plans for the purpose of obtaining
approval thereof. (See “subdivider .”)
   ALLEY — A strip of land over which there is a right-of-way , municipally or
privately owned, on which no dwellings or stores front, serving as the
secondary means of access to two or more properties.
   APPLICANT — A landowner or developer , as hereinafter defined, who has filed
an application for development , including his heirs, successors and assigns. 1
   APPLICATION FOR DEVELOPMENT — Every application, whether preliminary,
tentative or final, required to be filed and approved prior to the start of
construction or development , including but not limited to an application for a
building permit, for the approval of a subdivision  plat or plan or for the
approval of a development plan . 2
   AVERAGE DAILY TRAFFIC COUNT (ADT) — The vehicular traffic generated on a
particular street by the homes on that street plus any through traffic. ADT
counts should be considered in a cumulative effect.
   BLOCK — An area bounded by streets or by a combination of streets and public
parks, cemeteries, railroad rights-of-way or boundary lines of the Township of
Upper Dublin.
   BOARD — The Board of Commissioners of the Township of Upper Dublin.
   BOLLARDS — A fixed vertical column of wood or concrete extending no less
than three and one- half feet above parking grade and five feet below grade
placed for purposes of controlling vehicular traffic and protecting
pedestrians.
   BUFFER — A strip of ground which lessens the visual impact of a use on
surrounding uses and which is employed exclusively for landscaping.
   BUILDER — A person, who is not necessarily the owner of the land or agent of
the same, who, by contract or other agreement, is charged with the
responsibility of construction of buildings or other structures or of making
any construction improvements on any parcel of land.
   BUILDING — Any structure having a roof, supported by columns, piers or
walls, including tents, lunch wagons, trailers, dining cars, camp cars, mobile
homes or other structures on wheels or having other supports and any unroofed
platform, terrace or porch having a vertical face higher than three feet above
the level of the ground from which the building is measured. A "building" may
include more than one dwelling unit .
   BUILDING COVERAGE — The maximum horizontal covered area of building at or
above grade .
   BUILDING SETBACK LINE — A line within a lot so designed on a plan and/or
established by Deed of Zoning Ordinance between which line and the right-of-way
line of the street on which the lot abuts a building shall not be erected. The
greater distance from the right-of-way line shall govern the setback line.
   CARTWAY — That portion of a street or alley intended for vehicular use .
   CLEAR SIGHT TRIANGLE — An area of unobstructed vision at street
intersections defined by the right-of-way lines of the street and by a line of
sight between points on their right-of-way lines at a given distance from the
intersection of the right-of-way lines.
   CODE OF REGULATIONS — Such governing regulations as are adopted pursuant to
this chapter for the regulation and management of condominium properties,
including such amendments thereof as may be adopted from time to time.
   COMMON ELEMENTS — Includes:
   A.   The land on which the building is located and portions of the building
which are not included in a unit.
   B.   The foundations, structural parts, supports, main walls, roofs,
basements, halls, corridors, lobbies, stairways and entrances and exits of the
building .
   C.   The yards , parking areas and driveways .
   D.   Portions of the land and buildings used exclusively for the management,
operation or maintenance of the common elements.
   E.   Installation of all central services and utilities.
   F.   All apparatus and installations existing for common use .
   G.   All other elements of the building necessary or convenient to its
existence, management, operation, maintenance and safety or normally in common
use .
   H.   Such facilities as are designated in the declaration as common
elements.
   COMMON OPEN SPACE — A parcel or parcels of land or an area of water, or a
combination of land and water, within a development  site and designed and
intended for the use or enjoyment of residents of a development , not including
streets , off-street parking areas and areas set aside for public facilities.
[Amended 1-10-1995 by Ord. No. 8793 ]
   CONDOMINIUM — An estate in real property consisting of an undivided interest
in a portion of a parcel, together with a separate interest in a space within a
structure appurtenant to common areas. This form of ownership may be applied in
residential, professional office, limited industrial and commercial land uses .
   COUNCIL — A homeowner's association or other entity which shall manage the
business, operation and affairs of a condominium property on behalf of the unit
owners (size to be stated in code of regulations for the property).
   CROSSWALK — A right-of-way , municipally or privately owned, which crosses a
block so as to furnish access for pedestrians to adjacent streets or
properties.
   CUL-DE-SAC — A street with one end open for public vehicular and pedestrian
access and the other terminating in a vehicular turnaround.
   CUT — An excavation ; the difference between a point on the original ground
and a designated point of lower elevation on the final grade ; also the
material removed in excavation .
   DECLARATION — The instrument by which the owner of property submits the
property to the provisions of the Uniform Condominium Act, 68 Pa. C.S.A. § 3101
et seq., and all amendments thereto. [Amended 1-10-1995 by Ord. No. 879]
   DECLARATION OF REVOCATION — A statement of intent to convert a condominium
to a fee simple or rental property or structure , signed by 100% of the unit
owners and the holders of all mortgages, judgments or other liens affecting the
units.
   DECLARATION PLAN — A survey of the property to be submitted to the
provisions of the Uniform Condominium Act, 68 Pa. C.S.A. § 3101 et seq., which
shall bear the verified statement of a registered architect or licensed
professional engineer certifying that the declaration  plan fully and
accurately: [Amended 1-10-1995 by Ord. No. 879]
   A.   Shows the property, the location of the buildings (s) thereon, the
building and the layout of the floors of the buildings (s), including the units
and the common elements ; and
   B.   Sets forth the name by which the property will be known and the unit
designation for each unit therein.
   DETENTION BASIN — A stormwater management structure with a controlled
release rate which is essentially dry while not receiving stormwater. [Amended
9-14-2004 by Ord. No. 1139]
   DEVELOPER — Any landowner , agent of such landowner or tenant with the
permission of such landowner who makes or causes to be made a subdivision of
land or a land development . [Amended 1-10-1995 by Ord. No. 879]
   DEVELOPMENT — Any man-made change to improved or unimproved real estate,
including but not limited to, buildings or other structures , the placement of
mobile homes, streets and other paving, utilities, filling, grading ,
excavation , mining, dredging or drilling operations and the subdivision of
land. [Added 7-14-1998 by Ord. No. 973]
   DEVELOPMENT PLAN — The provisions for development , including a planned
residential development , a plat of subdivision , all covenants relating to use
, location and bulk of buildings and other structures , intensity of use or
density of development , streets , ways and parking facilities, common open
space and public facilities. The phrase “provisions of the development  plan ,”
when used in this chapter, shall mean the written and graphic materials
referred to in this definition. [Amended 1-10-1995 by Ord. No. 879]
   DRAINAGE — The flow of water and the methods of directing such flow, whether
natural or artificial.
   DRAINAGE FACILITY — Any ditch, pipe, culvert, storm sewer, stream, channel,
swale , conduit or structure designed, intended or constructed for the purpose
of diverting surface water from or carrying surface waters off streets , public
rights-of-way , parks, recreational areas or any part of any subdivision or
land development . [Amended 9-14-2004 by Ord. No. 1139]
   DRIVEWAY — A private way providing for vehicular and pedestrian access
between a public street and a parking area within a lot or property.
   DWELLING — A building designed and constructed for residential purposes in
which people live.
   DWELLING UNIT — One or more rooms arranged for the use of one or more
individuals living together as a single housekeeping unit, with cooking,
living, sanitary and sleeping facilities.
   EASEMENT — A right-of-way or other right granted by a property owner for the
use of a designated part of his/her property for public, quasi-public or
private purposes, including but not limited to utilities, drainageways, natural
or scenic area protection and access. [Amended 4-8- 1997 by Ord. No. 934]
   ENDORSEMENT — The review stamp of the Montgomery County Planning Commission.
   ENGINEER — A professional engineer licensed as such in the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania, duly appointed as the Engineer for Upper Dublin Township or for
an applicant .
   EROSION — The removal of surface materials by the action of natural
elements.
   EXCAVATION — Any act by which earth, sand, gravel, rock or any other similar
material is dug into, cut , quarried, uncovered, removed, displaced, relocated
or bulldozed, and shall include the conditions resulting therefrom.
   FILL —
   A.   Any act by which earth, sand, gravel, rock or any other material is
placed, pushed, dumped, pulled, transported or moved to a new location above
the natural surface of the ground or on top of the stripped surface, and shall
include the conditions resulting therefrom.
   B.   The difference in elevation between a point on the original ground and
a designated point of higher elevation on the final grade .
   C.   The material used to make a fill.
   FLOOD HAZARD BOUNDARY MAP — A map prepared by the Federal Insurance
Administra tion of the United States Department of Housing and Urban
Development designating the boundaries of the floodplain areas having special
flood hazards in Upper Dublin Township.
   FLOODPLAIN — The area along a watercourse which is periodically flooded by
water therefrom, as defined in the Township Code,
Chapter 255, Zoning, Article XXII, Floodplain Conservation District. [Amended
9-14-1999 by Ord. No. 1006; 9-14-2004 by Ord. No. 1139]
   FRONTAGE — The length of the front property line of the lot , lots or tract
of land abutting a street .
   GRADE — A slope of a street or other public way, specified in percent (%)
and shown on plans as specified herein.
   GRADE ELEVATION — The grade required at points of street intersections as
specified herein.
   GRADING — The changing of the grade of the existing ground surface of the
site by excavation or filling or a combination of both.
   GROSS FLOOR AREA — The total floor area measured to the outside of the
exterior walls of a building , exclusive of open courts. [Amended 11-13-1990 by
Ord. No. 789]
   GROUND COVER — Grass or nondeciduous low-growing plants installed or planted
in such a manner so as to form a continuous cover over the ground.
   HEIGHT — The “height” of a building shall be measured from the mean level of
the ground surrounding the building to a point midway between the highest and
the lowest points of the roof, provided that chimneys, spires, towers, elevator
penthouses, tanks and similar projections shall not be included in calculating
the “height.”
   IMPERVIOUS SURFACE — Any material placed on or above the earth, or any
material change in the natural surface of the earth, which substantially
reduces or prevents the natural infiltration of water. Examples include but are
not limited to structures, including eaves, roofs, and roof overhangs; roads;
parking areas (whether hard surfaced or not); driveways; sidewalks; walkways;
patios; sports courts; pools; and, the horizontal surface area of aboveground
stormwater management structures, including retention and detention basins.
Stormwater basins designed and constructed to allow for infiltration shall not
be considered as impervious surface. Patios designed and constructed with
pervious materials shall not be considered as impervious surface. [Added 9-14-
2004 by Ord. No. 1139; amended 4-12-2016 by Ord. No. 16-1316]
   IMPERVIOUS SURFACE RATIO — The amount of impervious surface on a site
compared to the total site area. The impervious surface ratio is determined by
dividing the total area of all impervious surfaces on a site by the total area
of the site . [Amended 9-14-2004 by Ord. No. 1139]
   IMPROVEMENT — Any man-made structure , object and/or area constituting a
physical addition to or alteration of real property. [Added 3-11-2008 by Ord.
No. 1195, § 1]
   IMPROVEMENTS — Includes but is not limited to grading , paving, curbing,
streetlights, street name signs, fire hydrants, water mains, gas mains,
sanitary sewers, on-site sewage disposal facilities, storm drains, inlets and
appurtenances, culverts, bridges, sidewalks, crosswalks , monuments, telephone
and electric lines, shade trees and all construction appurtenances incidental
thereto. [Amended 1-10-1995 by Ord. No. 879]
   LAND DEVELOPER — A person who is the legal or beneficial owner, or
authorized agent of the registered owner, of land subject to land development .
   LAND DEVELOPMENT — Any of the following activities: [Amended 1-10-1995 by
Ord. No. 879]
   A.   The improvement of one lot or two or more contiguous lots , tracts or
parcels of land for any purpose involving:
      (1)   A group of two or more residential or nonresidential buildings ,
whether proposed initially or cumulatively, or a single nonresidential building
on a lot or lots , regardless of the number of occupants or tenure; or
      (2)   The division or allocation of land or space, whether initially or
cumulatively, between or among two or more existing or prospective occupants by
means of or for the purpose of streets , common areas, leaseholds, condominiums
, building groups or other features.
   B.   A subdivision of land.
   C.   Development in accordance with 53 P.S. § 10503(1.1).
   LANDOWNER — The legal or beneficial owner or owners of land, including the
holder of an option or contract to purchase (whether or not such option or
contract is subject to any condition), a lessee if he is authorized under the
lease to exercise the rights of the landowner or other person having a
proprietary interest in land. [Amended 1-10-1995 by Ord. No. 879]
   LOT — A designated parcel, tract or area of land established by a plat or
otherwise as permitted by law and to be used, developed or built upon as a
unit. [Amended 1-10-1995 by Ord. No. 879]
   LOT AREA — The area contained within the property lines of the individual
parcels of land, excluding any area within any public right-of-way , but
including the area of any easement .
   LOT LINE — Any boundary line of a lot ; a property line.
   MAJOR SUBDIVISION — The division of a lot , tract or parcel of land or part
thereof into two or more lots , tracts or parcels of land which will require
improvements for the purpose, whether immediate or future, of transfer of
ownership or of building  development .
   MINOR SUBDIVISION — The division of a single lot , tract or parcel of land
into two or more lots , tracts or parcels of land for the purpose, whether
immediate or future, of transfer of ownership or of building  development ,
provided that the proposed lots , tracts or parcels of land thereby created
have frontage on an improved public street or streets , and provided further
that there is not created by the subdivision any new street or streets .
   MOBILE HOME — A transportable, single-family dwelling intended for permanent
occupancy, contained in one unit, or in two or more units designed to be joined
into one integral unit capable of again being separated for repeated towing,
which arrives at a site complete and ready for occupancy, except for minor and
incidental unpacking and assembly operations, and constructed so that it may be
used without a permanent foundation. [Amended 1-10-1995 by Ord. No. 879]
   MOBILE HOME LOT — A parcel of land in a mobile home park , improved with the
necessary utility connections and other appurtenances necessary for the
erection thereon of a single mobile home. [Amended 1-10-1995 by Ord. No. 879]
   MOBILE HOME PARK — A parcel or contiguous parcels of land which has been so
designed and improved that it contains two or more mobile home lots for the
placement thereon of mobile homes. [Amended 1-10-1995 by Ord. No. 879]
   MODULAR HOME — A factory-assembled structure or structures equipped with the
necessary service connections made so as to be movable from the factory for
assembly and installation upon a permanent foundation as a dwelling unit . 4
   OPEN SPACE — A parcel or parcels of land or an area of water or a
combination of land and water within a development  site , logically
interrelated and interconnected and designed and intended for the use and
enjoyment of the residents of the development and/or community, not including
streets , off-street parking areas, required yards and areas set aside for
public facilities. "Common open space " shall be substantially free of
structures but may contain such improvements as are in the development plan as
finally approved and as appropriate for the recreation of the residents served
thereby. "Open space" may be set aside in one or a combination of the following
ways:
   A.   DEED-RESTRICTED OPEN SPACE — An area or areas set aside specifically
for the use of residents within the development and integrated within the
development which will distribute and interconnect the open spaces throughout
the development .
   B.   DEDICATED OPEN SPACE — An area or areas dedicated to the Township for
use by all its residents and appropriately located to be accessible to all
residents while limiting ingress and egress by those residents from within the
proposed development .
   PARKING SPACE — A space, surfaced to whatever extent necessary to permit use
under all normal seasonal conditions of weather, available for the parking of
one motor vehicle.
   PEDESTRIAN WALKWAY — All walkways or sidewalks, not including street
sidewalks and walks directly accessing a building or group of buildings and
onto which a number of walks or sidewalks converge.
   PLAN — A graphic or written representation or document which, in the case of
condominiums , shall include a declaration , code of regulations and
declaration plan . "Plan" shall also have the same meaning as "plat ." [Amended
1-10-1995 by Ord. No. 879]
   PLAN, FINAL — A plan prepared for approval and recording for all
subdivisions and land developments , consisting of an improvement construction
plan and a record plan and all other items required under Article BI of this
chapter.
   PLAN, IMPROVEMENT CONSTRUCTION — A plan showing the construction details of
streets , drains, sewers, bridges, culverts and other improvements as required
by this chapter, showing the details required by Article III of this chapter.
   PLAN, LAND DEVELOPMENT — A tentative, preliminary or final plan , including
written and graphic material, showing the provision for development of a tract
when plans of subdivision would not be applicable.
   PLANNING COMMISSION — The Upper Dublin Township Planning Commission.
   PLAN, PRELIMINARY — A plan prepared for discussion with the Planning
Commission and Township Commissioners showing the proposed street and lot
layout, the deed restrictions, easements and all other items required under
Article III of this chapter for the entire parcel of land being subdivided.
   PLAN, RECORD — A plan prepared for recording showing the ultimate width of
streets , the lot lines , easements and all other items required under Article
III of this chapter.
   PLANTING AREA — Any area designated for landscaping purposes.
   PLAT — The map or plan of a subdivision or land development , whether
preliminary or final. "Plat" shall also have the same meaning as "plan."
[Amended 1-10-1995 by Ord. No. 879]
   PUBLIC NOTICE — Notice published once each week for two successive weeks in
a newspaper of general circulation in the municipality. Such notice shall state
the time and place of the hearing and the particular nature of the matter to be
considered at the hearing. The first publication shall not be more than 30 days
and the second publication shall not be less than seven days from the date of
the hearing. [Amended 1-10-1995 by Ord. No. 879]
   PUBLIC UTILITIES — A private or municipal corporation organized and existing
for the distribution and sale of water, electricity, gas or the collection and
disposal of sanitary waste or sewage in accordance with the laws' of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania or other appropriate governing body.
   REGULATORY FLOOD — The one-hundred-year flood, which is a flood having an
average frequency of occurrence on the order of once in 100 years, although the
flood may occur in any year.
   RESERVE STRIP — A parcel of land separating a street from adjacent
properties.
   RETENTION BASIN — A stormwater management structure with a controlled
release rate and which maintains a constant water level while not receiving
stormwater. [Amended 9-14-2004 by Ord. No. 1139]
   RIGHT-OF-WAY — A strip of land occupied or intended to be occupied by a
street , alley , sidewalk, crosswalk , sanitary or storm sewer, stream,
drainage ditch or for another special use .
   RIGHT-OF-WAY, LEGAL — Land open for use as a street , alley or sidewalk.
   RIGHT-OF-WAY LINE, LEGAL — The line parallel to the center line of any
public street , alley or other right-of-way which defines the limits of such
right-of-way .
   RIGHT-OF-WAY LINE, ULTIMATE — The line parallel to the center line of any
public street , alley or other right-of-way which defines the boundary of the
ultimate right-of-way as defined above.
   RIGHT-OF-WAY, ULTIMATE — The expected future right-of-way width computed
from the center line of an established right-of-way . [Amended 1-10-1995 by
Ord. No. 879]
   RIPARIAN CORRIDOR — A vegetated or natural area directly adjacent to (or
surrounding) a water body, including watercourses , ponds, lakes and wetlands,
that serves a variety of functions important to the health and welfare of
humans and the environment by: preserving water quality by filtering sediment
from runoff before it enters the water body; protecting streambanks from
erosion ; providing a storage area for floodwaters; providing food and habitat
for fish and wildlife; providing shade to regulate water temperature; and
preserving open space and aesthetic surroundings. A riparian corridor is
determined by boundaries set by a horizontal measurement extending from the top
of bank or high water mark of a water body to one foot above the one-hundred-
year base flood elevation or a horizontal measurement extending 50 feet from
the top of bank or high water mark of the water body, whichever distance is
greater. [Added 9-14-2004 by Ord. No. 1139]
   RUNOFF — The surface water discharge of a given watershed after
precipitation that does not enter the soil but runs off the surface of the
land. [Amended 9-14-2004 by Ord. No. 1139]
   RUNOFF FROM A FULLY DEVELOPED AREA UPSTREAM — The surface water runoff that
can be reasonably anticipated upon maximum development of that area of the
watershed located upstream from the subject tract, as permitted by prevailing
zoning. [Amended 1-10-1995 by Ord. No. 879]
   SEDIMENTATION — The process by which mineral or organic matter is
accumulated or deposited by moving wind, water or gravity. Once this matter is
deposited (or remains suspended in water), it is usually referred to as
"sediment."
   SHRUB — A woody perennial plant having persistent woody stems, branching
from the base.
   SIGHT DISTANCE — The distance of unobstructed view along the center line of
a street from the driver's sight height to the farthest visible point four
inches above the street surface.
   SIGHT TRIANGLE — The area of a triangle whose legs are the sides of the
cartway and an accessway which intersects with it, each being no less than 10
feet long from the point of intersection, whose hypotenuse connects two legs.
   SITE — A lot , tract or parcel of land, or a series of lots , tracts or
parcels of land, joined together, where grading work is continuous and
performed at the same time.
   SKETCH, TENTATIVE — A sketch draft showing proposed streets , lots or
buildings related to topography, that is to be used as the basis for informal
discussion between the representatives of the Planning Commission and the
subdivider , land developer or builder .
   SLOPE — The face of an embankment or cut section; any ground whose surface
makes an angle with the plane of the horizon. “Slopes” are usually expressed in
a percentage based upon vertical difference in feet per 100 feet of horizontal
distance or the relationship of the horizontal distance to the vertical
distance.
   SOIL STABILIZATION — Chemical or structural treatment of a mass of soil to
increase or maintain its stability or otherwise improve its engineering
properties.
   SOIL SURVEY — A report entitled “Soil Survey of Montgomery County,
Pennsylvania,” published April 1967 by the Soil Conservation Service, United
States Department of Agriculture, and which is available in the Township or
through the Extension Service, Agricultural Agent, the Pennsylvania State
University, in Norristown.
   STANDARDS — The Engineering and Construction Standards of Upper Dublin
Township. 5 
   STREET — Includes street, avenue, boulevard, road, highway, freeway,
parkway, lane, alley , viaduct and any other ways used or intended to be used
by vehicular traffic or pedestrians, whether public or private. [Amended 1-10-
1995 by Ord. No. 879]
   STREET, HALF — A street of less than the required right-of-way and cartway
width.
   STREET LINE — The dividing line between a lot and the right-of-way of a
street, legally open and officially recorded by the Township.
   STREET, PRIMARY — A street carrying heavy traffic volumes of fast-moving
traffic.
   STREET, RESIDENTIAL — A street used primarily as the principal means of
access to adjacent residential properties and which carries a small volume of
traffic.
   STREET, SECONDARY — A street connecting resident streets to primary streets
and also used as the principal means of access to properties other than
residential.
   STRUCTURE — Any man-made object having an ascertainable stationary location
on or in land or water, whether or not affixed to the land. [Amended 1-10-1995
by Ord. No. 879]
   SUBDIVIDER — A person who is the registered owner or authorized agent of the
owner of land to be subdivided. When required, written evidence of
authorization satisfactory in form to the Township Solicitor shall be filed
with the application and plan when signed by an agent of the registered owner.
   SUBDIVISION — The division or redivision of a lot , tract or parcel of land
by any means into two or more lots , tracts, parcels or other divisions of
land, including changes in existing lot lines for the purpose, whether
immediate or future, of lease, partition by the court for distribution to heirs
or devisees, transfer of ownership or building or lot development ; provided,
however, that the subdivision by lease of land for agricultural purposes into
parcels of more than 10 acres, not involving any new street or easement of
access or any residential dwelling , shall be exempted. [Amended 1-10-1995 by
Ord. No. 879]
   SWALE — A low-lying stretch of land which intercepts, collects or carries
surface water runoff . [Amended 9-14-2004 by Ord. No. 1139]
   TOPSOIL — Surface soils and subsurface soils which presumably are fertile
soils and soil material, ordinarily rich in organic matter or humus debris.
“Topsoil” is usually found in the uppermost soil layer called the A Horizon.
   TREE — Any woody plant having a well-defined stem of at least two inches in
caliper measured at a height of six inches above the natural grade .
   USE — Any activity, occupation, business or operation carried on or intended
to be carried on in a building or other structure or on a tract of land.
   USE AREA — Any area of land that is given to one category of land use and is
used to compute the net density of that use .
   VEHICULAR USE AREA — Any pervious or impervious area used by any type of
vehicle, whether moving or at rest.
   VISUAL SCREEN — A barrier of living or nonliving landscape materials put in
place for the purpose of obscuring from view those areas so screened.
   WATERCOURSE — A channel or conveyance of surface water, such as a stream or
creek, having defined bed and banks, whether natural or artificial, with
perennial or intermittent flow. [Amended 9-14-2004 by Ord. No. 1139]
   YARD — An open, unoccupied space on the same lot with a building or
buildings or use , open and unobstructed from the ground to the sky, except for
vegetation.
1. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see
Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
2. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see
Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
3. Editor's Note: The definition of "Comprehensive Plan," which immediately
followed this definition, was deleted 1-10-1995 by Ord. No. 879
4. Editor's Note: The definition of "Official Street Map," which immediately
followed this definition, was deleted 1-10-1995 by Ord. No. 879.
5. Editor’s Note: These Standards are on file in the Public Works Department.
ARTICLE III
General Provisions
§ 212-6.   Compliance required.
No subdivision or land development of any lot , tract or parcel of land shall
be made, and no street , alley , sanitary sewer, storm drain, water main, gas,
oil and electric transmission line or other improvements in connection
therewith shall be laid out, constructed or dedicated for public use or travel
or for the common use of occupants of a building abutting thereon except in
strict accordance with this chapter.
§ 212-7.   Plan approval required.
[Amended 8-8-2006 by Ord. No. 1169; 6-14-2011 by Ord. No. 11-1240, § 2]
It shall be unlawful for the owner of any land in the Township to make a
subdivision or land development thereof or to construct, open or dedicate for
public use or travel or for the common use of occupants of buildings thereon
any street , sanitary sewer, storm drain, water main or other facilities in
connection therewith unless and until a plan thereof shall have been prepared
by a registered professional engineer or surveyor, submitted to and approved in
writing thereon by the Board of Commissioners, or, in the case of plans
providing only for a lot line change, by the Planning Commission . Before
approval, such plan shall be submitted to the Montgomery County Planning
Commission for review. Before approving a subdivision or land development plan
, the Board may, in its discretion, arrange for a public hearing with respect
thereto, after giving such notice thereof as it deems advisable. The Board may
require alterations, changes or modifications in accordance with the provisions
of this chapter which it deems necessary in such plans and may refuse its
approval until all such alterations, changes or modifications in the plan have
been made.
§ 212-8.   Dedication of improvements.
Streets , parks and other public improvements shown on a subdivision or land
development plan to be recorded shall be deemed to be offered for dedication to
the Township unless the owner notes on the plan that such improvements have not
been offered for dedication to the Township.
§ 212-9.   Official Map.
[Amended 1-10-1995 by Ord. No. 879]
After a subdivision or land development plan has been duly recorded, the
streets , parks and other public improvements shown thereon shall be considered
to be a part of the Official Map of the Township.
§ 212-10.   Ownership of improvements.
Every street , park or other improvement shown on a subdivision or land
development plan that is recorded as provided herein shall be deemed to be a
private street , park or improvement until such time as the same has been
offered for dedication and accepted or until it has been condemned for use as a
public street , park or other improvement. 6
6. Editor’s Note: Former Sec. 3.00, Subsection 6, Resubmission, which
immediately followed this section, was deleted 1-10-1995 by Ord. No. 879.
§ 212-11.   Prerequisites to sale or issuance of permit.
[Amended 2-13-1996 by Ord. No. 903; 6-14-2011 by Ord. No. 11-1240, § 3]
   A.   No lot in a subdivision or land development may be sold, no permit to
erect, alter or repair any building upon land in a subdivision or land
development may be issued and no building may be erected in a subdivision or
land development unless and until a subdivision or land development plan has
been approved and recorded and until the improvements required by the Board in
connection therewith have either been constructed or guaranteed as herein
provided.
   B.   No building permit for new construction within a proposed development
will be issued until a working hydrant is located within 500 feet of the
building which is the subject of the permit and until a passable roadway of a
stone base minimum, capable of supporting 40 tons, is constructed so that fire
equipment and emergency vehicles can access the proposed building . [Amended 6-
14-2011 by Ord. No. 11-1240]
§ 212-12.   Review of plans; appeals.
   A.   Plans of subdivisions or land development wherein lots abut existing
improved streets of sufficient width shall be subject to approval or rejection
by the Township Engineer . In the event that such a plan is disapproved, the
reasons therefor shall be set forth in writing and given to the applicant .
   B.   Any person aggrieved by the decision of the Township Engineer may
appeal to the Board , and such appeal shall be considered by it at its next
regular meeting.
§ 212-13.   Condominiums.
[Amended 1-10-1995 by Ord. No. 879]
The sale of dwelling or commercial units as condominiums under the Uniform
Condominium Act, 68 Pa.C.S.A. § 3101 et seq., shall be permitted in accordance
with Article V of this chapter, and no regulation within this chapter shall be
construed to prohibit the condominium form of ownership.
ARTICLE IV
Design Standards
§ 212-14.   General principles, requirements and standards. 
[Amended 6-14-2011 by Ord. No. 11-1240, § 4]
The following principles of subdivision and land development , general
requirements and minimum standards of design shall be observed by the applicant
in all instances:
   A.   All portions of a tract being subdivided shall be taken up in lots ,
streets , public lands or other proposed uses so that remnants and landlocked
areas shall not be created.
   B.   When only a portion of a tract is being reviewed relative to
subdivision and land development , but where future subdivision or development
is imminent, the applicant shall demonstrate that the remainder of the tract or
parcel may be subdivided or developed in conformance with the existing zoning
classification of land use in a logical and satisfactory manner, as a condition
of approval of his plan .
   C.   Whenever possible, applicants shall preserve trees , groves,
floodplains , riparian corridors , watercourses , scenic points, historic and
cultural resources and other community assets and landmarks. [Amended 9-14-2004
by Ord. No. 1139]
   D.   Subdivisions and land developments should be laid out so as to avoid
the necessity for excessive cut or fill unless specifically warranted by
terrain or location.
   E.   Land within the Floodplain Conservation District or any riparian
corridor shall not be subdivided or developed for any purpose or use except for
those uses permitted within the Floodplain Conservation District under
Chapter 255, Article XXII, Floodplain Conservation District. [Amended 9-14-2004
by Ord. No. 1139]
   F.   The standards included in these regulations are minimum design
requirements. However, the Board of Commissioners reserves the right in any
case to increase the same if conditions so warrant.
   G.   Where literal compliance with the standards hereinafter specified is
clearly impractical, the Board of Commissioners may modify or adjust the
standards to permit reasonable utilization of property while securing
substantial conformance with the objectives of the regulations.
   H.   Where no public water supply is available to the subdivision or land
development , the Board of Commissioners shall require the subdivider ,
developer or builder to obtain from the District Sanitarian of the Department
of Environmental Resources certificates of approval as to the quality and
adequacy of the water supply proposed to be utilized by the subdivider ,
developer or builder and approval of the type and construction methods to be
employed in the installation of the individual water supply system, in
accordance with current state regulations. If water is to be provided by means
other than by private wells owned and maintained by the individual owners of
lots within the subdivision or development , applicants shall present evidence
to the governing body or planning agency, as the case may be, that the
subdivision or development is to be supplied by a certificated public utility ,
a bona fide cooperative association of lot owners or by a municipal
corporation, authority or utility. A copy of a certificate of public
convenience from the Pennsylvania Public Utility Commission or an application
for such certificate, a cooperative agreement or a commitment or agreement to
serve the area in question, whichever is appropriate, shall be acceptable
evidence. [Amended 1-10-1995 by Ord. No. 879]
   I.   Where the subdivision or land development is inaccessible to sanitary
sewers, the Board of Commissioners shall require the subdivider , developer or
builder to obtain from the District Sanitarian of the Department of
Environmental Resources certificates of approval of the sewage disposal
facilities to be provided by the subdivider , developer or builder , in
accordance with current state regulations.
   J.   Applicants shall observe the ultimate rights-of-way for contiguous
existing streets as prescribed by the Township. Additional portions of the
corridors for such streets shall be offered to the government agency having
jurisdiction at the time the subdivision or land development is consummated.
Applicable building setback lines , as defined by
Chapter 255, Zoning, shall be delineated as measured from the ultimate right-
of-way . [Amended 1-10- 1995 by Ord. No. 879]
   K.   Proposed subdivision and land development shall be coordinated with the
existing nearby neighborhood so that the community as a whole may develop
harmoniously.
   L.   Areas provided or reserved for such community facilities shall be
adequate to provide for building  sites , landscaping and off-street parking as
appropriate to the use proposed. The Board of Commissioners reserves the right
to accept or refuse offers of dedication for public use .
   M.   Improvement construction requirements shall be completed under the
Engineering and Construction Standards of Upper Dublin Township, 7  the
specifications of the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation, Department of
Environmental Resources, the Montgomery County Conservation District or other
appropriate agencies or the specifications included herein, whichever
specifications shall result in the more favorable interpretation of this
Article.
   N.   Construction of facilities. The subdivider , developer or builder
shall, where specified by the Board of Commissioners, construct and install,
with no expense to the Township, the streets , curbs, sidewalks, water mains,
sanitary and storm sewers, streetlights, fire hydrants, street signs, shade
trees , monuments and other facilities and utilities specified in this Article.
Construction and installation of such facilities and utilities shall be subject
to inspection by appropriate Township officials during the progress of the
work, and the subdivider shall pay for inspection.
   O.   Sewage Facilities Planning. All construction projects that propose new
or expanded plumbing/sewage facilities require DEP review under the
Pennsylvania Sewage Facilities Act (Act 537). No final subdivision or land
development approval will be issued until sewage planning has been approved by
DEP through the issuance of a planning module approval or an exemption from
planning, or until DEP has issued a letter stating that sewage planning is not
required. [Added 6-14-2011 by Ord. No. 11-1240]
7. Editor’s Note: These Standards are on file in the Public Works Department.
§ 212-15.   Streets.
[Amended 11-14-1989 by Ord. No. 771; 1-10-1995 by Ord. No. 879; 9-23-2003 by
Ord. No. 1114; 9-14-2004 by Ord. No. 1136; 11-14-2006 by Ord. No. 1173; 11- 14-
2006 by Ord. No. 1174; 11-13-2007 by Ord. No. 1188, § 1; 6-14-2011 by Ord. No.
11-1240, § 5]
All new streets and widened portions of all existing rights-of-way intended for
public use shall be dedicated to the Township, subject to final acceptance
based on compliance with the following requirements: [Amended 11-13-2007 by
Ord. No. 1188]
   A.   Street system.
      (1)   Conformance with adopted plans . The proposed street pattern shall
be properly regulated to existing streets , to the Township plan of streets and
to such county and state road and highway plans as have been duly adopted by
the respective agency.
      (2)   Arrangement. Streets shall be arranged in a manner to meet with the
approval of the Board of Commissioners, considered in relation to both existing
and planned streets , and located so as to allow proper development of
surrounding properties. Secondary and through highways shall be connected with
such existing streets and highways so as to form continuations thereof.
Residential streets shall be laid out to discourage their use as secondary
streets or through highways.
      (3)   Conformity with topography. Streets shall be adjusted to the
contour of the land so as to produce usable lots and streets of reasonable
grade , alignment and drainage .
      (4)   Grading . The street shall be graded to the full width of the
right-of-way and provision made for slopes beyond the right-of-way in
conformance with the applicable standards .
      (5)   Provisions of streets for future development . Access shall be
given to all lots and portions of the tract in the subdivision and to adjacent
unsubdivided territory. Streets giving such access shall be improved to the
limits of the subdivision . Remnants, reserve strips and landlocked areas shall
not be created.
      (6)   New streets . New streets shall be laid out to continue existing
streets at equal or greater right-of-way and cartway width, where practical.
      (7)   Dead-end streets . Dead-end streets are prohibited, unless designed
as culs-de-sac or designed for access exclusively to neighboring tracts.
      (8)   Street names and signs. No street names shall be used which will
duplicate or be confused with the name of an existing street . All street names
are subject to the approval of the Board of Commissioners. Existing street
names shall be projected whenever possible. Signposts and nameplates, approved
by the Township, shall be placed at street intersections at the cost of the
developer .
      (9)   Obstructions. No fences, trees , hedges, walls, plantings or other
obstructions shall be located within or be permitted to grow into the right-of-
way . Sight distances at street and driveway intersections must be in
accordance with ECSIP 7.1 standards [Amended 6-14-2011 by Ord. No. 11-1240]
      (10)   Half streets . The dedication of half streets at the edges of a
new subdivision is prohibited. If circumstances render this impracticable,
adequate provision for the concurrent dedication of the remaining half of the
street must be furnished by the subdivider , developer or builder . When there
exists a half street in an adjoining subdivision , the remaining half shall be
provided by the proposed development .
      (11)   Setbacks. No street may be created within a tract that would
impose on an abutting property an increased setback requirement under the
provisions of
Chapter 255 of the Township Code.
   B.   Right-of-way width, paving width and curbing, street width, alley ,
street alignment and street intersection specifications shall be in accordance
with the Engineering and Construction Standards in force at the time and
available at the Township building , except as provided for below:
      (1)   Minor residential streets developed pursuant to the requirements of
the Open Space Preservation District shall have a right-of-way of not less than
34 feet and a paving width of not less than 18 feet. In all events, the right-
of-way shall extend no less than eight feet beyond both edges of the paving.
      (2)   Internal streets designed for two-way traffic, developed in a
compact, pedestrian oriented, residential development pursuant to the
requirements of the Mobile Home Development District, shall have a right-of-way
of not less than 40 feet and a paving width of not less than 22 feet. Internal
streets designed for one way traffic shall have a right-of-way of not less than
36 feet and a paving width of not less than 18 feet. In all cases, the right-
of-way shall extend a minimum of nine feet beyond both edges of the paving.
         (a)   The paving width for alleys with curbing in a compact,
pedestrian oriented, residential development shall be a minimum of 14 feet. If
curbing is not required by the Township Engineer for stormwater management
purposes, then the paving width may be reduced to 12 feet.
         (b)   The street centerline radii in a compact, pedestrian oriented,
residential development shall be a minimum of 50 feet.
[Amended 11-13-2007 by Ord. No. 1188]
   C.   Street paving. All street paving must conform to the Standards of Upper
Dublin Township 8  and be approved by the Township Engineer prior to acceptance
by the Board . All grades , horizontal curves, vertical curves, intersections,
sight distances and tangents shall conform to the requirements established by
this chapter and shall be subject to the approval of the Township Engineer .
   D.   Access to public and private streets .
      (1)   Each and every lot or development hereafter created or subdivided,
and each and every existing lot upon which a building is proposed to be erected
in the Township, shall abut a street which has been improved to Township
Standards for a public street unless the Board of Commissioners has granted a
conditional use pursuant to the provisions of
Chapter 255 for construction on a private street which has not been thus
improved.
      (2)   The Township will not assume responsibility for providing public
services, such as trash collection, snowplowing, road improvements or
maintenance on a private street . Trash collection and snowplowing services may
be requested and provided by the Township on condition that all owners of
property on the private street agree and the condition of the private street
conforms to guidelines established by the Public Works Department. Deed
restrictions covering the aforesaid shall be recorded against all properties on
a private street , with the owners whose lots front on the private street being
fully responsible for the maintenance and improvement of the street . Private
streets which exceed 500 feet in length shall have private hydrants installed
at such intervals as shall be mandated by the Fire Marshal for residential
streets .
   E.   The following lane configurations shall apply with respect to
Norristown Road, Welsh Road and Limekiln Pike in the Maple Glen Overlay
District, subject to PennDOT approval:
Roadway Feature Limekiln Pike Norristown Road
                (feet)        (feet)
Roadway Feature         Limekiln Pike Norristown Road
                        (feet)        (feet)
Left parking aisle      8             8
Left bike lane          4             4
Outer left travel lane  -             -
Inner left travel lane  12            12
Centerlane              10            10
Inner right travel lane 12            12
Outer right travel lane -             -
Right bike lane         4             4
Right parking aisle     8             8
 
7.1.   Upper Dublin Township’s most current Engineering Construction Standards
and Improvements Procedures.
8.   Editor’s Note: The Standards are on file in the Public Works Department.
§ 212-16.   Driveways.
[Amended 6-14-2011 by Ord. No. 11-1240, § 6]
   A.   Location and design.
      (1)   Intersections. Driveways shall be located not less than 40 feet
from the street intersection and shall provide access to the street of a lesser
classification when there are streets of different classes involved.
      (2)   Pavement widths and grade . Driveway paving widths and grades shall
be in accordance with the Standards. 9
      (3)   All driveways shall be located, designed and constructed in such a
manner as not to interfere or be inconsistent with the design, maintenance and
drainage of the highway.
      (4)   The Board of Commissioners shall have the authority to approve
driveways intended for the use of two or more families, apartment development ,
commercial and industrial projects where usage by the occupants constitutes
essentially a private street . Driveways constituting private streets are those
accessways used by two or more families daily or 10 or more workers daily for
vehicular circulation. Driveways serving as private streets shall not be
dedicated to the municipality, nor does the municipality assume any
responsibility for their maintenance.
      (5)   Location and placement of driveways serving as private streets
shall comply with Subsection A(1) of this section and with §
212-15D. Additionally, provisions for drainage and stormwater runoff shall be
approved by the Township Engineer . [Amended 1-10-1995 by Ord. No. 879]
      (6)   The Board of Commissioners shall evaluate the location, placement
and alignment of driveways serving as private streets based upon the ease of
accessibility to and efficient maneuverability through the development for
protective services of fire and police.
      (7)   All driveways must comply with the provisions and standards of
PADOT Chapter 441. [Added 6-14-2011 by Ord. No. 11-1240]
      (8)   All driveways must be offset a minimum of five feet from any
property line, unless approved as part of a SALDO application. [Added 6-14-2011
by Ord. No. 11-1240]
      (9)   All side entrance garages shall provide a minimum of 28 feet of
paving for adequate turnaround area. [Added 6-14-2011 by Ord. No. 11-1240]
   B.   Construction.
      (1)   Construction of driveways to be used as private streets shall
conform to minimum design standards for residential streets , other than those
standards applicable to rights-of-way , width, curbing and shoulder grading .
      (2)   The owner, and all successors, of any property which is to abut any
driveway serving as a private street shall be fully responsible for the
permanent improvement of the driveway (s) and for the maintenance thereof in a
good and safe condition.
      (3)   All driveways shall be constructed in accordance w/the standards .
[Added 6-14-2011 by Ord. No. 11-1240]
9.   Editor’s Note: The Standards are on file in the Public Works Department.
§ 212-17.   Parking areas.
[Amended 6-14-2011 by Ord. No. 11-1240, § 7]
   A.   Automobile parking facilities shall be provided off-street in
accordance with requirements of
Chapter 255, Zoning, and this chapter.
   B.   At no time shall angle or perpendicular parking along the curbs of
local, public or private access roads or streets be permitted. All parking lots
and bays allowing any parking other than parallel shall be physically separated
from the cartway by a minimum of seven feet and confined by barrier curbing.
   C.   No one area for off-street parking of motor vehicles, defined as the
parking spaces bounded by planting strips, within or adjacent to residential
uses shall exceed 36 cars in capacity. Separate parking areas on a parcel shall
be physically separated from one another by ten- foot planting strips. [Amended
6-14-2011 by Ord. No. 11-1240]
   D.   No less than 20 feet of open space shall be provided between the
curbline of any parking area and the outside wall of the building . [Amended 6-
14-2011 by Ord. No. 11-1240]
   E.   When common parking facilities are approved, subject to
Chapter 255, side and/or rear yard parking requirements may be waived in order
to establish unified and continuous parking areas. In such cases, access drives
and sidewalks shall be so aligned as to maximize parking efficiency and
minimize traffic congestion. Entrances and exits must have good visibility so
that, both going in and coming out, drivers can see and cars can be seen.
[Amended 6-14- 2011 by Ord. No. 11-1240]
   F.   A parking space available for the parking of one motor vehicle shall be
not less than 9 ½ feet in width and 19 feet in length, having an area not less
than 180.5 square feet. The length of a parking space may be reduced two feet,
provided that a motor vehicle may overhang that distance into the landscape
area. [Amended 2-13-1996 by Ord. No. 903; 9-14-1999 by Ord. No. 1005]
   G.   All dead-end parking lots shall be designed to provide sufficient
backup area for the end stalls.
   H.   No less than a five-foot radius of curvature shall be permitted for all
curblines in all parking areas.
   I.   Parking lot dimensions shall be no less than those listed in the
following table:
 
Angle of Parking  Parking Stall Aisle Width Width One-Way (feet) Two-Way (feet)
(degrees)         Depth (feet)  (feet)
90                19            9.5               24             24
60                21            9.5               18             20
45                19            9.5               15             18
 
*   The Township may require a minimum width of 10 feet in parking lots serving
high volume/high turnover commercial facilities such as supermarkets or
convenience stores.
[Amended 2-13-1996 by Ord. No. 903; 6-14-2011 by Ord. No. 11-1240]
   J.   Parking areas shall be constructed in accordance with the Standards. 10
   K   Crosswalks . Crosswalks for pedestrians shall be provided within parking
areas. [Added 6- 14-2011 by Ord. No. 11-1240]
10.   Editor’s Note: The Standards are on file in the Public Works Department.
§ 212-18.   Sidewalks.
[Amended 2-13-2007 by Ord. No. 1182, § 2; 6-14-2011 by Ord. No. 11-1240, § 8;
5-14-2013 by Ord. No. 13-1273, § 1]
   A.   Where required.
      (1)   Sidewalks shall be provided along all streets excepting where, in
the opinion of the Board , they are unnecessary for the public safety and
convenience, and where it can be demonstrated that the objectives of
Chapter 206, Article XI, Low-Impact Development Practices for Managing
Stormwater Runoff , and §
255-205 of the Open Space Preservation District will be furthered. [Amended 11-
14-2006 by Ord. No. 1173]
      (2)   In land developments with common areas, sidewalks shall be located
appropriately to serve as access between parking areas and buildings and in
common areas to serve as internal site circulation.
      (3)   Sidewalks, a minimum of five feet wide shall connect all
handicapped parking areas to building entrances, wherever practical. [Added 6-
14-2011 by Ord. No. 11-1240]
   B.   Width. Sidewalks shall not be less than five feet in width in
residential areas. A greater width may be required in areas in which apartments
or business buildings are located, or deemed necessary at the discretion of the
Board . Sidewalks in the DO Dresher Overlay District shall not be less that six
feet in width. [Amended 2-13-2007 by Ord. No. 1182; 6-14-2011 by Ord. No. 11-
1240; 5-14-2013 by Ord. No. 13-1273]
   C.   On public streets , sidewalks shall be located between the curb and
right-of-way line. In all districts sidewalks crossing driveways must be
compliant with ADA regulations. Sidewalks in the DO Dresher Overlay District
shall be located six feet from the curb or cartway if no curb is present, and a
planting strip shall be placed between the edge of the curb or cartway and edge
of sidewalk. [Amended 1-10-1995 by Ord. No. 879; 6-13-2000 by Ord. No. 1034; 5-
14-2013 by Ord. No. 13-1273]
   D.   Crosswalks . Crosswalks not less than 10 feet wide and with concrete or
asphalt paving not less than four feet wide may be required where necessary to
provide access to schools, churches, parks and commercial areas. They shall be
maintained by the abutting property owners in the same manner as sidewalks on
public streets .
   E.   Sidewalks shall be constructed in accordance with the Standards. 11 1
   F.   The following sidewalk and planting area configurations shall apply
along Norristown Road, Welsh Road and Limekiln Pike in the Maple Glen Overlay
District, subject to PennDOT approval: [Added 9-14-2004 by Ord. No. 1136]
 
Roadway Feature     Limekiln Pike Norristown Road
                    (feet)        (feet)
Left sidewalk       7             7
Left planting area  4             4
Right planting area 4             4
Right sidewalk      7             7
 
11.   Editor’s Note: The Standards are on file in the Public Works Department.
 
Notes
1    Editor’s Note: The Standards are on file in the Public Works Department.
§ 212-19.   Curbs.
[Amended 6-14-2011 by Ord. No. 11-1240, § 9]
   A.   Concrete curbs shall be installed along each side of every residential
, secondary or primary street and along every private street , access driveways
and parking areas in land developments .
   B.   The Board of Commissioners may waive the curbing requirement if the
developer can prove to the Township that a proposed system of well-designed
"swales or other facilities or practices can perform the drainage function
comparable to a system of curbs and inlets and that the appearance and
functioning of the roadway and parking lot system shall not be impaired by the
lack of curbing, or, where it can be demonstrated that the objectives of
Chapter 206, Article XI, Low-Impact Development Practices for Managing
Stormwater Runoff , and, with respect to Open Space Preservation District
developments , the objectives of §
255-205 will be furthered. [Amended 11-14-2006 by Ord. No. 1173]
   C.   Curbs shall be constructed in accordance with the Standards. 12
   D.   Curbs within non-dedicated roads or parking areas may have a six-inch
reveal, if approved by the Township Engineer . [Added 6-14-2011 by Ord. No. 11-
1240]
12.   Editor’s Note: The Standards are on file in the Public Works Department.
§ 212-20.   Blocks.
   A.   Length. In general, all blocks in a subdivision shall have a minimum
length of 500 feet and a maximum length of 1,200 feet, unless special
conditions warrant a variance.
   B.   Width. Whenever practicable, blocks shall be of such width as to
provide two tiers of lots of the minimum size permitted under the applicable
zoning classification, except in the case of lots along a major thoroughfare
where the lot fronts on an interior street .
   C.   Through lots . Double-frontage  lots are to be avoided and generally
will not be permitted except where reversed frontage is desired away from a
major thoroughfare to a street of lesser traffic volume.
   D.   Blocks . Blocks for commercial and industrial areas may vary from the
elements of design contained in this section if the nature of the use requires
other treatment. In such cases, off-street parking for employees and customers
will be required along with safe and convenient access to the street system.
Space for off-street loading will also be required with similar access.
Extension of streets , railroad access right-of-way and utilities shall be
provided. The amount of parking space shall be as required by
Chapter 255, Zoning.
§ 212-21.   Lots on public and private streets.
[Amended 11-14-1989 by Ord. No. 771; 6-14-2011 by Ord. No. 11-1240, § 10]
   A.   Depth. Lots excessively deep in relation to width are to be avoided. A
proportion of 2 ½ to 1 is generally regarded as proper maximum for lots 60 feet
or more in width.
   B.   Width. The minimum width of a lot shall be that width which is measured
between the points where the side yards meet the right of way line and
extending there from the full depth of the principal building on the lot , plus
an additional 25 feet. [Amended 6-14-2011 by Ord. No. 11-1240]
   C.   Corner lots . All corner lots shall be a minimum of 1 ½ times the
minimum width of the interior lots of the same block , except for lots 40,000
square feet or larger.
   D.   Frontage . Every lot shall have frontage along the right-of-way of a
public street or a private street and shall have the minimum lot width required
by
Chapter 255 of the Township Code on each street on which the lot abuts.
[Amended 9-23-2003 by Ord. No. 1114; 6-14-2011 by Ord. No. 11-1240]
   E.   Sidelines. Whenever practicable, the sidelines of a lot shall be set at
right angles or radial to the right-of-way line.
   F.   Lot numbers. For the purpose of development , each subdivision may have
an overall system of lot numbers, the number one being assigned to a lot in the
first section to be developed. (Such system of lot numbers shall not be
confused with the regular house or building numbering system based on a
Township-wide plan .)
   G.   Building numbers. House or building numbers shall be assigned by the
Township in accordance with the provisions of
Chapter 76, Numbering of Buildings , and shall be shown on the Record Plan .
[Amended 1-10-1995 by Ord. No. 879; 6-14-2011 by Ord. No. 11- 1240]
   H.   Excessively irregular. A lot may not be created which is excessively
irregular unless reasonably dictated by the topography of the land or other
natural feature. An excessively irregular lot is one which is not four sided or
which has a boundary line the length of which is more than 2.5 times the length
of the opposite or any adjacent boundary line. [Added 9- 23-2003 by Ord. No.
1114]
§ 212-22.   Existing structures.
   A.   No subdivision of land will be approved with the property line
extending through any portions of any existing structure .
   B.   If a structure is to remain:
      (1)   In residential zoning districts of the Township, the lot size and
the lot dimensions of the newly created lot containing the structures must be
in scale with the height and bulk of the structure even if this requires a lot
area and/or dimensions exceeding the minimum zoning requirement for that
district. Structures proposed on the vacant portions of lands being subdivided
shall conform to the extent possible with the height , bulk, building materials
and architectural character of the existing structures in the immediate
vicinity, and the subdivision  plans shall show building  plans at suitable
detail.
      (2)   In other zoning districts of the Township (especially commercial
and industrial districts), the subdivision of the land must provide adequate
service and parking facilities, etc., in keeping with the minimum requirements
of
Chapter 255, Zoning, for each lot and cumulatively for all lots in the
subdivision . No subdivision will be approved in such instances if the
servicing and/or parking facilities, etc., attendant to the existing structure
are deemed inadequate or would be considered to become inadequate with the
development of the now-vacant lands. Any new structures contemplated on the
newly subdivided parcels shall be in conformity with the existing structures in
the immediate vicinity to the extent possible in regards to height , bulk,
building material and architectural character, and the subdivision  plans shall
show building  plans at suitable detail.
      (3)   Alterations and replacements will be permitted within the existing
structure , but exterior extensions of the building must conform to the
requirements of
Chapter 255, Zoning.
§ 212-23.   Grading.
[Added 7-14-1998 by Ord. No. 973 ; Amended 6-14-2011 by Ord. No. 11-1240, § 11]
   A.   Topsoil preservation. No topsoil shall be removed from the site or used
as spoil. Topsoil must be removed from the areas of construction and stored
separately. Upon completion of the construction, the topsoil must be
redistributed on the site uniformly. All areas of the site shall be stabilized
by seeding or planting on slopes of less than 25% and shall be stabilized by
sodding on slopes of 25% to 33%, planted in ground cover , riprap or other
slope stabilizations as may be required by the Township Engineer on slopes of
greater than 33%. [Amended 6-14-2011 by Ord. No. 11-1240]
   B.   Excavation and fill . No permanent excavation or fill shall be made
with a face steeper in slope than three horizontal to one vertical, except
under one or more of the following conditions:
      (1)   The submission of a soils report prepared by a qualified engineer
or Geologist, experienced in soil exploration and licensed in the Commonwealth
of Pennsylvania stating that the material in which the excavation of fill is
made is sufficiently stable to sustain a slope of steeper than three horizontal
to one vertical may be submitted to the Township Engineer .
      (2)   A concrete or stone masonry wall designed by a qualified engineer ,
licensed in the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania and approved by the Township
Engineer , is provided to support the face of the excavation or fill .
[Amended 6-14-2011 by Ord. No. 11-1240]
   C.   Fills shall not encroach on watercourses , riparian corridors ,
stormwater management facilities or the Floodplain Conservation District.
[Amended 9-14-2004 by Ord. No. 1139]
   D.   Fills placed adjacent to watercourses , riparian corridors , stormwater
management facilities or the Floodplain Conservation District shall have
suitable protection against erosion and sedimentation . [Amended 9-14-2004 by
Ord. No. 1139]
   E.   Slopes and fences. The top or bottom edge of slopes shall be a minimum
of five feet from property or right-of-way lines of streets or alleys in order
to permit the normal rounding of the edge without encroaching on the abutting
property. All property lines (where walls or slopes are steeper than three
horizontal to one vertical and five feet or more in height ) shall be protected
by a chain link fence four feet in height approved by the Township. The fence
shall be an integral part of the wall.
   F.   Site  grading  plan . The Township Engineer shall require a grading
 plan in conjunction with the plan of subdivision or land development in order
to ensure compliance with the above standards .
§ 212-24.   Drainage.
[Amended 7-14-1998 by Ord. No. 973; 6-14-2011 by Ord. No. 11- 1240, § 12]
   A.   General provisions. All land development and subdivisions must be
designed in conformance with the provisions set forth in the Township Code,
Chapter 206, Stormwater Management.
   B.   Requirements. [Amended 7-14-1998 by Ord. No. 973; 9-14-2004 by Ord. No.
1139]
      (1)   When required. Stormwater management facilities shall be required
to be constructed by the subdivider to take stormwater runoff and surface water
from the bottom of vertical grades , the grades of which slope on both sides
toward the bottom; to lead water away from springs; and to avoid excessive use
of cross gutters at street intersections and elsewhere.
      (2)   Drainage . Drainage  easements shall be required along natural
watercourses to a minimum width of 25 feet from the center line and may be used
for storm and sanitary sewers and as open space . Where conditions warrant,
such as in floodplains and riparian corridors , additional width shall be
required in such cases where runoff treatment requires a wider easement .
Runoff studies must prove such requirements beyond the floodplain or riparian
corridor .
      (3)   Dedication. Where stormwater or surface water will be gathered
within the subdivision or land development and discharged or drained in volume
over lands within or beyond the boundaries of the subdivision or land
development , the subdivider , developer or builder shall reserve or obtain
easements over all lands affected. The easements shall be adequate for such
discharge of drainage and for carrying off of such water and for the
maintenance, repair and reconstruction of the same, including vehicles,
machinery and other equipment for such purposes, and which shall be of
sufficient width for such passage and work. The subdivider , developer or
builder shall convey, at no cost, the easements to the Township upon demand.
   C.   Design.
      (1)   Computations and design. All computations and design shall be in
accordance with the provisions set forth in Township Code,
Chapter 206, Stormwater Management. [Amended 7-14-1998 by Ord. No. 973]
      (2)   Size. Storm drains shall be adequate for the anticipated runoff
when the area is fully developed as permitted by zoning. They shall have a
minimum internal diameter of 18 inches and a minimum grade of ½ of 1%. [Amended
6-14-2011 by Ord. No. 11-1240]
      (3)   Change in direction. Manholes or inlets shall be constructed at all
changes in horizontal or vertical alignment.
      (4)   Stormwater roof drains. Direct connections of roof drains to
watercourses and stormwater management facilities are prohibited. Roof runoff
shall be infiltrated on site or conveyed into watercourses on the property or
to a stormwater management facility through vegetated conveyances. Discharges
from roof drains onto sidewalks, driveways or parking areas or into gutters are
prohibited. [Amended 9-14-2004 by Ord. No. 1139]
      (5)   Drainage from unnatural sources. Water originating from other than
natural sources, such as air-conditioning units, sump pumps or other dry
weather flow, wherever practicable, shall be connected to the storm drainage
system of the township or discharged into watercourses on the property, at the
direction of the Township Engineer . These facilities may not be used for
pollution matter. Water from swimming pools or similar uses containing chlorine
shall be pretreated to remove chlorine to acceptable limits prior to discharge
to a watercourse or a township storm sewer system. [Amended 9-14-2004 by Ord.
No. 1139]
      (6)   Streams and watercourses . Changes to natural streams shall be made
only when specifically applied for and approved. Realignment must conform to
proper hydraulic design and shall involve the dedication of rights-of-way of
adequate width to make feasible future maintenance. Approval of the
Pennsylvania Department of Environmen tal Protection will be required prior to
any stream changes. When submitting a plan involving the construction or
realignment of a watercourse , there shall be submitted, in duplicate, copies
of the designer’s hydraulic computations. It is the responsibility of any
person, corporation or other entity doing any act on or across a communal
stream, watercourse or swale or upon the floodplain or right-of-way during the
pendency of the activity and to return it to its original or equal condition
after such activity is completed. [Amended 6-14-2011 by Ord. No. 11-1240]
      (7)   Bridges and culverts. Bridges and culverts shall be designed to
meet current Pennsylvania Department of Transportation design criteria and
standards for construction and shall be constructed to the full width of the
right-of-way . Waterway openings for drainage areas exceeding ½ square mile
shall be approved by the Division of Dams and Encroachments, Pennsylvania
Department of Environmental Resources. When submitting a plan involving the
construction of bridges or culverts, there shall be submitted, in duplicate,
copies of the designer’s computations, both as to hydraulic and structural
design.
      (8)   Construction. All drainage facilities , including pipe, inlets,
manholes, endwalls, trenches, swales , ditches and incidental items of work,
shall be constructed in accordance with the Standards of Upper Dublin Township.
13
      (9)   All plans showing the proposed storm sewer construction must be
accompanied by a complete design submitted by the registered engineer or
surveyor.
      (10)   When subdivisions or land developments are submitted to the
township for approval in sections, a complete stormwater management design for
the proposed subdivision and land development shall be submitted. The proposed
design must include the entire tract and not just a portion. [Amended 9-14-2004
by Ord. No. 1139]
      (11)   If only a section of subdivision or land development is
contemplated for construction, the developer shall show how he proposes to
handle stormwater from this section in order to prevent damage to adjacent
properties. If temporary construction is required, the developer shall include
such structures in the plan submitted. In the event that such temporary
measures cannot ensure protection to adjacent properties, then the main outfall
line of the storm sewer shall be included as part of the construction for the
proposed section. 14
      (12)   No aboveground stormwater management structure, as defined by
Chapter 206, shall be located within 20 feet of any front, side or rear
property line, with the exception of stormwater discharge or conveyance swales.
[Added 4-12-2016 by Ord. No. 16-1316]
      (13)   No aboveground stormwater management structure, as defined by
Chapter 206, shall be located within 20 feet of any existing or proposed
building or structure. [Added 4-12-2016 by Ord. No. 16-1316]
13.   Editor’s Note: The Standards are on file in the Public Works Department.
14.   Editor’s Note: Former Sec. 4.11., Special Drainage Problems, Flood-Prone
Areas and Watercourses , which immediately followed this section, was deleted
1-10-1995 by Ord. No. 879. For current provisions, see
Ch. 122, Flood Damage Prevention.
§ 212-25.   Erosion and sediment control.
[Amended 6-14-2011 by Ord. No. 11-1240, § 13]
   A.   General provisions.
      (1)   For qualifying tracts, no changes shall be made in the contour of
the land and no grading , excavating, removal or destruction of the topsoil ,
trees or other vegetative cover of the land shall be commenced until such time
that a plan for minimizing erosion and sedimentation has been processed with
and reviewed by the Township Engineer or there has been a determination by the
Township Engineer that such plans are not necessary.
      (2)   A qualifying tract shall be a tract for which a permit is required
under
Chapter 99, Excavations ; provided, however, that the division of land for
agricultural purposes into parcels of more than 10 acres, not involving any new
street or easement of access, shall be exempted. [Amended 9-14-2004 by Ord. No.
1139]
      (3)   No subdivision or land development plan shall be approved unless:
         (a)   There has been a plan approved by the Board of Commissioners
that provides for minimizing erosion and sedimentation consistent with this
section and an improvement bond or other acceptable securities are deposited
with the Township in the form of an escrow guaranty which will insure
installation and completion of the required improvements ; or
         (b)   There has been a determination by the Township Engineer that a
plan for minimizing erosion and sedimentation is not necessary.
      (4)   Any development which creates a significant change in the
characteristics of the watershed, thus increasing volume and velocity of
surface water runoff, due to the decrease in retention and infiltration of
stormwater shall not be permitted until guaranties are made of improvements
that will reduce the likelihood of erosion , sedimentation , inundation and
water drainage from peak periods of precipitation and provide for controlled
disposal of excess surface water. Such improvements must satisfy the
requirements and regulations of the Pennsylvanian Department of Environmental
Resources.
      (5)   Plans for the control of erosion and to reduce sediment shall meet
the standards and specifications of the Montgomery County Soil and Water
Conservation District. The plans shall be submitted to the Montgomery County
District for its review and comment and shall be approved by the Township
Engineer .
      (6)   Whenever sedimentation is caused by stripping vegetation, regrading
or other development , it shall be the responsibility of the person,
corporation or other entity causing such sedimentation to remove it from all
adjoining surfaces, drainage systems and watercourses and to repair any damage
at his expense as quickly as possible.
      (7)   The subdivision or land development plan must comply with the
provisions of
Chapter 206, Stormwater Management, which is incorporated herein by reference.
[Added 11- 9-1999 by Ord. No. 1011]
   B.   Performance principles. The following measures are effective in
minimizing erosion and sedimentation and shall be included where applicable in
the control plan :
      (1)   Stripping of vegetation, regrading or other development shall be
done in such a way that will minimize erosion .
      (2)   Development plans shall preserve salient natural features, keep cut
-fill operations to a minimum and ensure conformity with topography so as to
create the least erosion potential and adequately handle the volume and
velocity of surface water runoff .
      (3)   Wherever feasible, natural vegetation shall be retained, protected
and supplemented.
      (4)   The disturbed area and the duration of exposure shall be kept to a
practical minimum.
      (5)   Disturbed soils shall be stabilized as quickly as practicable.
      (6)   Temporary vegetation and/or mulching shall be used to protect
exposed critical areas during development .
      (7)   The permanent (final) vegetation and structural erosion control and
drainage measures shall be installed as soon as practical in the development .
      (8)   Provisions shall be made to effectively accommodate the increased
runoff caused by changed soil and surface conditions during and after
development . Where necessary, the rate of surface water runoff will be
structurally retarded.
      (9)   Sediment in the runoff water shall be trapped until the disturbed
area is stabilized by the use of debris basins, sediment basins, silt traps or
similar measures.
   C.   Grading for drainage . In order to provide more suitable sites for
building and other uses , to improve surface drainage and to control erosion ,
the following requirements shall be met: [Amended 9-14-2004 by Ord. No. 1139]
      (1)   All lots , tracts or parcels shall be graded to provide proper
drainage away from buildings and dispose of it without ponding, and all land
within a development shall be graded to drain and dispose of surface water
without ponding, except where approved by the Board .
      (2)   All drainage provisions shall be of such design to adequately
handle the surface runoff and carry it to the nearest stormwater management
facility. Where drainage  swales are used to divert surface waters away from
building , they shall be sodded or planted as required and shall be of such
slope , shape and size as to conform to the requirements of the township.
      (3)   Excavations and fills .
         (a)   Cut and fill  slopes shall not be steeper than 3:1 unless
stabilized by a retaining wall or cribbing, except as approved by the Board
when handled under special conditions. [Amended 6-14-2011 by Ord. No. 11-1240]
         (b)   Adequate provisions shall be made to prevent surface water from
damaging the cut face of excavations or the sloping surfaces of fills .
         (c)   Cuts and fills shall not endanger adjoining property.
         (d)   Fill shall be placed and compacted so as to minimize sliding or
erosion of the soil.
         (e)   Fills shall not encroach on watercourses or other water bodies.
         (f)   Fills placed adjacent to watercourses and other water bodies
shall have suitable protection against erosion .
         (g)   Grading will not be done in such a way so as to divert water
onto the property of another landowner without the expressed consent of the
property owner and the Board .
         (h)   During grading operations, necessary measures for dust control
will be exercised.
         (i)   Grading equipment will not be allowed to cross through
watercourse . Provisions will be made for the installation of culverts or
bridges.
   D.   Responsibility.
      (1)   Whenever sedimentation is caused by stripping vegetation, regrading
or other development , it shall be the responsibility of the person,
corporation or other entity causing such sedimentation to remove it from all
adjoining surfaces, drainage systems and watercourses and to repair any damage
at his expense as quickly as possible.
      (2)   Maintenance of all drainage facilities and watercourses within any
subdivision or land development is the responsibility of the developer /
property owner/property owner’s association unless the drainage facilities and
watercourses and/or the maintenance thereof, are accepted by the Township or
some other official agency. [Amended 6-14-2011 by Ord. No. 11-1240]
      (3)   It is the responsibility of any person, corporation or other entity
doing any act on or across a communal stream, watercourse or swale or upon the
floodplain , riparian corridor or right-of-way thereof to maintain, as nearly
as possible, in its present state the stream, watercourse , swale , floodplain
, riparian corridor or right-of-way during the pendency of the activity and to
return it to its original or equal condition after such activity is completed.
[Amended 9-14-2004 by Ord. No. 1139]
      (4)   Maintenance of stormwater management facilities, watercourses or
other drainage facilities originating and completely on private property is the
responsibility of the owner to their point of open discharge at the property
line or at a communal watercourse within the property. [Amended 9-14-2004 by
Ord. No. 1139]
      (5)   No person, corporation or other entity shall block, impede the flow
of, alter, construct any structure or deposit any material or thing or commit
any act which will affect normal or flood flow in any communal stream or
watercourse without having obtained prior approval from the Township or
Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Resources, whichever is applicable.
      (6)   Where a subdivision is traversed by a watercourse or other waters
of the common wealth, there shall be provided a drainage  easement as required
by §
212-24 of this chapter. [Amended 9-14-2004 by Ord. No. 1139]
      (7)   Each person, corporation or other entity which makes any surface
changes shall be required to: [Amended 9-14-2004 by Ord. No. 1139]
         (a)   Manage stormwater runoff as required by
Chapter 206 and other applicable sections of the Code.
      (8)   It shall be the obligation of every property owner to maintain his
property in such manner so as to permit at all times the free flow of water
through any drain, ditch, stream, swale , stormwater management facility, or
watercourse , whether natural or man-made, occupying such land, including the
removal of any trees , bushes, undergrowth, tree limbs, trash or debris which
might interfere with the free flow of water in the event of a storm. [Amended
9-14-2004 by Ord. No. 1139]
      (9)   To the extent that a property owner fails to maintain his property
in such manner so as to permit at all times the free flow of water, the
township shall exercise its discretion to take action as necessary to ensure
the free flow of water. [Amended 9-14-2004 by Ord. No. 1139]
      (10)   The Township shall be required to:
         (a)   Assess and collect the cost of off-site improvements to the
common natural watercourse except those required to existing state roads.
Collection may be delayed until the assessed land is approved for developments
.
         (b)   Acquire easements for such common natural watercourse
 improvements .
         (c)   Supervise such improvement to completion.
   E.   Compliance with regulations and procedures.
      (1)   The Board of Commissioners, in its consideration of all preliminary
plans of subdivision and land development , shall condition its approval upon
the execution of erosion and sediment control measures as contained in
Subsections B, C and D of this section. 15
      (2)   Stream channel construction on watersheds with drainage areas in
excess of 320 acres, or in those cases where downstream hazards exist, will
conform to criteria established by the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental
Resources.
      (3)   Final plans for minimizing erosion and sedimentation as approved
will be incorporated into the agreement and bond requirements as required under
Subsection A(3) of this section.
      (4)   The approval of plans and specifications for the control of erosion
and sedimentation shall be concurrent with the approval of the final plans of
subdivision or land development and becomes a part thereof.
      (5)   At the time that a building permit is applied for, a review shall
be conducted by the Township Engineer to ensure conformance with the plan as
approved. During the construction, further consultative technical assistance
will be furnished, if necessary, by the Township Engineer and the Montgomery
County Soil and Water Conservation District. During this development phase, the
Township Engineer shall inspect the development  site and enforce compliance
with the approved plans .
      (6)   Permission for clearing and grading prior to recording of plans may
be obtained under temporary easements or other conditions satisfactory to the
Board of Commissioners.
      (7)   In the event that the developer proceeds to clear and grade prior
to recording of the plans or without satisfying conditions specified under
Subsection E(6), the Board may revoke the approval of the preliminary plan .
15.   Editor’s Note: Former Subsection 5(b), concerning the specifications for
installation and design of the required measures, which immediately followed
this subsection, was deleted 1-10-1995 by Ord. No. 879.
§ 212-26.   Sanitary sewers and on-site disposal.
[Amended 6-14-2011 by Ord. No. 11- 1240, § 14]
   A.   General provisions. This section shall be applicable to all
subdivisions and land develop ment, whether utilizing public or private streets
; or driveways serving as private streets ; and in the case of a subdivision or
land development utilizing private streets , the subdivider or applicant shall
execute recordable covenant with the Township that, for the purposes of sewer
connections, assessments and rentals, the rights and liabilities of himself and
his grantees, heirs, successors and assigns shall be the same as if his
property abutted a public street .
   B.   Sewers.
      (1)   Whenever practicable, sanitary sewers shall be installed and
connected to a public sanitary sewer system following review of plans and
approval by the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection (DEP). In
areas not presently served by public sanitary sewers, appropriate sewage
disposal must be provided in accordance with the regulations of the DEP and, in
addition, the installation and capping of sanitary sewer mains and house
laterals may be required if studies by the Township indicate that extension of
public sanitary sewer trunks or laterals to serve the property subdivided
appears probable or necessary to protect public health. [Amended 10-8- 2002 by
Ord. No. 1094; 6-14-2011 by Ord. No. 11-1240]
      (2)   When consistent with the Township Sewage Facilities Plan, a
sanitary sewer system, with connection to each building in a subdivision or
land development , shall be installed at the expense of the applicant or
subdivider and connected to a public sanitary sewer system. [Amended 10-8-2002
by Ord. No. 1094]
      (3)   When not consistent with the Township Sewage Facilities Plan, the
applicant must request a revision to the plan in accordance with Act 537, the
Pennsylvania Sewage Facilities Act, in order to allow installation of a sewer
system. 16
      (4)   If outfall sewers are not available in the vicinity, but are
considered reasonably necessary in the near future by the Township for the area
in question, a system of sewers, together with all necessary laterals extending
from mains to the street  right-of-way line, shall be installed at the expense
of the subdivider or applicant . The sewer lines shall be suitably capped at
the limits of the subdivision or land development , and the laterals shall be
capped at the right-of-way line. The sewer installation shall include the
construction within rights-of-way or easements to bring the sewer to the future
connection with a public sanitary sewer system. [Amended 10-8-2002 by Ord. No.
1094]
      (5)   If sanitary sewers are not to be installed at the time of
subdivision , developers shall grant, reserve and set aside easements in the
streets and roads for installation and maintenance of sewer lines at such time
that the subdivision or land development shall be a part of a public sanitary
sewer system. [Amended 10-8-2002 by Ord. No. 1094]
      (6)   A sewer shall be considered to be planned for extension to a given
area any time after preliminary engineering and related studies have been
completed and the construction of facilities adequate to serve the area
containing the subdivision has been programmed for completion within a
reasonable time.
      (7)   When capped sewers are provided, on-site disposal facilities shall
also be provided.
      (8)   All sanitary sewer systems located in flood-prone areas, whether
public or private, shall be floodproofed in accordance with the provisions of
Chapter 122, Flood Damage Prevention. [Amended 1-10-1995 by Ord. No. 879]
   C.   Design and construction.
      (1)   The design and construction of the sanitary sewer system, including
size and grade of sewer pipe, manholes, laterals, pumping stations, trenches
and all appurtenant work thereto, shall be in accordance with the Standards of
the Bucks County Water and Sewer Authority and the PADEP. [Amended 10-8-2002 by
Ord. No. 1094]
      (2)   Laterals. Lateral connections to each lot shown on the final plan
shall be installed 10 feet past the right-of-way line of the street prior to
paving. Each building shall have a separate connection to the sanitary sewer
system. [Amended 6-14-2011 by Ord. No. 11-1240]
      (3)   (Reserved) 17
      (4)   The sanitary sewer system shall be tested in accordance with the
Standards of the Bucks County Water and Sewer Authority and shall be approved
by the Township Engineer before buildings are permitted to be connected to the
laterals. [Amended 10- 8-2002 by Ord. No. 1094]
   D.   On-lot disposal system. If public sewage disposal is not available and
the sewage treatment is on a project or individual lot basis, such private
facilities must be installed by the subdivider , developer or builder in
accordance with the provisions of Act 537, the Pennsylvania Sewage Facilities
Act. 18
      (1)   The “usable area” for sewage disposal shall be shown on the
preliminary plan for each lot . The “usable area” shall be situated beyond the
radius of the water supply well and shall conform to all rules and regulations
or future amendments thereto of the DER and Upper Dublin Township.
      (2)   Proximity to wells. In no instance shall a septic tank, tile field
or other effluent disseminating system be located uphill from a drilled well,
and it shall not be closer to it than 100 feet, and 10 feet from any dwelling
or property line.
16.   Editor’s Note: See 35 P.S. § 750.1 et seq.
17.   Editor’s Note: Former Subsection C(3), Pumping station, was repealed 10-
8-2002 by Ord. No. 1094.
18.   Editor’s Note: See 35 P.S. § 750.1 et seq.
§ 212-27.   Water supply.
[Amended 6-14-2011 by Ord. No. 11-1240, § 15]
   A.   The subdivider shall provide public water service to provide adequate
supply to each lot in a subdivision . The public water system shall be designed
to provide a loop system wherever possible, unless the developer can prove the
construction of a loop system will be an undue hardship.
   B.   Where no public water service is available and it would be an undue
hardship for the subdivider to have the public water service extended, the
subdivider may, on approval of the Board of Commissioners, be permitted to
construct a well on each lot . All wells shall be constructed according to
present rules and regulations, or any future amendments thereto, of the
Department of Environmental Resources and
Chapter 255, Zoning.
   C.   The proposed location of the wells shall be shown on the preliminary
plan for each lot . Where there are existing wells on the property or adjoining
lots , they must also be shown.
   D.   A circular area with a radius conforming to the rules and regulations,
or future amendments thereto, of the State Department of Environmental
Resources and the Township shall be shown around each well to denote clear
space in which no sewage system is to be located.
   E.   Where public water service is furnished, the circles are not necessary,
with the exceptions of those wells lying immediately adjacent to the
subdivision . However, the usable area is limited by a clear zone surrounding
the water service line to each house as required by the State Department of
Health and the Township.
   F.   Hydrants. Fire hydrants shall be located at accessible points
throughout the subdivision when public water supply is available. The fire
hydrants shall be located in accordance with the rules and regulations of the
Upper Dublin Fire Marshal. [Amended 6-14-2011 by Ord. No. 11-1240]
§ 212-28.   Utilities.
   A.   All electric, telephone and communication service facilities, both main
and service lines, shall be provided by underground cables, installed in
accordance with the prevailing standards and practices of the utility or other
companies providing such services, except where it is demonstrated to the
satisfaction of the Board of Commissioners that the underground installation
herein required is not feasible because of the physical condition of the lands
involved. All main underground cables which are within the right-of-way of a
street shall be located as specified by the Board of Commissioners.
   B.   Easements for utilities. Easements having a minimum width of seven feet
shall be provided along the rear of lots for use of utility companies for
constructing, operating and maintaining facilities utilizing overhead pole line
construction, where said overhead line(s) are permitted.
§ 212-29.   Streetscape improvements
[Amended 6-13-2000 by Ord. No. 1034; 9-14-2004 by Ord. No. 1136; 6-14-2011 by
Ord. No. 11-1240, § 16]
   A.   Street lighting shall be installed in each subdivision by and at the
expense of the developer and in accordance with a plan approved by the
Township. In the DO Dresher Overlay District, street lighting shall be model
“Old Town No. A850 SR,” as manufactured by Sternberg Vintage Lighting, or equal
as approved by the Board of Commissioners. Poles for light fixtures shall be
model 5700-KP as manufactured by Sternberg Vintage Lighting, or approved equal.
[Amended 6-14-2011 by Ord. No. 11-1240]
   B.   Streetlighting and street furniture in the Maple Glen Overlay District
shall conform to the following standards :
 
Item             Manufacturer   Model         Notes          Installation
Bike rack        Concept Urbain T-20
Bollard          Spring City    Reston
                                              Full vertical  Shroud lamp to
Light: luminar   Spring City    Van Buren     cutoffs and    block glare from
                                              conceal lamp   adjacent windows
Light: lamp post Spring City    Madison Flair
                                Top
Trash/recycling  Victor Stanley 43
receptacle
Bench            Victor Stanly  TK 8292-72    Natural finish Bolted down to
                                                             ground
 
§ 212-30.   Survey monuments.
   A.   Monuments shall be of stone or concrete and located on the right-of-way
lines at corners, angle points, beginning and end of curves and as otherwise
required. Monuments shall be indicated on all plans . They shall be placed
after a new street has been completed. A certified copy of this referenced
information shall be given to the Township Engineer . Permanent reference
monuments of case concrete or durable stone 20 inches by 4 inches by 4 inches
with forty-five-degree beveled edges shall be set by the subdivider , developer
or builder at all corners and angle points of the boundaries of the original
tract to be subdivided and at all street intersections and intermediate points
as may be required.
   B.   Staking requirements. All lots shall be staked by the registered
engineer or surveyor for the subdivider when final grading has been completed.
This stakeout shall be visible and completed before an owner or occupant moves
into the property. All lot corner markers shall be permanently located and
shall be at least five-eighths-inch metal pin with a minimum length of 24
inches, located in the ground to existing grade .
§ 212-31.   Natural or historic feature preservation.
Where the applicant is offering for dedication or is required by ordinance to
establish a reservation of open space or preserve an area of scenic or historic
importance, a “limit of contract” which will confine excavation , earthmoving
procedures and other changes to the landscape will be required to ensure
preservation and prevent destruction of the character of the area in open space
.
§ 212-32.   Landscaping.
[Amended 9-10-1991 by Ord. No. 806; 12-13-1994 by Ord. No. 878; 11-13-2007 by
Ord. No. 1188, § 2; 6-14-2011 by Ord. No. 11-1240, § 17; 5-14-2013 by Ord. No.
13-1272, §§ 1–4; 1-8-2019 by Ord. No. 19-1347, §§1, 2]
   A.   Intent. The intent of these regulations is to promote practical,
sustainable, and orderly community development by minimizing tree loss and
adding new trees and plants; minimizing soil erosion and sedimentation and
stimulating groundwater recharge; preventing and reducing light and heat
pollution; stimulating air purification and oxygen regeneration; providing for
noise abatement and visual buffering; maintaining and conserving the Township’s
natural amenities; and to provide for the harmonious development of contiguous
properties in different zoning districts. This intent shall be achieved by
requiring certain minimum landscaping requirements for all land developments
and subdivisions . [Amended 6-14-2011 by Ord. No. 11-1240]
   B.   General landscape requirements.
      (1)   The provisions in these regulations are not intended to restrict
existing residential owners from planting or removing trees and shrubs from
their property, except in the case of effective property line screening and
bufferings. [Amended 6-14-2011 by Ord. No. 11-1240]
      (2)   The standards of design for this section should be used to judge
the adequacy of subdivision or land development proposals. Where, in the
opinion of the Township Commissioners, the literal application of these
standards in certain cases would work undue hardship, they may recommend
reasonable exceptions as will not be contrary to the public interest. The Board
of Commissioners may modify or adjust the standards to permit reasonable
utilization of property while securing substantial conformance with the
objectives of the regulations.
      (3)   The standards included in these regulations are minimum design
requirements. The Board of Commissioners reserves the right to request that the
landscaping in any plan exceed the requirements listed herein if conditions so
warrant.
      (4)   It is required that all Landscape Plans be prepared and sealed by a
landscape architect registered by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania and familiar
with this section in order to promote the proper use and arrangement of plant
materials. The seal may be omitted for a two-lot  subdivision . These Plans
shall be reviewed by the staff and consultants and voted upon by the Township
Board of Commissioners. [Amended 6- 14-2011 by Ord. No. 11-1240]
      (5)   Required plant material shall be planted prior to the issuance of a
permanent use and occupancy permit. In lieu of planting due to seasonal
constraints, the locations of plantings will be staked, and the developer or
landowner will be required to submit to the Township an agreement signed by the
purchaser at the time of settlement. This agreement will indicate that the
purchaser understands and acknowledges that the stakes indicate the locations
of trees to be planted and that the trees will be planted by the developer or
landowner as soon as the weather permits but no longer than six months after
the date of the agreement. [Amended 6-14-2011 by Ord. No. 11-1240]
      (6)   All plant material shall meet the standards of the American
Standard for Nursery Stock by the American Association of Nurserymen, or most
recent edition. [Amended 6-14-2011 by Ord. No. 11-1240]
      (7)   All plant material shall be installed in accordance with the
Township’s planting standards and specifications. [Amended 6-14-2011 by Ord.
No. 11-1240]
      (8)   All plant materials shall be guaranteed for a period of 18 months
following final approval by the Township, except where otherwise noted in this
section. Any plant material that has 25% or greater dead branches shall be
considered dead. A tree shall be considered dead when the main leader has died
or 25% of the crown is dead. Any dead material shall be replaced and installed
according to approved planting practices.
      (9)   The Township shall make a final inspection for acceptance at the
end of the guaranty period. This inspection will be performed when plant
materials are in full leaf only (May 1 through November 15). All guaranty
escrow funds will be released upon acceptance following the end of the guaranty
period. [Amended 6-14-2011 by Ord. No. 11-1240]
      (10)   Non-conforming uses , special exceptions and conditional uses .
Whenever there is a non- conforming use , special exception or conditional use
, the use shall comply with the more restrictive landscape requirements for
either the land use or the zoning district in which it is located. [Amended 6-
14-2011 by Ord. No. 11-1240]
      (11)   Redevelopment/retrofits of existing non-residentially used lots .
If only a portion of an existing non-residentially used parcel is being
redeveloped/renovated, then only the area being redeveloped/renovated shall be
required to comply with the provisions of this Section proportionately.
[Amended 6-14-2011 by Ord. No. 11-1240]
      (12)   All landscape material to be installed shall account for the
growth, size and pattern to allow adequate area and spacing at maturity. [Added
6-14-2011 by Ord. No. 11-1240]
      (13)   All plantings shall be arranged to provide clear sight triangles
at street intersections and shall not obstruct any sight distance requirements.
The clear sight triangles shall be 100 feet at primary or lesser street
classifications and shall be 125 feet on arterial or greater street
classifications. [Added 6-14-2011 by Ord. No. 11-1240]
   C.   When a landscape plan is required. A landscape plan shall be submitted
with all preliminary and final land development plans and subdivision
applications. [Amended 6-14-2011 by Ord. No. 11-1240]
   D.   Definitions. Unless otherwise expressly stated, for the purposes of
these regulations, the following terms shall have the following meanings:
      CALIPER — The dimension of a trunk diameter measured six inches above
grade for trees four inches in diameter or less, and at 12 inches above grade
for trees greater than four inches in diameter. Such measurements apply to
trees to be planted as a component of the landscape plan .
      DIAMETER — The dimension of a trunk of an existing tree measured outside
edge to outside edge of the bark and at breast height (4 feet) above grade .
      DECIDUOUS — The type of tree or shrub drops or sheds its foliage in the
fall and grows new leaves in the spring.
      EVERGREEN — A tree or shrub that does not drop its foliage in the fall
and generally maintains a green color year round.
      FLOWERING/UNDERSTORY TREE — Generally a small or mid-sized tree commonly
inhabiting the understory layer.
      LANDSCAPE PLAN — A plan developed expressly for showing the location,
size, quantity and species of existing and proposed plant material, to include
trees , shrubs , ground cover , seeding and sodding. Information shall include
planting details, plant schedules and general notes and specifications
pertaining to installation and maintenance of the plant material.
      MONOCULTURE — A planting of trees or shrubs that is comprised of the same
species for each installed element as determined by its Latin name.
      NATURALIZED LANDSCAPE — An established assemblage of plant material that
utilizes all native trees , plants and grasses that are suitable to the
physical and natural conditions of the site or site  improvement .
      SCREEN BUFFER — A perimeter landscape planting for the purposes of
providing a formal separation between neighboring uses . Such a buffer may be
required if the new land development or land uses are the same as the adjacent
zoning or land use . A screen buffer is intended to be comprised of evergreen
species and to be an impenetrable visual screen after five years. It is not
intended to be a monoculture of one plant species.
      SHADE/CANOPY TREE — A tree , typically deciduous with a single straight
trunk that matures to a height of 40+ feet which results in it becoming part of
the canopy or uppermost layer.
      SOFTENING BUFFER — A perimeter landscape planting for the purpose of
providing an informal separation between neighboring uses . It shall utilize a
mix of deciduous and evergreen trees and shrubs per the requirements in Table 1
19 and is not intended to be an impenetrable visual screen .
      STREET TREE — A shade/canopy tree with a single trunk located adjacent to
a street , road or pedestrian right of way and outside the street  right-of-way
with distances as specified in this section of the Code.
[Amended 6-14-2011 by Ord. No. 11-1240]
   E.   Information required to be shown on the landscape plan .
      (1)   The landscape plan submission shall show the following existing and
proposed information:
         (a)   Plan scale, date, north arrow and location map with zoning
district designations and current land use (s) for the site and all adjacent
properties. [Amended 6-14-2011 by Ord. No. 11-1240]
         (b)   Property lines, setback lines, easements and rights-of-ways. 
[Amended 6-14-2011 by Ord. No. 11-1240]
         (c)   Location of the footprints for all buildings . [Amended 6-14-
2011 by Ord. No. 11-1240]
         (d)   Location of all roads, parking, service areas and other
impervious or porous site  improvements . [Amended 6-14-2011 by Ord. No. 11-
1240]
         (e)   Location of all outside storage and trash/recyclable receptacle
areas. [Amended 6-14-2011 by Ord. No. 11-1240]
         (f)   Locations of sidewalks, berms, fences, walls, freestanding signs
and site lighting.
         (g)   Locations of all underground, surface and above grade utilities,
such as sanitary and storm sewers, water, electric, cable, TV, data lines,
utility easements , transformers, hydrants, manholes, inlets and mechanical
equipment. [Amended 6-14-2011 by Ord. No. 11-1240]
         (h)   Location, diameter, and species of existing individual trees
with trunks eight inches or more in diameter. Trees in hedge rows, groves or
woodlands with trunk diameters of eight inches or more may be shown by
indicating the outer canopy edge or drip line of the tree grouping. Existing
trees shown as masses must be labeled with an approximate quantity as counted
or calculated. The total number of existing trees shall be included on the
Plan. If the site contains 20 or more trees , then a separate tree survey plan
showing the location and diameter of individual trees over eight inches in
diameter is to be included. The tree survey plan is to be at the same scale of
the site  plan as submitted. The drawing is to be sealed by a professional land
surveyor or registered landscape architect. [Amended 6-14-2011 by Ord. No. 11-
1240]
         (i)   A schedule listing existing trees eight inches or greater in
diameter to be removed by the proposed development. The schedule shall indicate
the botanical and common name, height, spread, diameter, quantity and special
remarks for all trees proposed for removal. [Amended 6-14-2011 by Ord. No. 11-
1240]
         (j)   A planting schedule listing all new plant materials (trees ,
shrubs and ground cover ) proposed to be installed as part of the project. This
schedule shall indicate the botanical and common name, height, spread, caliper,
quantity and special remarks for all proposed plant materials. Symbols may be
utilized in the planting schedule and on the landscape plan to simplify and
clarify the plan . [Amended 6-14-2011 by Ord. No. 11-1240]
         (k)   Plans shall be drawn to a scale of not less than one inch equals
40 feet (1"=40') and shall show all existing and proposed contours at two-foot
intervals. [Amended 6-14-2011 by Ord. No. 11-1240]
         (l)   Details and specifications for the planting and staking of trees
, the planting of shrubs , establishment of ground covers by seed and/or plug,
and installation of any hardscape or landscape features, including landscape
furnishings such as benches, bike racks, bollards , etc. [Amended 6-14-2011 by
Ord. No. 11-1240]
         (m)   Existing natural features, such as streams and creeks, water
bodies, floodplains , wetlands, rock outcroppings and slopes in excess of 25%.
[Amended 6-14-2011 by Ord. No. 11-1240]
         (n)   Location of all proposed plant materials to include trees ,
shrubs , ground cover , including perennials, annuals, meadow and/or lawn.
[Amended 6-14-2011 by Ord. No. 11-1240]
         (o)   Information in the form of notes or specifications pertaining to
planting and lawn areas. Such information shall specify the quality
requirements and material for planting and staking, seeding, sodding, ground
cover establishment, mulching and the like. [Amended 6-14-2011 by Ord. No. 11-
1240]
         (p)   Using a graphic symbol, the limits and details of temporary tree
protection fencing proposed to protect existing trees and shrubs from equipment
damage during construction. [Amended 6-14-2011 by Ord. No. 11-1240]
         (q)   Interior parking lot green space calculations for parking lots
larger than 5,000 square feet shall have a minimum landscape area of 10%. The
area of the parking lot shall be measured from five feet outside the edge of
the paving, or face of curb, where applicable, if the outside area is planted
or turfed. Green space may include tree islands, rain gardens, planted or
turfed corners and the outside perimeter of parking lots if they are planted or
turfed. Green space to be considered shall be depicted graphically on the plan
and the calculation shall appear on the drawings in the following form:
 
Total Green Space                  Parking Lot Area                   Percent of Parking Lot
                                                                      Devoted to Green Space
            square feet             square feet               .         %
(numerator)                        (denominator)
 
[Amended 6-14-2011 by Ord. No. 11-1240]
         (r)   A table showing compliance with each section of the Code is
required. Landscape plans shall use symbols or labels to indicate which plant
material meets which code requirement. [Amended 6-14-2011 by Ord. No. 11-1240]
   F.   Specific planting requirements. Street  trees , softening buffers ,
screen buffers , general on-site screening, parking area landscaping, detention
basin landscaping and individual lot landscaping shall be provided according to
the following standards :
      (1)   Street  trees .
         (a)   When required.
            [1]   Street  tree planting requirements applicable to each zoning
district are listed in Table 1. 19.1
            [2]   Street  trees shall be required for any subdivision or land
development where suitable street  trees do not exist. Areas requiring such
street  trees shall include:
               [a]   New streets .
               [b]   New sidewalks or pedestrian ways.
               [c]   Existing streets , sidewalks, pedestrian ways, highways,
bicycle trails or pathways when they abut or lie within the subdivision or land
develop ment.
               [d]   Access driveways to residential developments serving three
or more single-family residences.
               [e]   Access driveways to nonresidential developments .
         (b)   Location.
            [1]   Street  trees shall be spaced to permit the healthy growth of
each tree . In no instance shall they be closer than 50 feet on center nor
further than 75 feet on center for each side of the street . The length of
frontage may be reduced for calculation purposes by the right of way of
intersecting street (s).
            [2]   Street  trees shall be planted no closer than two feet nor
more than 15 feet outside the street  right-of-way , as measured to the center
of the trunk; street  trees shall be planted no closer than eight feet to any
public sidewalk.
            [3]   At intersections, trees shall be located no closer than 40
feet from the intersection of the curbs and must be outside the clear sight
triangle .
            [4]   Where trees exist along a roadway, existing healthy shade
trees over eight inches in diameter within 20 feet of the curb face or edge of
pavement may be counted toward the street  tree requirement. Where existing
street  trees are over 75 feet apart, new shade trees shall be planted between
these existing trees at a spacing of no greater than 75 feet on center and no
less or closer than 25 feet to any existing tree .
            [5]   Street  trees may be grouped (in groups of three or more) or
planted in an informal arrangement, if appropriate to the area. The number of
trees as calculated by the above standard shall be equal or greater quantity
and may be spaced a minimum of 40 feet on center with appropriate species and
with no spacing or gaps between tree groupings greater than 150 feet.
            [6]   Street  trees shall not be planted over underground utilities
or beneath overhead utility lines. If utility lines are present or proposed,
the street  trees shall be shown at a distance of no less than 10 feet nor more
than 25 feet from the center line of the overhead or underground utility. Where
this is not possible due to space limitations or other reasons, the species of
street tree shall be changed to a species that grows to a lower mature height
as recommended by the Township consultants.
         (c)   Plant material requirements (size, type and quality standards ).
            [1]   Street  trees shall be a minimum of two and one half inches
in caliper. Trees shall meet the general specifications for height and spread
in relationship to caliper for shade trees as stated in the American Standard
for Nursery Stock by the American Association of Nurserymen. All branches shall
be pruned to a clearance height of seven feet above the ground No side
branching on tree trunks will be allowed below six feet eight inches from the
ground. Trees shall have a single, straight trunk and central leader and be
free of disease and mechanical damage. Tree leaders shall not be cut.
Recommended street  tree species are found in Subsection I, Recommended plant
list.
[Amended 6-14-2011 by Ord. No. 11-1240]
      (2)   Softening buffer .
         (a)   When required.
            [1]   Softening buffer planting requirements applicable to each
zoning district or land use are listed in Table 1 at the end of this chapter.
            [2]   A softening buffer is required along the perimeter of a site
proposed for land development or subdivision . Existing healthy trees and
shrubs meeting the requirements of Table 1 19.2 may be counted in satisfying
those requirements. A softening buffer is not required along internal side and
rear yard lines of new lots created by a proposed residential development.
            [3]   The buffer area shall be 25 feet in width and used for no
purpose other than planting of trees and shrubs to meet planting requirements.
The area may include a well or fence provided it does not exceed six feet in
height. Any wall or fence shall be constructed in such a manner that it will
not conflict with the character of the abutting district or land use .
            [4]   The applicant may not be required to provide buffer planting
when existing planting, topography and/or man-made structures are shown on the
plans and serve the same purpose.
            [5]   A softening buffer is not required where a screen buffer is
provided.
[Amended 6-14-2011 by Ord. No. 11-1240]
         (b)   Location. Required buffer plantings, shall be aligned adjacent
to property lines or rights-of-way boundaries but may be positioned elsewhere
on the property with the recommendation of Township staff or consultants and
approved by the Board of Commissioners. An innovative and free-form arrangement
of the required plant material is encouraged. [Amended 6-14-2011 by Ord. No.
11-1240]
         (c)   Plant material requirements. [Amended 6-14-2011 by Ord. No. 11-
1240]
            [1]   Not more than 35% of plants shall be evergreen. [Amended 6-
14-2011 by Ord. No. 11-1240]
            [2]   Deciduous and semi-deciduous plants may be used with
evergreen species to provide color and a softer, more interesting and natural
effect. [Amended 6- 14-2011 by Ord. No. 11-1240]
            [3]   All plant material used shall meet minimum height
requirements as stated in Subsection I, Recommended plant list.
      (3)   Screen buffer .
         (a)   When required. [Amended 6-14-2011 by Ord. No. 11-1240]
            [1]   Screen buffer planting requirements applicable to each zoning
district or land use are listed in Table 2 at the end of the chapter. [Amended
6-14-2011 by Ord. No. 11-1240]
            [2]   If a screen buffer exists, this requirement may be reduced or
eliminated, upon the recommendation of Township staff or consultants and
approval by the Board of Commissioners. [Amended 6-14-2011 by Ord. No. 11-1240]
            [3]   In addition, all truck loading, outside storage areas,
mechanical equipment and trash receptacles shall be screened from view from
streets and abutting residential areas in accordance with the standards for
screen buffer size and type, as found in Table 2, Screen Buffer Requirements.
20
            [4]   The buffer area shall be used for no purpose other than
planting of trees , shrubs and lawn to meet planting requirements. [Amended 11-
13-2007 by Ord. No. 1188]
         (b)   Location.
            [1]   The screen buffer is to provide a visual barrier between
adjacent land uses . The screen buffer shall be 30 feet in width and aligned
adjacent to property lines or ultimate rights-of-way boundaries or may be
positioned elsewhere on the property upon the recommendation of Township staff
or consultants and approval by the Board of Commissioners. [Amended 5-14-2013
by Ord. No. 13-1272]
            [2]   The screen planting shall be broken only at points of
vehicular/pedestrian access and easements where plantings are prohibited.
            [3]   Screen buffers are not required in front yards .
[Amended 6-14-2011 by Ord. No. 11-1240]
         (c)   Plant material requirements.
            [1]   Trees used for screen buffers shall be composed of a minimum
of 80% evergreen varieties. Shrubs may be a combination of evergreen and
deciduous species. At the same time the required plant material shall be so
arranged as to provide a visual screen of 50% and at least eight feet in
height. Where the screen buffer planting requires more than 50 trees , no more
than half of these trees may be of a single species.
            [2]   Walls, ornamental structures , fences and earth berms, or a
combination of these, may be used in combination with appropriate plant
material, upon the recommendation of Township staff or consultants and approval
of the Board of Commissioners.
            [3]   Recommended evergreen tree species used for screening are
found in Subsection I, Recommended plant list. Spacing requirements are
included in Table 1. 21
[Amended 6-14-2011 by Ord. No. 11-1240]
      (4)   Parking area landscaping. [Amended 6-14-2011 by Ord. No. 11-1240]
         (a)   Landscaping requirements applicable to each zoning district or
land use are listed in Table 1. 22  Selected plant material shall account for
the sub base conditions, especially related to acid and alkaline sub base rock
and ballast. [Amended 6-14- 2011 by Ord. No. 11-1240]
         (b)   In addition to the trees and shrubs required for buffers and
parking areas, a minimum of 10% of any parking lot over 5,000 square feet in
gross area shall be devoted to landscaping. [Amended 6-14-2011 by Ord. No. 11-
1240]
         (c)   A maximum of 12 parking spaces shall be permitted in a row
without a landscape island. This island shall contain not less than 400 square
feet of planting area with a minimum island width of 20 feet and one shade tree
, or flowering trees , of a size and type suitable to the parking lot. Where
area restrictions exist, flowering trees may be used upon the recommendation of
Township staff or consultants and approval by the Board of Commissioners.
[Amended 6-14-2011 by Ord. No. 11- 1240]
         (d)   Raised continuous curbing shall be required around all planting
islands, except those used for stormwater management such as rain gardens where
openings are needed. In addition, curbed planting islands shall be placed at
the end of each row of parking spaces which begins or terminates at an internal
circulation drive. [Amended 6-14-2011 by Ord. No. 11-1240]
         (e)   For any land use where the total number of parking spaces
exceeds 100 stalls, the parking area shall be divided by continuous islands
perpendicular to the spaces every 120 feet. (One hundred twenty feet assumes
four rows of parking and two aisles.) These divider islands shall be a minimum
of 15 feet wide.
         (f)   In addition to the above, any parking area over 4,000 square
feet in area closer than 50 feet to a public street  right-of-way or to any
residential district shall have a continuous row of shrubs , fence, wall, earth
berm or a combination of these to a minimum height of three feet six inches at
time of installation between the street or residential district and the parking
area.
         (g)   Recommended shade tree species are found in Subsection I,
Recommended plant list.
      (5)   Detention basin landscaping.
         (a)   The basin landscaping shall be so designed that the plantings in
and adjacent to it shall not have a negative effect on the hydrological
function of the basin.
         (b)   Drainageways, detention basins and retention ponds shall be
aesthetically pleasing and compatible with the adjacent land use . Creative
grading , innovative basin forms and naturalized plantings and groundcovers
shall be employed where feasible. [Amended 6-14-2011 by Ord. No. 11-1240]
         (c)   Basin floors and sides.
            [1]   Floors dry most of the year shall be landscaped in one or a
combination of the following:
               [a]   Turf (seeded, hydro-seeded or sodded).
               [b]   Seeded in low-maintenance naturalized mix that includes
groundcovers with warm season meadow grasses and wildflowers. Commercial mixes
shall be matched to site conditions.
               [c]   All-season ground cover .
            [2]   Basin floors, portions of a floor or channels which are wet
most of the year shall be landscaped in one or a combination of the following:
               [a]   Wet habitat grasses and ground covers .
               [b]   Seeded in low-maintenance, naturalized mix that include
groundcovers with warm season meadow grasses and wildflower. Commercial mixes
shall be matched to wet site conditions.
[Amended 6-14-2011 by Ord. No. 11-1240]
         (d)   Basin perimeter plantings.
            [1]   Basin perimeter planting requirements applicable to each zone
or land use are listed in Table 1. 22.1 To promote diversity, up to 50% of the
shade trees may be substituted with an option of two flowering trees, two
evergreen trees or 10 shrubs for every shade tree. No plantings shall be placed
on the fill area of the berm acting as an impoundment structure. Trees and
shrubs shall not be planted in the basin floor.
[Amended 6-14-2011 by Ord. No. 11-1240]
         (e)   Recommended tree and shrub species are found in Subsection I,
Recommended plant list. [Added 6-14-2011 by Ord. No. 11-1240]
      (6)   Individual lot landscaping.
         (a)   When required.
            [1]   Individual lot landscaping includes those areas of the site
not covered by Subsection F(1) through (5) above.
            [2]   Lot landscaping requirements applicable to each zone or land
use are listed in Table 1. 23
            [3]   Lot landscape requirements shall not be met for any lot by
the transplanting of other plant material from the subject lot or lots created
as part of this application, unless approved as provided in this Chapter
(Subsection G).
[Amended 6-14-2011 by Ord. No. 11-1240]
         (b)   Location. Trees specified under this section shall be planted on
the lot . They may be planted within the general open space of the subdivision
or land development , upon recommendation by Township consultants and approval
by the Board of Commissioners. [Amended 6-14-2011 by Ord. No. 11-1240]
         (c)   Plant material requirements. [Amended 6-14-2011 by Ord. No. 11-
1240]
            [1]   Trees shall be a minimum of three inches in caliper and of a
recommended species listed in Subsection I, Recommended plant list.
            [2]   To permit greater diversity and interest, up to 50% of the
shade tree requirement may be substituted with an option of two flowering trees
, two evergreen trees , and ten shrubs for each shade tree . Substitute plan
material shall be from the Recommended Plant List, Subsection I, and refer to
Note No. 1 on Table 1. 23.1 [Amended 6-14-2011 by Ord. No. 11-1240]
      (7)   Landscaping on Slopes .
         (a)   When required. Landscaping shall be required on disturbed areas
of the site with slopes in excess of one foot vertical to 4 feet horizontal (4:
1 or 25% slope ).
         (b)   Plant material requirements.
            [1]   Sodded lawn and/or ground cover plantings are required on all
slopes of between 25% and 33%. [Amended 5-14-2013 by Ord. No. 13-1272]
            [2]   Ground cover plantings are required on slopes of 33% or
greater (one foot vertical to three feet horizontal).
         (c)   Supplemental plantings. Supplemental plantings may be applied
toward the replacement tree requirements of Subsection H, except where these
plantings are required by other sections of this chapter. Supplemental
plantings of shade trees , ornamental trees and evergreen trees and shrubs may
be planted as a part of landscaping on slopes .
[Amended 6-14-2011 by Ord. No. 11-1240]
      (8)   Watercourse  Buffers
         (a)   When required.
            [1]   Watercourse  buffer planting requirements applicable to each
zoning district or land use are listed in Table 1. 23.2 [Amended 5-14-2013 by
Ord. No. 13- 1272]
            [2]   Buffers are required along all permanent and intermittent
streams and watercourses where they cross a property. Where existing healthy
vegetation exists it must be retained. It must be supplemented per the
requirements of this chapter.
            [3]   Buffers must be provided on each side of the stream or
watercourses except when the waterway forms the property boundary, in which
case the buffer is required only on the subject property side.
         (b)   Location. Buffers shall be aligned with the stream/creek
embankment or watercourse edge.
         (c)   Plant material requirements.
            [1]   Buffers must be a minimum of 35 feet for unnamed watercourses
, 50 feet for named waterways and 100 feet for Sandy Run and Wissahickon Creek.
Named waterways are: Rose Valley Creek (North and South Branches), Tannery Run,
Honey Run, Small Creek, Rapp Run, and Pine Run.
            [2]   Buffer plantings must be selected based on site conditions,
and in particular with respect to flow, flooding, soil wetness and elevation.
            [3]   Plant diversity and informal planting schemes are recommended
to replicate natural streamside buffers and habitat.
[Amended 6-14-2011 by Ord. No. 11-1240]
      (9)   Landscaping of Other Areas. Any area not used for buildings ,
structures , paved areas, planting beds, or screening shall be planted in an
all-season ground cover or lawn and other landscape materials. Wherever
possible, healthy and suitable existing vegetative materials shall be
preserved. [Amended 6-14-2011 by Ord. No. 11-1240]
      (10)   Existing Vegetation. In cases where preserved natural features
existing on the subject site duplicate, or essentially duplicate, the planting
requirements of this chapter, these requirements may be waived or amended upon
the recommendation of Township consultants and approval by the Board of
Commissioners. [Added 6-14-2011 by Ord. No. 11-1240]
   G.   Preservation and Protection of Existing Trees .
      (1)   All subdivisions and land developments shall be laid out in such a
manner so as to preserve the healthy trees and shrubs on the site , whenever
possible. Special care must be taken to preserve trees over 20 inches in
diameter and trees standing in groves. Special care shall include avoiding
woodland fragmentation, protecting native species, and removing invasive plant
species. The Township may refuse approval of any plan showing the unnecessary
destruction of healthy trees and shrubs , particularly those for which special
care is required. Financial benefit to the developer will not constitute a
sufficient reason to avoid compliance with this subsection.
      (2)   During the construction of any site , trees and shrubs , as defined
herein, shall be protected by temporary fencing to ensure that there is no
encroachment or disturbance within the area of their dripline by changing grade
, trenching, stockpiling of building materials or topsoil or compacting the
soil and roots by any equipment. In addition, the following regulations shall
apply:
         (a)   Existing trees where the root zone (dripline) has been
encroached upon are not to be counted as preserved.
         (b)   Existing trees where trunks are within five feet of proposed
sidewalks, walkways or driveways , or within 10 feet of proposed roadways are
not to be counted as preserved.
         (c)   At the direction of the Township staff or consultants, existing
trees which have not been adequately protected or have been significantly
damaged are to be removed.
         (d)   Standing trees that are confirmed by the Township staff or
consultants as dead or substantially in decline or stressed or invasive species
that are undesirable for the site or site conditions will not be counted as
preserved and shall be removed.
      (3)   The foregoing requirements for trees in Subsection F(1), (2), (3),
(4) and (8) (street  trees , softening buffers , screen buffer , parking area,
and watercourse  buffers ) shall be met by preserving existing healthy, native
trees . To that end, the number of trees required by these subsections may be
reduced by a credit for approved preserved trees as follows:
         (a)   Approved preserved trees eight inches or greater in diameter
remaining on an individual lot may offset the requirements as noted herein on a
ratio set forth in Subsection (d). For example, if two eight-inch healthy
native shade trees are preserved on a lot , two trees may be deducted from the
calculated requirements.
         (b)   A preserved tree may not be used to offset more than one
landscape code requirement.
         (c)   Transplanting plant material within the subject property may be
permitted when unusual or unique conditions exist, such as crowding, a change
in site conditions or prior planting conditions (e.g., nursery.)
         (d)   Credits for approved preserved trees to offset landscape code
requirements shall be calculated as follows:
 
Diameter of Trunk of Approved Preserved Tree (inches) Number of Tree Credits
37 or greater                                         5
25 to 36                                              4
13 to 24                                              2
8 to 12                                               1
 
[Amended 6-14-2011 by Ord. No. 11-1240]
   H.   Replacing Trees Destroyed by Development.
      (1)   Where more than 25% of the existing trees have been removed, every
remaining tree , eight inches in diameter or more, which is destroyed because
of site  improvements shall be replaced. It is intended that tree replacement
be the initial steps towards re- establishing woodland and reforestation.
Replacement shall be according to the following formula:
         (a)   One-third of the required replacement trees shall be shade trees
at a ratio of one shade tree to one removed tree (1:1).
         (b)   One-third shall be flowering trees and evergreen trees at a
ratio of two flower ing/evergreen trees to one removed tree (2:1).
         (c)   One-third shall be shrubs at a ratio of ten shrubs to one
removed tree (10:1), or, all or some part of this third may be groundcover at a
ratio of 40 groundcover plants to one removed tree (40:1).
      (2)   Replacement plant material shall be positioned, spaced and planted
to replicate a native woodland or forest and near other woodland where possible
to expand existing woodland areas. All species are to be selected from
Subsection I, Recommended Plant List.
         (a)   Such new plant material shall be planted in addition to that
required in Subsection F above.
         (b)   Replacement trees must be planted in common areas within and
between lots rather than as foundation plantings around individual structures .
         (c)   Recommended sizes and species of shade trees , evergreen trees ,
flowering trees , shrubs and groundcovers are listed in Subsection I.
      (3)   Calculation and estimation of existing trees before construction
shall be performed based on the following procedure:
         (a)   Healthy trees over eight inches in diameter standing alone will
be documented individually and noted on the landscape plan . Dead trees or
trees in severe decline shall be omitted.
         (b)   The quantity of large trees standing in masses of over 10 trees
shall be estimated by the following method:
            [1]   Three 100 by100-foot square areas will be staked out in
locations acceptable to the owner/developer and the Township staff or
consultants.
            [2]   The quantity of trees in each area will be counted and the
totals averaged to determine the average number of trees per 10,000 square feet
of wooded area.
            [3]   This average quantity per area shall serve as a
representative sample and will be used to determine both the quantity of trees
being removed and the quantity of trees to remain in large masses.
      (4)   Calculation and estimation of existing trees remaining after
construction shall be prepared by the applicant and confirmed by Township staff
or consultants based on the procedure noted above.
      (5)   Calculations of the required replacements for existing trees eight
inches or more in diameter removed during construction shall be submitted by
the applicant and confirmed by Township staff or consultants based on the
following formula:
         (a)   Twenty-five percent of the total number of existing trees on the
site may be removed without the need for replacement.
         (b)   If more than 25% but less than 75% of the total number of
existing trees are to be removed, the replacement quantity shall be based on a
1:1 ratio and the plant material selected based on woodland replacement
criteria as stated above in Subsection H(1).
         (c)   If 75% or more of the existing trees are to be removed, the
calculation of replacement trees for the last 25% of the trees removed shall be
at a ratio of 2:1; two new two and one half inch caliper shade trees for each
existing tree removed. The replacement plant material shall be based on the
woodland replacement criteria as stated above in Subsection H(1).
      (6)   The total number of trees on site before construction, the total
number of trees proposed to be removed and the total quantity of required
replacement trees are to be listed on the landscape plan .
[Amended 6-14-2011 by Ord. No. 11-1240]
   I.   Recommended plant list. The following is the recommended list of trees,
shrubs and ground cover for use in Upper Dublin Township. However, the Board of
Commissioners may permit other planting types if they are hardy to the area,
are not subject to blight or disease and are of the same general character and
growth habit as those listed below. Substitutions for suitable plants not
listed will be considered on a case by case basis. Any plant material proposed
for use and not listed must be reviewed and recommended for approval by
Township staff or consultants and approved by the Board of Commissioners.
      (1)   Shade/canopy trees : minimum two and one half inches caliper,* 12
to 14 feet high, eight feet minimum spread, clear trunk to seven feet above the
ground and full branching structure .
         Acer rubrum - Red Maple
         Acer saccharum - Sugar Maple*
         Aesculus glabra - Buckeye
         Betula nigra - River Birch
         Carpinus betulus - European Hornbeam*
         Carya glabra - Pignut Hickory
         Carya ovata - Shagbark Hickory
         Cercidiphyllum japonicum - Katsura Tree*
         Corylus colurna - Turkish Filbert*
         Fagus (species) - Beech
         Ginko biloba - Ginko (male only)*
         Gleditsia triacanthos - Common Honeylocust
         Gleditsia triacanthos inermis - Thornless Common Honeylocust
         Gymnocladus dioicus - Kentucky Coffeetree
         Juglans cinera - Butternut
         Juglans nigra - Black Walnut
         Larix decidua - Larch
         Liquidambar styraciflua - Sweetgum
         Liriodendron tulipifera - Tulip Poplar
         Metasequoia glyptostroboides - Dawn Redwood
         Nyssa sylvatica - Black Gum
         Platanus x acerifolia - London Planetree
         Platanus occidentallis - Sycamore
         Quercus acutissima - Sawtooth Oak*
         Quercus alba - White Oak
         Quercus bicolor - Swamp White Oak
         Quercus imbricaria - Shingle Oak*
         Quercus macrocarpa - Bur Oak
         Quercus palustris - Pin Oak
         Salix alba - White Willow
         Salix babylonica - Weeping Willow
         Sophora japonica - Scholar-tree*
         Tilia cordata - Littleleaf Linden
         Ulmus (hybrid species) - Elm*
         Zelkova (species) - Zelkova*
         * Suitable for street  trees
         * Nursery grown trees four inches caliper or less are measured at six
inches above ground level as defined by the American Association of Nurserymen.
Nursery grown trees of greater than four-inch caliper are measured at 12 inches
above the ground level.
      (2)   Evergreen trees : minimum eight feet in height, four-foot minimum
spread,* single leader, symmetrically branching to the ground.
         Abies concolor - Concolor Fir
         Abies fraseri - Fraser Fir
         Cedrus (species) - Cedar
         Chamaecyparis (species) - False Cypress
         Ilex opaca - American Holly
         Juniperus virginiana - Eastern Red Cedar
         Picea abies - Norway Spruce
         Picea glauca - White Spruce
         Picea omorika - Serbian Spruce
         Picea pungens - Colorado Spruce
         Pinus bungeana - Lacebark Pine**
         Pinus flexilis - Limber Pine**
         Pinus strobus - White Pine**
         Pseudotsuga menziesii - Douglas Fir
         * = Spread may be less than four feet for upright or columnar
varieties.
         ** = Not to be used for buffer plantings.
      (3)   Flowering understory trees : minimum eight feet in height, five-
foot minimum spread, symmetrically branched to within four feet from the
ground.
         Acer ginnala - Amur Maple
         Acer griseum - Paperbark Maple
         Amelanchier (species) - Serviceberry
         Amelanchier Canadensis - Shadblow Serviceberry
         Carpinus caroliniana - Ironwood
         Cercis canadensis - Redbud
         Cladrastus Cladrastis lutea - Yellowwood
         Cornus (species) - Dogwood
         Crataegus (species) - Hawthorne
         Halesia carolina - Carolina Silverbell
         Koelreuteria paniculata - Golden Rain Tree
         Magnolia (species) - Magnolia
         Malus (species) - Crabapples (disease resistant varieties)
         Ostrya virginiana - American Hornbeam
         Oxydendrum arboreum - Sourwood
         Prunus (species) - Cherries and Plums (disease resistant varieties)
         Sassafras albidum - Sassafras
      (4)   Deciduous shrubs : 30-inch minimum height, 24-inch minimum spread
and symmetrically branched to the ground.
         Abelia x grandiflora - Glossy Abelia
         Aesculus parviflora - Bottlebrush Buckeye
         Aronia arbutifolia - Red Chokeberry
         Callicarpa bodinieri - Beautyberry
         Calycanthus floridus - Sweetbrush
         Cephalanthus occidentalis - Buttonbush
         Chaenomeles speciosa - Common Flowering Quince
         Cornus sericea - Redosier Dogwood
         Corylopsis glabrescens - Fragrant Winterhazel
         Cotoneaster (species) - Cotoneaster
         Cytisus scoparius - Scotch Broom
         Daphne odora - Fragrant Daphne
         Deutzia gracilis - Slender Deutzia
         Enkianthus campanulatus - Redvein Enkianthus
         Forsythia (species) - Forsythia
         Fothergilla gardenii - Dwarf Fothergilla
         Hamamelis (species) - Witchhazel
         Hydrangea (species) - Hydrangea
         Hypericum prolificum - St. Johnswort
         Ilex verticillata - Winterberry Holly
         Itea virginica - Virginia Sweetspire
         Jasminum nudiflorum - Winter Jasmine
         Kalmia latifolia - Mountain Laurel
         Ligustrum amurense - Amur Privet
         Lindera benzoin - Spicebush
         Lonicera fragrantissima - Winter Honeysuckle
         Myrica pensylvanica - Northern Bayberry
         Philadelphus coronarius - Mockorange
         Physocarpus opulifolius - Common Ninebark
         Rhus (species) - Sumac
         Skimmia japonica - Japanese Skimmia
         Spiraea (species) - Spiraea (except spiraea japonica)
         Syringa (species) Lilac
         Vaccinium corymbosum - Highbush Blueberry
         Viburnum (species) - Viburnum
         Weigelia florida - Weigelia
      (5)   Evergreen shrubs : 24-inch minimum height, 18-inch minimum spread
and symmetrically branched to the ground.
         Berberis (species) - Barberry (except berberis thunbergii and berberis
vulgaris)
         Buxus (species) - Boxwood
         Cupressocyparis leylandii - Leyland Cypress
         Ilex (species) - Holly
         Juniperus (species) - Juniper
         Leucothoe fontanesiana - Leucothoe
         Mahonia aquifolium - Oregon Hollygrape
         Osmanthus heterophyllus - Osmanthus
         Pieris (species) - Pieris
         Prunus laurocerasus - Cherrylaurel
         Rhododendron (species) - Rhododendron
         Taxus (species) - Yews
         * Height and spread requirements may be reversed for spreading
varieties of evergreen shrubs .
      (6)   Groundcover plants.
         (a)   Shrubs : heavily rooted plants in two gallon containers planted
a maximum of 36 inches on center.
            Calluna vulgaris - Scotch Heather
            Cotoneaster (species) - Cotoneaster (low-growing and spreading
cultivars)
            Erica (species) - heath
            Forsythia viridissima “Bronxensis”- Bronx Forsythia
            Juniperus horizontalis and Sabina species - Juniper
            Microbiota decussate - Siberian Cypress
            Stephanandra incisa - Cutleaf Stephanandra
            Symphoricarpos x chenaultii - Prostrate Chenault Coralberry
            Vaccinium macrocarpon “Lohzam” - Lohzam American Cranberry
         (b)   Herbaceous plants: heavily rooted plants in number 2 containers
planted a minimum of 18 inches on center.
            Ajuga reptans - Bugleweed
            Gaultheria procumbens - Eastern Teaberry
            Liriope (species) - Lilly Turf
            Pachysandra terminalis - Japanese Pachysandra
            Vinca minor - Myrtle, Periwinkle
            Hardy Ferns
            Ornamental grasses
[Amended 6-14-2011 by Ord. No. 11-1240; 5-14-2013 by Ord. No. 13-1272; 1-8-2019
by Ord. No. 19-1347]
19. Editor’s Note: Table 1 is included at the end of this chapter.
19.1. Editor’s Note: Table 1 is included at the end of this chapter.
19.2. Editor’s Note: Table 1 is included at the end of this chapter.
20. Editor’s Note: Table 2 is included at the end of this chapter.
21. Editor’s Note: Table 1 is included at the end of this chapter.
22. Editor’s Note: Table 1 is included at the end of this chapter.
22.1. Editor’s Note: Table 1 is included at the end of this chapter.
23. Editor’s Note: Table 1 is included at the end of this chapter.
23.1. Editor’s Note: Table 1 is included at the end of this chapter.
23.2. Editor’s Note: Table 1 is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 212-33.   Reserve strips; rights-of-way and/or easements; deeds.
[Amended 6-14-2011 by Ord. No. 11-1240, § 18]
   A.   Reserve strips controlling access to streets , alleys , subdivisions or
adjacent areas are prohibited.
   B.   Rights-of-way and/or easements for sanitary utilities, road
construction or maintenance or for drainage purposes, public utilities or for
any specific purpose shall be required by the Board of Commissioners as needed,
the location and width in each case to be as determined by the governing body.
[Amended 4-8-1997 by Ord. No. 934]
      (1)   Where a right-of-way exists to be used as a street , building
setback lines shall be measured from the nearest side of the ultimate street
 right-of-way . In certain circumstances, where non-street rights-of-way or
easements exist, the Township Engineer in his sole discretion may require that
building setback lines be measured from the nearest side of said right-of-way
or said easement .
      (2)   Nothing shall be permitted to be placed, planted, set or put within
the area of an easement . The area shall be kept as lawn.
      (3)   The owner of any lot , upon written request by the Township, and at
the owner’s sole expense, shall remove anything placed, planted, set or put
(with or without knowledge of this regulation) within the area of any easement
.
      (4)   To the fullest extent possible, easements shall be adjacent to rear
or side lot lines .
   C.   No right-of-way or easement for any purpose whatsoever shall be recited
or described in any deed unless the same has been shown on the approved plan .
Any error found in a deed shall be immediately corrected and rerecorded in the
office of the Recorder of Deeds for Montgomery County at Norristown,
Pennsylvania, at the sole expense of the subdivider .
   D.   Easements . Easements for present or ultimate construction of storm
drains and sanitary sewers having a minimum width of 25 feet shall be provided
where necessitated by topographical conditions. Five feet of additional width
shall be provided for each additional utility beyond the first one. Where a
subdivision or land development is traversed by a natural watercourse , there
shall be provided a drainage  easement or right-of-way conforming substantially
with the line of such watercourse and of such widths as will be adequate to
preserve natural drainage . [Amended 6-14-2011 by Ord. No. 11-1240]
§ 212-34.   Recreational areas and community assets.
Wherever practicable, provision shall be made for suitable open space for
parks, playgrounds and recreational areas. In commercial areas, provision shall
be made for suitable open space for walkways (connecting parking facilities
with commercial structures ), malls, sitting areas, etc. Due consideration
shall be given to the preservation of natural features, including large trees ,
groves, waterways, scenic points, historical spots and other community assets.
§ 212-35.   Construal of standards; recommendations.
   A.   The standards of design of this Article should be used to judge the
adequacy of subdivision or land development proposals. Where, in the opinion of
the Township Engineer , the literal application of these standards in certain
cases would work undue hardship or be plainly unreasonable, the Township
Engineer may recommend to the Board of Commissioners such reasonable exceptions
as will not be contrary to the public interest. The Board of Commissioners may
modify or adjust the standards to permit reasonable utilization of property
while securing substantial conformance with the objectives of the regulations.
   B.   The standards included in these regulations are minimum design
requirements. The Board of Commissioners reserve the right in any case to
request that development features exceed these standards if conditions so
warrant.
   C.   In reviewing subdivision or land development plans , the Board of
Commissioners shall refer such plans to the Township Planning Commission for
recommendations concerning the adequacy of existing and proposed community
facilities to serve the additional dwellings proposed by the subdivision or
land development .
   D.   Subdividers are requested to give careful consideration to the
desirability of providing adequate rights-of-way and paving on existing streets
and reserving areas and easements for facilities normally required in
residential sections, including churches, libraries, schools and other public
buildings , parks, playgrounds and playfields; shopping and local business
centers; rights-of-way ; and easements for storm and sanitary sewer facilities
in those areas that cannot be immediately joined to the existing storm and
sanitary sewer systems of the Township.
   E.   Areas provided or reserved for such community facilities should be
adequate to provide for building  sites , landscaping and off-street parking as
appropriate to the use proposed. The Board of Commissioners reserves the right
to accept or refuse offers of dedication for public uses .
§ 212-35.1.   Transportation impact study.
[Added 4-13-1999 by Ord. No. 995]
   A.   Whenever a transportation impact study is required, it is anticipated
that the study will enable the Township to assess the impact of a proposed
development on the local transportation system. Its purpose is to ensure that
proposed developments do not adversely affect the transportation network and to
identify any traffic problems associated with access from the site to the
existing transportation network. The study’s purpose is also to delineate
solutions to potential problems and to present improvements to be incorporated
into the proposed development. The study shall assist in the protection of air
quality, the conservation of energy and the encouragement of public
transportation use .
   B.   Subdivisions and land developments for which a study is required.
      (1)   A transportation impact study shall be required for all
subdivisions and land developments that meet one or more of the following
criteria:
         (a)   Residential: 20 or more dwelling units .
         (b)   Commercial: a commercial building or buildings consisting of
15,000 square feet or more of gross floor area or when the Zoning Code (
Chapter 255) requires 60 or more parking spaces for the proposed use .
         (c)   Office: a development consisting of 15,000 square feet or more
of gross floor area or when the Zoning Code (
Chapter 255) requires 60 or more parking spaces for the proposed use .
         (d)   Industrial: a development consisting of 25,000 square feet or
more of gross floor area or when the Zoning Code (
Chapter 255) requires 40 or more parking spaces for the proposed use .
         (e)   Institutional: a development consisting of 25,000 square feet or
more of gross floor area or when the Zoning Code (
Chapter 255) requires 100 or more parking spaces for the proposed use .
         (f)   Other: fast-food or drive-through restaurants; convenience
stores; drive-in movie theatres; gas stations; car wash.
      (2)   The Board of Commissioners, at its discretion, may require the
preparation of a transportation impact study for any other subdivision or land
development or other major change of use of property.
      (3)   The developer shall reimburse the Township for reasonable fees and
expenses incurred by the Township Traffic Engineer for the review of the
developer's transportation impact study and plans .
   C.   A transportation impact study shall be provided for a given study area.
The boundaries of the study area to be analyzed shall include those
intersections which may be affected by the proposed subdivision or land
development . If there is any dispute as to whether an intersection may be
affected or not, the final discretion shall rest with the Township Traffic
Engineer .
   D.   The transportation impact study shall contain, but not be limited to,
the following information:
      (1)   General site description. The site description shall include the
size, location, proposed land uses , construction staging and completion date
of the proposed land development . If the development is residential, types of
dwelling units and number of bedrooms shall also be included. A brief
description of other major existing and proposed land developments within the
study area shall be provided. The general site description shall also include
probable characteristics of potential site users to the extent that they may
affect the transportation needs of the site (e.g., number of senior citizens).
      (2)   Transportation facilities description.
         (a)   The description shall contain full documentation, including
plans , of the proposed internal transportation system. This description shall
include proposed internal vehicular, bicycle, pedestrian and other intermodal
circulation, all proposed ingress and egress locations, all internal roadway
widths and rights-of-way , parking conditions, traffic channelizations and any
traffic signals or other intersection control devices within the site . The
site design shall be shown to maximize potential public transportation usage to
and from the development, such as providing adequate turning radii at all
access points to allow a bus to enter the development. Bus shelter and sign
locations shall be designated where appropriate.
         (b)   The report shall describe the entire external roadway system
within the study area. Driveways adjacent to or across from proposed site
access points shall be identified. Major intersections in the study area shall
be identified and mapped. All existing and proposed public transportation
services and facilities within a one-mile radius of the site shall also be
documented. All future highway improvements , including proposed construction
and traffic signalization, shall be noted. This information shall be obtained
from the Twelve-Year Highway Capital Program for the Delaware Valley Region and
from the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation. Any proposed roadway
improvements resulting from proposed surrounding developments shall also be
recorded.
      (3)   Existing traffic conditions.
         (a)   Existing traffic conditions shall be measured and documented for
all streets and intersections in the study area. Traffic volumes shall be
recorded for existing average daily traffic, existing peak hour traffic and for
the subdivision's peak hour traffic. Complete traffic counts at all
intersections in the study area shall be conducted, encompassing the peak
highway and development-generated hour(s), and documentation shall be included
in the report. A volume capacity analysis based upon existing volumes shall be
performed during the peak hour(s) and the peak development-generated hour(s)
for all roadways and major intersections in the study area. A volume capacity
analyses based upon existing volumes shall be performed, using the procedures
of the current Highway Capacity Manual, during the peak hour(s) and the peak
development-generated hour(s) for all roadways and major intersections in the
study area. Levels of service shall be determined for each location.
         (b)   This analysis will determine the adequacy of the existing
roadway system to serve the current traffic demand. Roadways and/or
intersections experiencing levels of service E or F shall be noted as
congestion locations.
      (4)   Transportation impact of the development. Estimation of vehicular
trips to result from the proposal shall be completed for both the street system
and the development-generated peak hour(s). These development-generated traffic
volumes shall be provided for the inbound and outbound traffic movements as
estimated. Acceptable source(s) and methodology shall be followed. These
generated volumes shall be distributed to the study area and assigned to the
existing streets and intersections throughout the study area. Documentation of
all assumptions used in the distribution and assignment phase shall be
provided. Traffic volumes shall be assigned to all access points. Pedestrian
volumes shall also be calculated, if applicable. If school crossings are to be
used, pedestrian volumes shall be assigned to each crossing. Any
characteristics of the site that will cause unusual trip generation rates and/
or traffic flows shall be noted.
      (5)   Analysis of transportation impact.
         (a)   The total future traffic demand based on full occupancy of the
proposed subdivision or land development shall be calculated. This demand shall
consist of the combination of the existing traffic expanded to the completion
year, the development-generated traffic, background growth and the traffic
generated by other proposed developments in the study area. A volume/capacity
analysis shall also be conducted using the total future demand and the future
roadway capacity. If staging of the proposed development is anticipated,
calculations for each stage of completion shall be made. This analysis shall be
performed using the peak highway hour(s) and peak development-generated hour(s)
for all streets and major intersections in the study area. Volume/capacity
calculations shall be completed for all major intersections. Levels of service
for all streets and intersections shall be listed.
         (b)   All access points and pedestrian crossings shall be examined as
to the feasibility of installing traffic signals. This evaluation shall compare
the projected traffic and pedestrian volumes to the warrants for traffic signal
installation.
      (6)   Conclusions and recommended improvements .
         (a)   All streets and/or intersections showing a level of service
below D shall be considered deficient, and specific recommendations for the
elimination of these problems shall be listed. Highway capacity evaluations
shall consider not only the overall intersection level of service, but also
each approach and movement to identify any substandard values which need to be
improved. The listing of recommended improvements might include but not be
limited to the following elements: internal circulation design; site access
location and design; external street and intersection improvements ; traffic
signal installation and operation, including signal timing, signal upgrade,
signal coordination through time-based, hardwire interconnection or intelligent
traffic systems; transit design improvements ; and improvements to facilitate
transit service.
         (b)   At locations where the level of service for the design year is
deficient without the proposed development, determine improvements which would
not only provide a level of service and delay no worse than conditions without
development but which would improve such level of service and delay.
         (c)   Existing and/or future public transportation service shall also
be addressed. A listing of all actions to be undertaken to increase present
public transportation usage and improve service, if applicable, shall be
included.
         (d)   The listing of recommended improvements for both streets and
transit shall include, for each improvement , the party responsible for the
improvement , a preliminary cost estimate and funding of the improvement and
the phase of development during which the improvement must be completed.
         (e)   The Board of Commissioners shall review the transportation
impact study or have its own consulting Traffic Engineer review the impact
study at the applicant's expense, to analyze its adequacy in solving any
traffic problems that will occur due to the land development or subdivision and
make recommendations to the Board of Commissioners.
         (f)   The Board of Commissioners may decide that certain improvements
contained in the study on or adjacent to the site or at other locations
impacted by the traffic generated by the development of the site are required
for preliminary plan approval and may attach those conditions to the plan
approval.
         (g)   The roadway and signal improvement  plans shall not be submitted
to the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation until such plans are approved
by the Board of Commissioners or the Montgomery County Department of Roads and
Bridges. This submittal to the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation shall
be accompanied by comments of the Board of Commissioners and the Montgomery
County Planning Commission.
§ 212-35.2.   Manual of design standards – GFW Greater Fort Washington
District.
[Added 5-14-2019 by Ord. No. 19-1351, §8]
Development in the GFW Greater Fort Washington District shall comply with the
following design standards.
   A.   The overall purpose and intent of these design standards is to:
      (1)   Clarify the intent of the Greater Fort Washington (GFW) District in
Article XXXVIII of the Zoning Ordinance;
      (2)   Foster a more attractive and functional outcome for land
development in the GFW District;
      (3)   Be consistent with the provisions of Section 708-A of Article VII
of the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code;
      (4)   Help with the transformation of the former Fort Washington Office
Park and Office Center into a new and improved place that is more diverse,
compact, and walkable; and
      (5)   Provide a template and a framework for a Specific Manual of Written
and Graphic Design Standards to be prepared by the applicant at the time of
land development plan submission.
   B.   Building and parking location.
      (1)   New buildings shall be located at a build-to line, per the GFW
District, unless there are hydrologic, topographic, or other environmental
constraints along the frontage of a lot .
      (2)   New parking shall be primarily located to the rear of buildings ,
or to the side of buildings , per the GFW District.
      (3)   No double bay parking lots shall be installed in the front of
buildings , and no more than 30% of the lot  frontage width may be occupied by
parking in front of a building ; provided, however, that all such parking shall
be screened by a pier-fence-hedge-street  tree combination.
      (4)   Whenever an existing building is already located with a deep
setback, with parking in front, a pier-fence-hedge combination shall be
installed and maintained at the build-to line. The pier-fence-hedge-street
 tree combination shall be in accordance with the streetscape design standards
outlined in §
212-35.2.A.(6).
   C.   Sustainable parking.
      (1)   Sustainable parking shall be in accordance with the guidelines of
the Sustainable Green Parking Lots Guidebook, prepared by the Montgomery County
Planning Commission.
      (2)   Sustainable parking shall be created and maintained to promote
green infrastructure and to minimize the adverse impacts of flooding in the GFW
District.
      (3)   Green and sustainable parking shall:
         (a)   Be integrated into the surrounding built and natural
environment;
         (b)   Manage water as a resource by promoting an infiltration and
natural retention system;
         (c)   Protect local water quality through effective filtration and
biological systems;
         (d)   Minimize the heat island effect through effective shading and
alternative pavement material;
         (e)   Conserve energy usage and encourage the placement of sustainable
energy infrastructure;
         (f)   Provide safe walkways; and
         (g)   Use land more efficiently.
   D.   Alternative transportation.
      (1)   The Fort Washington Office Park Transportation Demand Management
(TDM) Plan shall be implemented to the maximum extent possible.
      (2)   Two (2) or more alternative transportation facilities shall be
provided for all uses with new buildings of 100,000 square feet or more of
gross leasable floor area , or with 3 or more stories in height .
      (3)   Bus/shuttle shelters (Belson Outdoors: Model ALS-68AOH -Quaker
Bronze or approved equal) shall be installed and maintained in close proximity
to the entrance of a building for every 100,000 square feet or more of gross
leasable floor area (GLA) proposed for non-residential use , or for every 100
or more proposed apartment units.
      (4)   Shuttle services shall be provided for tenants/employees to connect
to train stations, in order to: manage the parking demand; produce a 10%
reduction in trip generation; and qualify for 50 dwelling unit per acre density
for apartment development .
      (5)   Bike share hubs shall be located in close proximity to community
facilities, employment centers, and public transit.
      (6)   Last-mile transit, multiuse trails shall be incorporated through
the implementation of sharrows designating a shared vehicular and bicycle
roadway, pavement markings, signage, etc.
      (7)   One (1) electric car charging station shall be provided for every
25 parking spaces at employment centers, public transit stations, multi-family
residences, etc. in order to encourage ecofriendly transportation.
      (8)   An indoor ground floor space, as part of the amenities area, shall
be provided for bicycle storage for at least 25% of the occupants of the
building .
      (9)   An indoor ground floor space, as part of the amenities area, shall
be provided for a waiting room for ride-sourcing, ride-hauling, and/or ride-
sharing (such as Uber, Lyft, etc.).
   E.   Pedestrian connectivity.
      (1)   Pedestrian connections shall be provided in the form of sidewalks,
crosswalks, trails, and pathways.
      (2)   Last-mile transit, multiuse trail linkages to existing pedestrian
and/or trail networks, and the proposed Cross County Trail shall be provided to
the maximum extent possible in order to increase overall connectivity.
      (3)   Pedestrian signage and signalization shall be provided at
intersections in order to ensure pedestrian safety.
      (4)   Traffic calming devices shall be provided in the form of: raised
crosswalks; speed tables; bulb-outs/neckdowns of the roadway; raised and/or
landscaped medians; corner radius treatments; and the like.
   F.   Streetscape.
      (1)   The streetscape shall consist of an interconnected network, and
cul-de-sac  streets shall not be created.
      (2)   The streetscape shall be enhanced by a street  tree program in
accordance with the design standards in §
212-32. SLDO.
      (3)   The streetscape shall be enhanced with alternating street lights in
order to illuminate both the street and sidewalk.
      (4)   The streetscape shall be enhanced with ADA compliant sidewalks, at
a minimum width of six (6) feet on both sides of all streets .
      (5)   ADA compliant crosswalks shall be installed and maintained at a
minimum width of six (6) feet at all street intersections and across all
driveway curb cuts.
      (6)   Per §
212-35.2.B.(3) above, a pier-fence-hedge combination shall be installed and
maintained at the build-to line when an existing building is located with a
deep setback, and has parking in front.
      (7)   Black steel or aluminum fence 36 inches to 42 inches in height
shall be installed and maintained between the piers of the pier-fence-hedge
combination.
      (8)   Evergreen hedges at a height of 18 inches to 24 inches shall be
installed and maintained in front of fencing for the pier-fence-hedge
combination.
      (9)   Streetscape enhancements shall also comply with §
212-29.
   G.   Landscape.
      (1)   Plant materials shall be grouped to provide emphasis and to
reinforce the alignment of man-made features.
      (2)   Landscape elements shall be grouped to reinforce the alignment of a
street , sidewalk, walkway, street edge, or boundary of other spaces.
      (3)   The landscape shall be diversified through the use of contrasting
textures such as: smooth and rough, light and dark, bright and shadow,
brilliant and subdued, and natural and man-made.
      (4)   Plant materials shall be selected to be tolerant of prevailing
climatic, hydrologic and soil conditions.
      (5)   Plant materials shall be selected based on the appropriate USDA
zone of hardiness.
      (6)   In addition to the design standards for landscaping in §
212-32, plants shall be installed and maintained to provide seasonal color and
color variation.
      (7)   Landscaping such as a bio-retention area, a rain garden, or a
vegetated stormwater management feature, that promotes decreased stormwater
runoff shall be installed and maintained to the maximum extent possible.
      (8)   Pedestrian circulation shall be accentuated with landscaping.
      (9)   Open spaces , walkways, and view corridors shall be accentuated
with landscaping.
      (10)   Landscaping and pedestrian pathways shall be installed and
maintained in all parking areas.
   H.   Green space and public space.
      (1)   A minimum of 15% of the gross lot area shall be designed, built,
and maintained as green space, within which a minimum of 3% of the gross lot
area shall be public space.
      (2)   Public space shall be in the form of: a plaza, outdoor gathering
area, outdoor dining area, or other similar well landscaped feature.
      (3)   Green space shall be centrally located and framed by buildings on
two or more sides, to the maximum extent possible.
      (4)   Plazas as public space shall have at least 65% unit pavers, and at
least one (1) shade tree per 900 square feet of plaza area.
      (5)   To promote the transformation of the former industrial park and
office park, green space shall be designed to create a new, transformative “Art
in the Park” result.
      (6)   Landscape and hardscape in green spaces shall focus on simple,
colorful, artistic, and functional design.
      (7)   Within required public spaces, public art such as a sculpture and/
or fountain, shall be installed and maintained in order to enhance the overall
character and appearance of the GFW District.
      (8)   Boulders, landscaping rocks, and/or varied landforms shall be
designed and integrated into green spaces.
   I.   Hardscape.
      (1)   Hardscaping in the form of unit pavers shall be installed and
maintained in all courtyards, plazas, and parking courts.
      (2)   Hardscape materials shall include brick, concrete pavers,
flagstone, and cobblestone.
      (3)   All pavers shall comply with ADA requirements, and be installed and
maintained in accordance with manufacture’s recommendations.
      (4)   All concrete pavements shall have a broom finish, with smooth
trowel edging along the sides and at all expansion and dummy joints.
      (5)   Cobblestone and/or Belgian block may be used as a substitute for
concrete curbs in private driveways and parking areas.
   J.   Lighting.
      (1)   Street lights (Sentry: SCP-LED Central Park Luminaire or approved
equal) shall be installed and maintained along all streets at a maximum height
of 18 feet, and shall be placed at intervals in the range of 100 to 140 feet
depending upon street  tree spacing and illumination needs. Street lights shall
have a black matte finish.
      (2)   Parking lot lights shall be installed and maintained at a maximum
height of 22 feet to 30 feet. Parking lot lights shall have a black matte
finish.
      (3)   Wall mounted lights shall have a black matte finish.
      (4)   Pedestrian scale ornamental lighting shall be installed and
maintained in all public spaces.
      (5)   All lighting shall be shielded and diffused in a downward
orientation, and shall not create off-site glare.
   K.   Architectural form, materials and height .
      (1)   All new buildings shall be a minimum of 20 feet in height .
      (2)   All new buildings along the Pinetown Road Corridor shall be sited
at a build-to line in order to promote the streetscape character of the GFW
District.
      (3)   New buildings shall have a sloped roof, or a parapet if the roof is
flat.
      (4)   Roof lines shall be varied with parapet walls, cupolas, dormers,
towers, and the like.
      (5)   All new buildings shall have a vertical rhythm formed by pilasters,
fenestration, columns, and/or the compositions of materials and colors.
      (6)   New buildings shall have a recess or projection in the range of 12
to 24 inches every 36 feet of building facade length.
      (7)   New building materials and colors shall be non-white, in order to
minimize reflective glare.
   L.   Street furniture.
      (1)   Mail pavilions shall be built and maintained in common areas.
      (2)   Dumpsters shall be located within a gated enclosure in order
provide a visual screen .
      (3)   Benches (DuMor Model 58-60 or approved equal) shall be installed
close to building entrances, along pedestrian accessways, and in courtyards and
plazas. Benches shall have a black matte finish.
      (4)   Bicycle racks (Victor Stanley Model: BRBS-103 or approved equal)
shall be installed and maintained near building entrances and in areas of major
pedestrian activity. Bicycle racks shall have a black matte finish.
      (5)   Bus shelters in Belson Outdoors: Model ALS68AOH - Quaker Bronze or
approved equal shall be installed and maintained per §
212-35.2.D(3) above.
      (6)   Waste receptacles (Victory Stanley Model: S-42 or approved equal)
shall be installed and maintained in pedestrian gathering spaces and near
building entrances. Waste receptacles shall have a black matte finish.
   M.   Contextual signs.
      (1)   Freestanding signs, as monument signs, shall be installed and
maintained with a masonry base to the maximum extent possible.
      (2)   Overall sign design shall project a colorful “brand” for the use on
the lot .
      (3)   Freestanding signs, such as pole signs, shall reflect the materials
and colors of the principal building on the lot .
      (4)   Signage shall be integrated with the landscaping on the lot .
      (5)   Wayfinding signage in the form of vertical pole mounted signs shall
be installed on street lights poles or other freestanding pole.
      (6)   Signs shall be internally illuminated, not with flood lights, to
the maximum extent possible.
   N.   Stormwater management.
      (1)   Stormwater management shall reflect best management practices of
the PA DEP.
      (2)   Stormwater management shall include bio-retention areas, rain
gardens, vegetated stormwater management features.
      (3)   Landscape design shall integrate plants and soils to naturally
detain, treat, and infiltrate runoff from impervious surfaces .
      (4)   Stormwater management shall comply with §
212-25.
   O.   Drive-thru facility.
      (1)   Drive-through facilities shall not be located along a primary
street  frontage .
      (2)   When a drive-through facility is located on the side of a building
, it shall be set back at least 25 feet from the v right-of-way .
      (3)   Drive-through facilities shall have building materials, colors, and
form, complementary to the principal building .
      (4)   Double drive-through facilities shall not be permitted. Side-by-
side drive-through lanes serving one brand may be permitted, subject to the
evaluation of site-specific conditions.
      (5)   The number and size of vehicular access points to the site from the
public street shall be minimized. Corner lots shall provide vehicular access
from the secondary street whenever feasible.
      (6)   Drive-through facilities stacking lanes shall not wrap around the
building.
      (7)   To the maximum extent possible, stacking lanes shall be linear and
straight, with a minimal number of turns.
APPENDIX A
[Added 5-14-2019 by Ord. 19-1351]
General_Manual_of_Written_&_Graphic_Design_Standards_(PDF)
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5df02b024b4c8f2f8cc81a782b45029f5e431e28/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4809.nap]ARTICLE V
Condominiums and Condominium Conversions
§ 212-36.   Applicability.
The procedures set forth in this Article shall be followed by all applicants
proposing to develop land or buildings to be maintained under the condominium
form of ownership or to convert existing land or buildings from its present
ownership to the condominium form of ownership in Upper Dublin Township.
§ 212-37.   Declaration.
[Amended 1-10-1995 by Ord. No. 879]
In addition to all other requirements set forth in this chapter and not in
conflict with the requirements of this Article, a declaration , a plat and plan
of the condominiums and bylaws shall be required for any proposed condominium
and shall be approved by the Board of Commissioners in accordance with the
requirements set forth in this Article and the Uniform Condominium Act, 68 Pa.
C.S.A. § 3101 et seq., prior to submission of said documents for proper
recording to the Recorder of Deeds of Montgomery County. Furthermore, this
Article shall provide for the revocation of an approved condominium and
subsequent recording of the same by appropriate means.
   A.   The declaration .
      (1)   Submission. In addition to all plans required pursuant to Article
IIl of this chapter, six copies of the declaration shall be submitted to the
Township Manager accompanied by an application for approval. The Township
Manager shall transmit one copy to each of the following for review and
recommendations at least 45 days prior to the date on which the Board of
Commissioners is to take action: the Township Engineer , Township Planning
Commission and the Montgomery County Planning Commission. The Planning
Commission shall transmit the declaration to the Board of Commissioners with
its recommendations for action by the Board. 24
      (2)   Declaration approval. After the declaration has been approved by
the Board , the copies duly certified by the Township Manager shall be
distributed as follows:
         (a)   Three copies will be returned to the applicant for his files and
for submission to the Office of the Recorder of Deeds of Montgomery County and
the Montgomery County Planning Commission.
         (b)   One copy will be retained in the Township files.
24. Editor’s Note: Former Subsection A2, Contents of the Declaration , which
immediately followed this subsection, was deleted 1-10-1995 by Ord. No. 879.
§ 212-38.   Plats and plans of condominiums.
   A.   Submission. In addition to all plans required pursuant to Article III
of this chapter, one copy of the plats and plans of the condominiums , on linen
or Mylar drafting film, 24 inches by 36 inches, as specified by the Recorder of
Deeds of Montgomery County, shall be submitted to the Township Manager,
together with five paper prints accompanied by an application for approval. The
Township Secretary shall transmit one copy to each of the following for review
and recommendation at least 45 days prior to the date on which the Board of
Commissioners are to take action: the Township Engineer , the Township Planning
Commission and the Montgomery County Planning Commission. The Planning
Commission shall transmit the plats and plans of the condominiums to the Board
of Commissioners with its recommenda tions for action by the Board. 25
   B.   Approval of plats and plans of condominiums . After the plats and plans
of the condominiums have been approved by the Board , the copies duly certified
by the Township Manager shall be distributed as follows:
      (1)   Three copies will be returned to the applicant for his files and
for submission to the Office of the Recorder of Deeds of Montgomery County and
the Montgomery County Planning Commission.
      (2)   One copy will be retained in the Township files.
25. Editor’s Note: Former Subsection A2, Contents of the Declaration Plan,
which immediately followed this subsection, was deleted 1-10-1995 by Ord. No.
879.
§ 212-39.   Bylaws.
[Amended 1-10-1995 by Ord. No. 879]
   A.   Submission. In addition to all plans required pursuant to Article III
of this chapter, six copies of the bylaws shall be submitted to the Township
Manager accompanied by the application for approval and shall be forwarded to
the Board of Commissioners for its action. The Township Manager shall transmit
one copy to the Township Planning Commission for its review and recommendations
at least 45 days prior to the date on which the Board of Commissioners is to
take action. The Planning Commission shall transmit the bylaws to the Board of
Commissioners with its recommendations for action by the Board . All subsequent
amendments to the approved bylaws shall be submitted to the Township Manager
for approval in accordance with the requirements of this subsection. 26 
   B.   Should any property or structure be converted into condominium units in
violation of this chapter, in addition to other remedies provided by law,
appropriate action(s) or proceed ings(s), whether by legal or equitable process
or otherwise, may be instituted or taken against the owner or owners to prevent
such unlawful violation.
   C.   The provisions, restrictions and benefits of this section may not be
waived by agreement or otherwise.
   D.   No declaration shall be approved by the Board of Commissioners unless
the owner or owners of the property or structure converting the same agree to
comply with the provisions set forth in this section. 27
26. Editor’s Note: Former Subsection 2, Contents of Code of Regulations , which
immediately followed this subsection, was deleted 1-10-1995 by Ord. No. 879.
27. Editor’s Note: Former Sec. 5.04, Conversions of Real Property or Structure
to Condominiums, and Sec. 5.05, Declaration of Revocation, which immediately
followed this section, were 1-10-1995 by Ord. No. 879.
ARTICLE VI
Plan Submission Requirements and Processing Procedures
§ 212-40.   Applicability.
The procedures set forth in this Article shall be followed by all applicants
proposing to subdivide or develop land in Upper Dublin Township.
§ 212-41.   Plans required for approval.
[Amended 8-11-2009 by Ord. No. 09-1217, § 1; 6-14-2011 by Ord. No. 11-1240, §
19; 5-14-2013 by Ord. No. 13-1272, §§ 5, 6]
Applicants shall be required to submit the following plans :
   A.   Tentative sketch (optional). Applicants are encouraged to submit a
tentative sketch for informal discussion with Township, county and state
agencies. A tentative sketch for a land development or a subdivision shall not
be considered a formal application; however, when submitted, it should be as
described in §
212-42.
   B.   Preliminary plan (required). A preliminary plan as described in §
212-43 is required for all subdivisions and land development proposed within
the Township.
   C.   Minor subdivision  plan (required). A minor subdivision  plan as
described in §
212-44 is required for all applicable subdivisions . A determination will be
made by Township officials, consisting of the Township Manager, Engineer ,
Solicitor, and Planner as to when a minor subdivision  plan should be required
in accordance with the criteria for a minor subdivision . [Amended 10-14-1997
by Ord. No. 954; 6-14-2011 by Ord. No. 11-1240]
   D.   Final plan (required). A final plan is required for all subdivisions
and land developments proposed within the Township.
      (1)   A final plan shall consist of two parts:
         (a)   An improvement construction plan as described in §
212-45B herein.
         (b)   A record plan as described in §
212-45C herein.
      (2)   A plan showing all information required for a final plan , which
has been submitted as a preliminary plan and for which no changes have been
required by the Township, may be approved as a final plan .
   E.   A stormwater management plan shall be submitted, if required pursuant
to
Chapter 206, Stormwater Management, in accordance with the provisions outlined
therein. [Added 7-14- 1998 by Ord. No. 973; amended 9-14-2004 by Ord. No. 1139]
   F.   Lot Consolidation. Adjacent lots owned by the same entity may be
consolidated by recording a deed describing the lots as a single parcel,
without minor subdivision  plan approval, where the only change being made to a
lot line is the elimination of one or more of them, subject to administrative
review by the Township Engineer and the Code Enforcement Department. This
exemption from the approval procedures set forth in this chapter shall be
subject to the following:
      (1)   A statement must be placed in the deed acknowledging that it is a
deed of consolidation intended to merge the lots and that any future
independent use of the pre-consolidation lots would require subdivision
approval.
      (2)   The application to register the deed shall constitute an
application to amend the Township’s plan of properties to show the
consolidation.
      (3)   Prior to such deed being recorded at the Montgomery County Recorder
of Deeds office, the Code Enforcement Department shall notify the Montgomery
County Board of Assessment, the Township Engineer , the Zoning Officer, and the
Township Tax Collector, of the proposed consolidation.
      (4)   Each deed that will be submitted for recording with the Montgomery
County Recorder of Deeds shall be filed and recorded with the Township Code
Enforcement Department. The filing shall include a copy of the deed and have
attached thereto a plan prepared, signed and sealed by a registered surveyor
showing:
         (a)   The metes and bounds, gross and net (after deducting the rights-
of-way of any public or private street ) areas.
         (b)   The error of closure of the consolidated lot . The error of
closure shall not be greater than one part in 5,000.
         (c)   No discrepancies in any property lines.
         (d)   Consistent bearing datum.
      (5)   The Township Engineer may request the applicant submit additional
information, such as a title survey or binder, if necessary to clarify any
existing conditions or other related issues.
         (a)   If upon review there are discrepancies and/or inconsistencies
that cannot be readily resolved, then the lot consolidation plan shall be
rejected and returned to the applicant .
            [1]   Once a rejected lot consolidation is remedied, it may be
resubmitted as minor subdivisions , as provided for in this Chapter.
      (6)   Upon approval by the Code Enforcement Officer and merger by deed
original lots shall lose their separate identity for all purposes relating to
their development.
[Added 8-11-2009 by Ord. No. 09-1217]
      (7)   Certificates. When approved, the record plan must show:
         (a)   The signature and seal of the registered surveyor certifying
that the plan represents a survey made by him, that the monuments shown thereon
exist as located, and that the dimensional and geodetic details are correct.
         (b)   The signature and seal of the registered engineer verifying that
the plan of improvements is true and correct and made by him.
         (c)   The signature duly notarized and date of the owner or equitable
owner certifying his adoption of the plan .
         (d)   The date, Township Seal and signature of the President of the
Board of Commissioners, certifying that the Board approved the plan attested by
the Township Secretary.
         (e)   The processed and reviewed certification of the Montgomery
County Planning Commission.
         (f)   The certificates as required by 53 P.S. § 10503.1.
[Added 5-14-2013 by Ord. No. 13-1272]
   G.   Lot line change. A change to one lot line between two adjacent lots may
be approved administratively, without minor subdivision  plan approval, where
the only change being made is to adjust the one common lot line , subject to
review by the Township Engineer and the Code Enforcement Department. This
exemption from the approval procedures set forth in this chapter shall be
subject to the following:
      (1)   A statement must be placed in each deed acknowledging that it is a
revised deed intended to revise a single lot line .
      (2)   The application to register the deeds shall constitute an
application to amend the Township’s plan of properties to show the lot line
revision.
      (3)   Prior to such deed being recorded at the Montgomery County Recorder
of Deeds office, the Code Enforcement Department shall notify the Montgomery
County Board of Assessment, the Township Engineer , the Zoning Officer, and the
Township Tax Collector, of the proposed lot line revision.
      (4)   No new lots may be created as a result of the application.
      (5)   The revised lots shall be no less conforming than the original lots
with respect to lot areas and other dimensional requirements of the applicable
zoning district.
      (6)   Each deed that will be submitted for recording with the Montgomery
County Recorder of Deeds shall be filed and recorded with the Township Code
Enforcement Department. The filing shall include a copy of the deed and have
attached thereto a plan prepared, signed and sealed by a registered surveyor
showing:
         (a)   The metes and bounds, gross and net (after deducting the rights-
of-way of any public or private street ) areas.
         (b)   The error of closure of each lot . The error of closure shall
not be greater than one part in 5,000.
         (c)   No discrepancies in any property lines.
         (d)   Consistent bearing datum.
         (e)   Information required in §
212-42.
         (f)   Any additional plan information as required by the Township
Engineer .
      (7)   The Township Engineer may request the applicant submit additional
information, such as a title survey or binder, if necessary to clarify any
existing conditions or other related issues.
         (a)   If upon review there are discrepancies and/or inconsistencies
that cannot be readily resolved, then the lot line change application and plan
shall be rejected and returned to the applicant .
            [1]   Once a rejected lot line change application and plan is
remedied, it may be resubmitted as minor subdivisions , as provided for in this
chapter.
      (8)   Upon approval by the Code Enforcement Officer the revised lots
shall lose their pre- procedure identity for all purposes relating to any
future development.
[Added 6-14-2011 by Ord. No. 11-1240]
      (9)   Certificates. When approved, the same certifications required in §
212-41.F(7) shall apply for lot line changes. [Added 5-14-2013 by Ord. No. 13-
1272]
§ 212-42.   Tentative sketch requirements.
[Amended 6-14-2011 by Ord. No. 11-1240, § 20]
Applicants desiring to submit a tentative sketch shall show the following
information:
   A.   The name of the subdivision or land development .
   B.   The name and address of the owner, engineer and/or surveyor.
   C.   The tract boundary and location by deed plotting.
   D.   North point and scale, if any.
   E.   The location of the tract to surrounding tracts and to at least two
existing streets . The surrounding tracts shall be shown along with the current
property owners’ names.
   F.   Existing tract features, such as woodlands, watercourses , floodplains
, steep slopes (as defined in Zoning Code, §§
255-7 and
255-34 and in
Chapter 99, Excavations ), buildings and parking areas with access from a
public road [Amended 6-14-2011 by Ord. No. 11-1240]
   G.   Proposed features, such as lots , roads, buildings , parking areas,
access from a public road and landscape areas.
   H.   Zoning district and area regulations for the tract and surrounding
properties.
§ 212-43.   Preliminary plan requirements.
[Amended 6-14-2011 by Ord. No. 11-1240, § 21; 5-14-2013 by Ord. No. 13-1272, §
7]
Applicants submitting a preliminary plan for subdivision shall conform to the
following standards :
   A.   Drafting standards .
      (1)   The scale of the plan shall not be smaller than 100 feet to the
inch and shall be accurate to within one part in 300.
      (2)   Dimensions shall be in feet and decimals and bearings in degrees,
minutes and seconds.
      (3)   The plan shall show the courses and distances of the boundary line
survey of the entire tract being subdivided.
      (4)   The sheet or sheets shall be one of the following sizes: 24 inches
by 36 inches or 30 inches by 42 inches. If more than one sheet is necessary,
each sheet shall be the same size and consecutively numbered to show its
relation to the total number of sheets comprising the plan (i.e., Sheet No. 1
of 5). In addition, a digital copy of all materials shall be submitted in a
“.pdf” format. [Amended 10-14-1997 by Ord. No. 953; 6-14- 2011 by Ord. No. 11-
1240]
      (5)   Where there are two or more sheets, a key map shall be provided
sufficient to show their relationship.
      (6)   The plan shall be clear and legible and shall be so prepared and
bear an adequate legend to indicate clearly which features are existing and
which are proposed.
      (7)   The minimum text size shall be 0.1 inches in height. [Added 6-14-
2011 by Ord. No. 11-1240]
   B.   Location and identification. Each plan shall provide:
      (1)   A title consisting of the name and address of the subdivider ,
developer , builder and the person who developed the plan . A registered
professional surveyor must certify the tract boundary survey and a registered
professional engineer must certify the proposed improvements with their names
and addresses included on the plan .
      (2)   The name of the subdivision , its location by identification of
significant bounding roads, the names of adjacent property owners and the name
of the municipality.
      (3)   The date of preparation of the plan , the scale and North point.
      (4)   The entire tract boundary with bearings and distances.
      (5)   A key map relating the subdivision to at least three existing
intersections of Township roads, at a scale not less than 800 feet to the inch.
      (6)   The zoning district and area regulations from
Chapter 255, Zoning, for the tract being subdivided or developed and on
adjoining tracts. Any deed restrictions, variances or special exceptions being
sought or granted shall be shown or noted on the plan .
   C.   Existing features.
      (1)   All topographic and physical features within the tract being
subdivided which impacts it shall be shown:
         (a)   The location, name of roads including the width (cartway and
right-of-way ) dimensions, center line courses, distances, curve data,
curblines, curbline radii at intersections and street location tie ins by
courses and distances to the nearest intersection.
         (b)   The location of steep slopes (as defined in Zoning Code, §§
255-7 and
255-34 and
Chapter 99, Excavations ), watercourses , floodplains , riparian corridors ,
storm water management facilities and drainage flows.
         (c)   The location, size and ownership of utility lines above and
below ground, including but not limited to storm sewers, water, sanitary
sewers, gas mains, fire hydrants, electric cable and pipelines.
         (d)   Any man-made or natural features, not limited to steep slopes ,
soil types, deed restrictions having a significant impact on the tract to be
subdivided.
         (e)   Contours at vertical interval of two feet in sufficient detail
to show the course, structure and capacity of all stormwater management
facilities, including the method of drainage on adjacent tracts.
            [1]   If the distance between contour lines exceeds 100 feet
horizontally, a lesser contour interval will be required as determined by the
Township Engineer .
            [2]   Benchmarks to which contour elevations refer shall be noted
on the plan and shall be: Horizontal NAD 83 (1992 adjustment), Vertical NACD
88.
         (f)   The location, with measured distances from roads and property
lines, and the character of existing buildings and man-made structures on or in
the ground.
         (g)   The location of existing monuments with references to them.
      (2)   The off-site topographical information and physical features within
the 100 feet abutting the property must be shown with the same degree of
accuracy and detail required by §
212-43.C(1). This information may be supplemented by an aerial map. The level
of information/detail required is to be determined by the Township Engineer .
The Township Engineer may also require the applicant to provide information
within a greater abutting distance.
      (3)   Where the property is a resource listed on the Historic Resource
Inventory, the applicant shall submit a statement with the plan , indicating
which, if any, of such historic resources would be changed or affected to any
substantial extent by the implementation of the subdivision  plan and the
development of the property and the manner in which they would be changed or
affected. 29
[Amended 6-14-2011 by Ord. No. 11-1240]
   D.   Proposed features (lots and improvements ). All proposed improvements
as required by the design standards (accompanied by all supporting documents)
shall be shown on the plan . [Amended 6-14-2011 by Ord. No. 11-1240]
      (1)   The layout of all streets , alleys and walkways, including names
and widths of cartways and rights-of-way , and streets shown on the Township’s
Ultimate Right-of-Way Map which may impact the tract being subdivided.
      (2)   The layout, dimensions and net area of all lots , including
consecutive lot and house numbers. House numbers shall be assigned by the
Township.
      (3)   Any land to be dedicated for public or common use .
      (4)   Tentative grades of proposed streets to existing streets to a point
400 feet beyond the boundaries of the tract being subdivided, when required by
the Township Engineer . [Amended 6-14-2011 by Ord. No. 11-1240]
      (5)   The location and size of sanitary sewers, stormwater management
facilities, culverts, watercourses , on-site sewage facilities, if applicable,
water mains, fire hydrants, special structures and all appurtenances. [Amended
9-14-2004 by Ord. No. 1139]
      (6)   All building setback lines on each lot with distances from the
street  right-of-way ; lots to be used for other than residences.
      (7)   Disposition of all buildings and structures indicating retention or
demolition. The character and use of buildings and structures to be retained
shall be noted on the plan .
      (8)   The purpose, location, width and boundaries by dimensions of all
rights-of-way and/or easements to be created for all stormwater management
facilities, drainage , utilities or to other pertinent reasons. [Amended 9-14-
2004 by Ord. No. 1139]
      (9)   Typical cross-sections and center-line profile for each new or
widened street  cartway , as well as the profile for sanitary sewers and
stormwater management facilities, including manholes, inlets and catch basins.
[Amended 9-14-2004 by Ord. No. 1139]
      (10)   Soil erosion and sediment control facilities during and after
construction and stormwater management facilities, including the layout of
water detention structures , bridges and culverts. [Amended 9-14-2004 by Ord.
No. 1139]
      (11)   All landscaping facilities for screening, buffering, conservation,
shade and aesthetics. Facilities may include trees , shrubs , fences and/or
earthwork.
      (12)   Subdivision characteristics shall be noted on the plan indicating:
         (a)   The number of acres being subdivided.
         (b)   The number of lots created.
         (c)   The number, type and character of buildings .
         (d)   The linear feet of new road and widened road.
         (e)   The minimum, maximum and average lot size.
         (f)   The average slopes of all lots which contain any slope of 10% or
greater. [Added 8-11-1987 by Ord. No. 735]
      (13)   A street lighting plan in accordance with §
158-14 shall be submitted whenever a street is proposed to be constructed or
extended. [Added 10-8-2002 by Ord. No. 1093]
   E.   Improvement construction plan .
      (1)   Drafting standards . The same standards shall apply for the
improvement construction plan as for the preliminary plan , except that the
horizontal scale of the plan and profile shall not be smaller than 40 feet to
the inch, and the vertical scale shall be two, four, five or 10 feet to the
inch, whichever is more appropriate.
      (2)   Information to be shown. The plan shall contain all the information
and details, both on and off site , to provide working plans for the
construction of the proposed streets , and widening of existing streets ,
sanitary sewers and stormwater management facilities, utilities, erosion and
sediment control, landscaping, including all appurte nances, as shown on the
approved preliminary plan . The information shall include but not be limited
to:
         (a)   Horizontal plan . The horizontal plan shall show details of the
horizontal layout as follows:
            [1]   Information shown on the approved preliminary plan .
            [2]   The beginning and end of proposed immediate construction.
            [3]   Stations corresponding to those shown on the profile.
            [4]   The curb elevation at tangent points or horizontal curves at
road or alley intersections and at the projected intersections of the
curblines.
            [5]   The location and size of sanitary sewers and lateral
connections with distances between manholes, water, gas, electric and other
utility pipes or conduits and of stormwater management facilities, inlets and
manholes.
            [6]   The location, type and size of curbs and all paving widths.
            [7]   The location and species of all shade trees and the location
and type of fire hydrants and streetlights.
         (b)   Profiles. The profile plan shall show vertical details of the
horizontal plan as follows:
            [1]   Profiles and elevations of the ground along the center line
of proposed roads.
            [2]   Profiles of sanitary sewers with profiles over the sewer of
the present and finished ground surface showing manhole locations beginning
with the lowest manhole.
            [3]   Profiles of stormwater management facilities showing basin
structures , basin inlet and discharge points, manhole and/or inlet locations,
swales and other significant structures , conveyances and control measures.
            [4]   Profiles of water mains.
         (c)   Cross-section. The cross-section shall comply with the
Township’s standards and specifications as minimum requirements. It shall show
a typical cross-section across the road with details of grading and
construction as follows:
            [1]   The ultimate right-of-way width and location and width of the
cartway .
            [2]   The type, depth and crown of paving.
            [3]   The type and size of curb.
            [4]   When sidewalks are required, grading of the sidewalk area
should be carried to the full width of the ultimate right-of-way and slopes of
cut or fill extended beyond the ultimate right-of-way .
            [5]   When required, the location, width, type and depth of
sidewalks.
            [6]   The typical location, size and depths of sewers, stormwater
management facilities and utilities.
         (d)   Additional information. Additional information shall be
submitted with the final plan as follows:
            [1]   All required local, state and federal permits shall be
submitted. These permits may include Upper Dublin Township, Montgomery County,
Pennsylvania Department of Transportation (PennDOT) and Pennsylvania Department
of Environmental Protection (DEP) permits. DEP permits may be required for
stormwater management, stream alteration, dams, erosion and sedimentation
control, air pollution or sanitary sewer facilities.
            [2]   All engineering calculations which support the proposed
improvements , such as stormwater management, sanitary facility design or
structural calcula tions shall be submitted.
            [3]   A statement shall be required on the final plan as follows:
“The approved improvement construction plan , a copy of which may be inspected
at the office of the Township Public Works Director, has been made a part of
the approved final plan .”
[Added 6-14-2011 by Ord. No. 11-1240]
   F.   Certificates. [Reserved]. [Amended 6-14-2011 by Ord. No. 11-1240; 5-14-
2013 by Ord. No. 13-1272]
29. Editor’s Note: See
Ch. 127, Historic Preservation, and Ch. A264, Historic Resource Inventory.
§ 212-44.   Minor subdivision plan (final).
[Amended 6-14-2011 by Ord. No. 11-1240, § 22; 5-14-2013 by Ord. No. 13-1272, §
8]
It is the purpose of this section to provide for simplified plan submission and
processing requirements by which minor subdivisions may be submitted and
approved. Plans submitted under the provisions of this section must meet the
following criteria, conform to established standards and provide the required
information:
   A.   Criteria for minor subdivisions . A minor subdivision is a subdivision
of a tract that:
      (1)   Has not been a part of a subdivision submitted within the past five
years.
      (2)   Presently fronts on a physically improved street that is legally
open to the public.
      (3)   Will not involve or require the construction of any new street ,
the extension of municipal services or the creation of any other public
improvement .
      (4)   Does not require a variance from
Chapter 255, Zoning, for any one of the proposed lots on which new construction
will occur or may occur in the future. [Amended 5-14-2013 by Ord. No. 13-1272]
      (5)   Is in general conformance with the other plans . [Amended 1-10-1995
by Ord. No. 879]
      (6)   No steep slopes , Floodplain Conservation District (as defined in
the Township Code
Chapter 255, Zoning, Article XXII, Floodplain Conservation District) or
drainage courses exist or are needed on the tract being subdivided. [Amended 9-
14-1999 by Ord. No. 1006; 6-14-2011 by Ord. No. 11-1240]
   B.   Drafting standards . The same standards shall be required for a minor
subdivision  plan as are required in §
212-43A for a preliminary plan . [Amended 6-14-2011 by Ord. No. 11- 1240]
   C.   Location and identification. The location and identification
requirements in §
212-43.B shall apply for minor subdivisions . [Amended 5-14-2013 by Ord. No.
13-1272]
   D.   Existing features. The same standards shall be required for a minor
subdivision  plan as are required in §
212-43C for a preliminary plan . [Amended 6-14-2011 by Ord. No. 11-1240]
   E.   Proposed features (lots ).
      (1)   The layout, dimensions and net area of all lots , including
consecutive lot or house numbers. House numbers shall be assigned by the
Township.
      (2)   The location and size of sanitary sewers, stormwater management
facilities, water mains, private wells, fire hydrants or on-site sewage
facilities, if applicable. [Amended 1-10-1995 by Ord. No. 879; 9-14-2004 by
Ord. No. 1139]
      (3)   All building setback lines on each lot with distances from the
street  right-of-way ; lots to be used for other than residences.
      (4)   Disposition of all buildings and structures indicating retention or
demolition. The character and use of buildings and structures to be retained
shall be noted on the plan .
      (5)   All landscaping facilities for screening, buffering, conservation,
shade and aesthetics. Facilities may include trees , shrubs , fences and/or
earthwork.
      (6)   Subdivision characteristics shall be noted on the plan indicating:
         (a)   The number of acres being subdivided.
         (b)   The number, type and character of buildings .
         (c)   The minimum, maximum and average lot size.
   F.   Certifications. When approved, the same certifications required in §
212-45.C(4) shall apply for minor subdivisions . [Amended 1-10-1995 by Ord. No.
879; 5-14-2013 by Ord. No. 13- 1272]
§ 212-44.1.   Minor land development plan.
[Added 3-9-1999 by Ord. No. 990; Amended 6-14-2011 by Ord. No. 11-1240, § 23;
5-14-2013 by Ord. No. 13-1272, § 9]
It is the purpose of this section to provide for simplified plan submission and
processing requirements by which minor land development may be submitted and
approved Plans submitted under the provisions of this section must meet the
following criteria, conform to established standards and provide the required
information:
   A.   Criteria for minor land development . A minor land development is a
development of a tract that:
      (1)   The proposal involves expansion of the gross area of an existing
building by no more than 25% to a maximum of 5,000 square feet of new area.
      (2)   The proposal does not introduce a new use to the property.
      (3)   The proposal does not involve the creation of additional dwelling
units .
      (4)   The proposal does not involve the construction of a new building
larger than 5,000 square feet in area.
      (5)   The proposal does not require any additional stormwater management
facilities or other public improvements .
      (6)   The specific property has received minor land development
consideration no more than two times previous to the current proposal.
   B.   Drafting standards .
      (1)   Drafting standards . The same standards shall be required for a
minor land develop ment as are required in §
212-43A for a preliminary plan . [Amended 6-14-2011 by Ord. No. 11-1240]
      (2)   Location and identification. Each plan shall provide:
         (a)   A title consisting of the name and address of the subdivider ,
developer , builder and the person who developed the plan . A registered
professional surveyor must certify the tract boundary survey and a registered
professional engineer must certify the proposed improvements with their names
and addresses included on the plan .
         (b)   The name of the subdivision , its location by identification of
significant bounding roads, the names of adjacent property owners and the name
of the municipality.
         (c)   The date of preparation of the plan , the scale and North point.
         (d)   The entire tract boundary with bearings and distances.
         (e)   A key map relating the subdivision to at least three existing
intersections of Township roads, at a scale not less than 800 feet to the inch.
         (f)   The zoning district and area regulations from
Chapter 255, Zoning, for the tract being subdivided or developed and on
adjoining tracts. Any deed restrictions, variances or special exceptions being
sought or granted shall be shown or noted on the plan .
         (g)   Montgomery County Planning Commission file number.
         (h)   Property parcel number, block , unit, address, owner of record,
deed book and page.
         (i)   Reference to any prior subdivisions , conditional use approvals
or Zoning Hearing Board audits.
   C.   Existing features. The same standards shall be required for a minor
land development plan as are required in §
212-43C for a preliminary plan . [Amended 6-14-2011 by Ord. No. 11- 1240]
   D.   Proposed features. The same standards shall be required for a minor
land development plan as are required in §
212-43D for a preliminary plan . [Amended 6-14-2011 by Ord. No. 11- 1240]
   E.   Certifications. Upon approval, the record plan shall show:
      (1)   The signature of the registered professional surveyor or engineer
certifying that the plan represents a survey made by him, the monuments shown
exist as located and the dimensions and geodetic details are correct.
      (2)   The signature of the subdivider , developer or builder certifying
his adoption of the plan and changes.
      (3)   The signature of the President of the Board of Commissioners,
attested by the Township Secretary, certifying that the Board of Commissioners
has approved the minor land development plan and any changes.
      (4)   The certificates as required by 53 P.S. § 10503.1.
   F.   Procedures.
      (1)   Applications for minor land development approval shall be submitted
in letter form to the Code Enforcement Office, along with 15 copies of a plan
with sufficient detail and dimension to show the nature and character of the
work to be performed. If the Township Engineer requires information in addition
to that required above, to perform a complete review, that information shall be
provided as requested.
      (2)   Applications shall include the fee for minor land development
application as established by the Board of Commissioners and any other
applicable fees.
      (3)   Each application will be forwarded to the Upper Dublin Township
Planning, Parks and Library Committee, for comment and recommendation at its
next regularly scheduled meeting. The applicant shall be responsible for
presenting his application and demonstrating why consideration as a minor land
development is appropriate. Applicant will also be responsible for securing
reviews from the following advisory groups: [Amended 6-14-2011 by Ord. No. 11-
1240]
         (a)   Planning Commission . [Amended 6-14-2011 by Ord. No. 11-1240]
         (b)   Environmental Protection Advisory Board.
         (c)   Park and Recreation Director.
         (d)   Public Works Director.
         (e)   Shade Tree Commission.
      (4)   Upon recommendation by the Planning Commission and the
Commissioner’s Planning, Parks and Library Committee, the application will be
sent to the Board of Commissioners for consideration for final approval.
[Amended 6-14-2011 by Ord. No. 11-1240]
      (5)   Each application shall be subject to review by the Township
Engineer . Review fees shall be paid by the applicant .
      (6)   [Reserved]. [Amended 5-14-2013 by Ord. No. 13-1272]
   G.   Certifications. When approved, the same certifications required in §
212-45C(4) shall apply to minor land developments . [Added 5-14-2013by Ord. No.
13-1272]
§ 212-45.   Final plan.
[Amended 6-14-2011 by Ord. No. 11-1240, § 24]
Applicants submitting a final plan for subdivision shall conform to the
following standards :
   A.   The final plan shall be submitted as soon as practical after the
required improvements have been installed or are guaranteed in accordance with
Act 247, as amended. 30
   B.   Improvement construction plan . The same standards shall be required
for a final plan as are required in §
212-43E for a preliminary plan . [Amended 6-14-2011 by Ord. No. 11- 1240]
   C.   Record plan .
      (1)   Drafting standards . The same standards shall be required for a
record plan as for the preliminary plan and, in addition for recording
purposes, the plans shall be placed on sheets sizes 24 inches by 36 inches. All
lettering and lines shall be drawn so as to still be legible should the plan be
reduced to half size. In addition, all plans and reports shall be submitted in
a .pdf format. [Amended 6-14-2011 by Ord. No. 11-1240]
      (2)   Existing features. The same standards shall be required for a
record plan as are required in §
212-43C for a preliminary plan . [Amended 6-14-2011 by Ord. No. 11-1240]
      (3)   Information to be shown. The plan , which shall include all
portions of an approved preliminary plan , shall show:
         (a)   A title, as required for a preliminary plan .
         (b)   Evidence should be provided that the plans are in conformance
with
Chapter 255, Zoning, and other applicable Township ordinances and regulations.
In any instance where such plans do not conform, evidence shall be presented
that an exception or variance has been officially authorized.
         (c)   The names of abutting owners, names, locations, widths and other
dimensions of all roads, including tie-ins, alleys and easements , including
center line courses, distances and curve data; descriptive data of right-of-way
lines and easement lines so that a single deed may be drawn to the appropriate
authority for the dedication of roads by the subdivider , developer or builder
.
         (d)   The layout and dimensions, with bearings and distances, of lots
, including consecutive numbering of lots and house numbers, building setback
lines with distances for the ultimate right-of-way lines , the total area, net
area, number of lots , area of each lot and minimum lot size.
         (e)   The typical cross-sections for each proposed road indicating
location, width, type, thickness and crown of paving; type and size of curbs;
location, width, type and thickness of sidewalks.
         (f)   The location of curblines, with radii at intersections; the
location and width of sidewalks and crosswalks .
         (g)   The location and size of stormwater management facilities,
sanitary sewers, culverts, major structures , water mains and fire hydrants.
[Amended 9-14-2004 by Ord. No. 1139]
         (h)   The purpose of creating easements .
         (i)   References to any land to be dedicated for public use .
         (j)   The location, material and size of all monuments with reference
to them.
         (k)   Restrictions in the deed affecting the subdivision of the
property.
         (l)   The location of all floodplains , as defined by
Chapter 255, Zoning, and for the purposes of the determination of applicable
flood insurance risk premiums for structure in flood-prone areas:
            [1]   Indicate the lowest habitable floor elevation (in relation to
near sea level) of new or substantially improved structures ; and
            [2]   Indicate the elevation to which the structure will be
floodproofed.
         (m)   Additional notes as required by the Township Engineer .
         (n)   Landscape plantings.
      (4)   Certificates. When approved, the record plan must show:
         (a)   The signature and seal of the registered surveyor certifying
that the plan represents a survey made by him, that the monuments shown thereon
exist as located and that the dimensional and geodetic details are correct.
         (b)   The signature and seal of the registered engineer verifying that
the plan of improvements is true and correct and made by him.
         (c)   The signature duly notarized and date of the owner or equitable
owner certifying his adoption of the plan .
         (d)   The date, Township Seal and signature of the President of the
Board of Commissioners, certifying that the Board approved the plan attested by
the Township Secretary.
         (e)   The date and signature of the Chairman of the Planning
Commission certifying the Planning Commission reviewed the plan .
         (f)   The date and signature of the Township Engineer indicating he
reviewed the plan .
         (g)   The processed and reviewed certification of the Montgomery
County Planning Commission.
         (h)   The certificates as required by 53 P.S. § 10503.1. [Added 1-10-
1995 by Ord. No. 879]
[Amended 5-14-2013 by Ord. No. 13-1272]
30. Editor’s Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 212-46.   Land development plans.
[Amended 6-14-2011 by Ord. No. 11-1240, § 25; 5- 14-2013 by Ord. No. 13-1272, §
11]
Applicants submitting a land development plan shall be required to conform to
the following standards and submit these plans :
   A.   Tentative sketch . A tentative sketch may be submitted at the option of
the applicant . When submitted, a tentative sketch shall conform to the
standards set forth in §
212-42 of this article.
   B.   Preliminary plan . A preliminary plan shall be submitted and conform to
the standards set forth in §
212-43 of this article, with appropriate data, plus the following information,
shown on the plan :
      (1)   All covenants relating to use .
      (2)   Tract statistics, including:
         (a)   Total tract area.
         (b)   Net tract area.
         (c)   Total dwelling units and proposed density, if applicable, and/or
intensity of use , including bedroom mix.
         (d)   Building and impervious coverage.
         (e)   Total number of parking spaces and spaces per dwelling , if
applicable, and/or uses .
         (f)   Lot size, floor area or gross leaseable area, as applicable.
      (3)   The arrangement and location of all buildings , roads, parking
areas and other man- made features, such as accessory structures , facilities
and walkways.
      (4)   The areas of common open space or facilities.
      (5)   A conceptual site utilization layout defining the general locations
of all proposed uses and activities.
      (6)   A grading  plan showing changes to existing terrain and structures
and specifications for required improvements .
      (7)   A landscape plan in accordance with §
212-32 of this chapter.
      (8)   Other data as may be required by the Township Commissioners, such
as traffic report, conservation district report, planning module from
Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Resources and permits required from
state, county and/or Township agencies.
      (9)   An outdoor lighting plan in accordance with §
158-14. [Added 10-8-2002 by Ord. No. 1093]
   C.   Final plan . A final plan shall be submitted and conform to the
standards set forth in §
212-45 of this article with appropriate data plus the following additional
information shall be shown on the plan : [Amended 6-14-2011 by Ord. No. 11-
1240]
      (1)   Improvement construction plan . Applicants shall submit an
improvement construction plan as provided for in §
212-43E. [Amended 6-14-2011 by Ord. No. 11-1240]
      (2)   Record plan . A record plan for a land development shall be
prepared for recording when improvements are required for public use , such as
road widenings and easements . The record plan shall show additional
information as follows:
         (a)   All covenants relating to use .
         (b)   Tract statistics.
            [1]   Total tract area.
            [2]   Net tract area.
            [3]   Total dwelling units and proposed density, if applicable,
and/or intensity of use , including bedroom mix.
            [4]   Building and impervious coverage.
            [5]   Total number of parking spaces and spaces per dwelling , if
applicable, and/or use .
            [6]   Lot size, floor area or gross leaseable area, as applicable.
      (3)   The arrangement and location of all buildings , roads, parking
areas and other man- made features, such as accessory structures , facilities
and walkways.
      (4)   Certifications. When approved, the same certifications required in
§ 212.C(4) shall apply for land development plans . [Added 5-14-2013 by Ord.
No. 13-1272]
§ 212-47.   Plan processing procedures.
[Amended 6-14-2011 by Ord. No. 11-1240, § 26]
For approval of a subdivision or land development plan , all applicants shall
comply with the following plan processing procedure:
   A.   All plans filed for approval shall be submitted, with the appropriate
application and fee as provided in the Township fee schedule 31 in the
following order: [Amended 1-10-1995 by Ord. No. 879; 6-14-2011 by Ord. No. 11-
1240]
      (1)   Tentative sketch (optional but encouraged).
      (2)   Preliminary plan .
      (3)   Final plan .
   B.   The Township Manager or his designee shall have seven days from the
date of submission of an application to check the plans and documents to
determine if on their face they are in proper form and contain all information
required by this chapter. If defective, the application and fees may be
returned to the applicant with a statement of rejection, within the seven-day
period; otherwise, it shall be deemed accepted for filing as of the date of
submission. Acceptance for filing shall not, however, constitute a waiver of
any deficiencies or irregularities. The applicant may appeal a decision by the
Township Manager under this section to the Board of Commissioners. [Amended 6-
14-2011 by Ord. No. 11-1240]
   C.   Each plan revision, whether to a tentative, preliminary or final plan ,
shall be filed one at a time. The filing of a plan revision shall constitute a
withdrawal of the preceding version of that plan .
      (1)   The Township Manager or his designee shall have seven days from the
date of submission to examine amended or corrected applications to determine
whether such amended or corrected applications result in a substantial
amendment to the plan or in the filing of a plan so changed as to be considered
a new plan .
[Added 6-14-2011 by Ord. No. 11-1240]
   D.   When a preliminary or final subdivision or land development plan is
amended or revised in any respect after the original submission date, before
the amended or revised plan is accepted by the Township Manager, the subdivider
or developer shall execute a statement indicating that the original plan is
amended or revised and that the time for review is extended 90 days following
the next regularly scheduled meeting of the Board or, if that meeting is more
than 30 days following the filing of the revised plan , then 90 days following
the 30th day after filing. If the applicant refuses to extend the time for plan
processing, the Board of Commissioners shall at its next public meeting deny
the original application. [Amended 1-10-1995 by Ord. No. 879; 6-14-2011 by Ord.
No. 11-1240]
   E.   When the decision reached concerning an application for approval of a
specific plan results in a denial of the plan , then the applicant , when and
if he should reapply requesting approval of the plan , shall do so in
accordance with the plan sequence outlined in Subsection A herein and the
additional procedures below. [Amended 6-14-2011 by Ord. No. 11-1240]
   F.   Applications for approval of a subdivision or land development plan
shall be filed with the Township Code Enforcement Office. Any application for
approval of a subdivision or land development plan must include payment of the
required fee, comply with the subdivision and land development plan checklist
requirements, 32  and include complete copies in a paper and .pdf format of all
materials filed.  [Amended 1-10-1995 by Ord. No. 879; 6-14-2011 by Ord. No. 11-
1240]
   G.   The applicant , or his agent , shall be required to appear in person at
the Township building in order to make application for approval of a plan .
[Amended 6-14-2011 by Ord. No. 11-1240]
   H.   Schedule of plan processing steps. The following number of copies of
each plan shall be submitted with the application to the Township:
      (1)   Tentative sketch . A minimum of 20 copies of the tentative sketch
shall be submitted for distribution by the Township as follows:
Distribution Number of Copies
Distribution                          Number of Copies
Planning, Parks & Library Committee   3
President, Board of Commissioners     1
Engineer                              2
Manager                               1
Solicitor                             1
Municipal Planner                     1
Planning Commission                   2
Environmental Planning Advisory Board 2
Public Works Department               1
Parks and Recreation Department       1
Code Enforcement Department           4
Montgomery County Planning Commission 1
 
      (2)   Preliminary plan .
         (a)   A minimum of 20 copies shall be submitted for distribution by
the Township as provided for in Subsection H(1) above:
         (b)   Depending upon the nature of the plan , up to four additional
copies may be required for distribution as follows:
 
Distribution                                        Number of Copies
Montgomery County Conservation District             1
Montgomery County Department of Roads and Bridges   1
Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection 1
Pennsylvania Department of Transportation           1
 
      (3)   Final plan . Improvement construction and final plan . A minimum of
15 copies shall be submitted for distribution by the Township as follows:
Distribution Number of Copies
Distribution                           Number of Copies
Township                                
   Engineer                         2
   Planning, Parks & Library Committ1e
   Manager                          1
   Code Enforcement Department      8
   Public Works Department          1
   Police Department                1
Montgomery County Planning Commission  1
 
[Amended 6-14-2011 by Ord. No. 11-1240]
   I.   The date shall be stamped on each copy received. [Amended 1-10-1995 by
Ord. No. 87933; 6-14-2011 by Ord. No. 11-1240]
   J.   Prior to preliminary plan approval, the applicant shall provide
evidence of a formal review and response from the following agencies, if
applicable: [Amended 6-14-2011 by Ord. No. 11-1240]
      (1)   Highway occupancy permit (state, county or Township). 34
      (2)   Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection, approval for:
         (a)   Planning module for land development .
         (b)   Water quality management permit.
         (c)   Stream encroachment permit.
         (d)   General permits.
         (e)   Others.
[Amended 6-14-2011 by Ord. No. 11-1240]
      (3)   Montgomery County Conservation District for:
         (a)   Soil erosion and sediment control.
      (4)   Appropriate Water Authority for:
         (a)   Water source.
         (b)   Extension.
         (c)   Connections.
   K.   Plan Review. [Amended 1-10-1995 by Ord. No. 879; 10-14-1997 by Ord. No.
954; 11-14- 2006 by Ord. No. 1175; 6-14-2011 by Ord. No. 11-1240]
      (1)   The Township Engineer , the Planning Commission , and the
Montgomery County Planning Commission shall review the plans and shall submit
their comments and recommendations to the Board of Commissioners. Where the
property is listed on the Upper Dublin Historic Inventory, the Historical
Commission shall also review the plans and shall submit their comments. 35 
Where applicable, the Environmental Protection Advisory Board will also submit
its comments. [Amended 6-14-2011 by Ord. No. 11-1240]
      (2)   The Board of Commissioners shall act on a preliminary or final plan
within 90 days following the next regularly scheduled meeting of the Board of
Commissioners next following the date the application is filed or, if that
meeting is more than 30 days following the filing of the application, then 90
days following the 30th day after filing.
         (a)   The Commissioners Planning Committee will comment on a tentative
sketch  plan and advise the applicant . No formal action will be taken by the
Board on a tentative sketch  plan application.
         (b)   If the Board approves a preliminary or final plan , the Township
Manager or Secretary will so certify thereon. Two copies of the approved plan
will be returned to the applicant .
         (c)   If the Board conditionally approves a plan , the applicant shall
subsequently submit a revised plan which complies with the conditions
stipulated. At the time of the Board’s conditional approval, the applicant must
agree, in writing, to acceptance of the conditions specified.
         (d)   If the Board disapproves the plan , the Township Manager or
Secretary will notify the applicant , in writing, of the defects in the
application stating the requirements not met.
      (3)   A point by point response letter addressing each review comment
shall be provided with all resubmissions. [Added 6-14-2011 by Ord. No. 11-1240]
   L.   The final plan , complying with all applicable requirements, shall be
filed with the Township for approval within 12 months from the date of the
approval of the preliminary plan . Failure to comply with the time limitation
herein provided shall make the approval of the preliminary plan null and void
unless an extension of time is granted in accordance with this section. The 12-
month period may be extended by the Board of Commissioners upon application by
the applicant filed in writing no less than 30 days prior to the end of the
twelve-month period, if all of the following is demonstrated: [Amended 2-10-
2004 by Ord. No. 1124; 6-14-2011 by Ord. No. 11-1240]
      (1)   That one or more conditions existent at the time of preliminary
plan approval have changed.
      (2)   That such change of circumstances was beyond the applicant’s
control and has prevented submission of the final plan within the twelve-month
period.
      (3)   That such circumstances have been overcome or will be overcome in
the foreseeable future.
   M.   The final plan will not be formally approved by the Board of
Commissioners unless the required improvements have been constructed and/or
installed in strict accordance with Township standards and specifications, or
the Township is assured by means of a proper completion guaranty in the form of
a bond, or the deposit of funds or securities in escrow, sufficient to cover
the cost of the improvements as estimated by the Township Engineer , so that
the improvements will subsequently be installed. [Amended 6-14-2011 by Ord. No.
11-1240]
31. Editor’s Note: See fee schedule.
32. Editor’s Note: The checklist is on file in the Township offices.
33. Editor’s Note: Former Subsection 9, regarding acceptance of plans, which
immediately followed this subsection, was deleted 1-10-1995 by Ord. No. 879.
34. Editor’s Note: Former Subsection 10(b), regarding Township authority
approval, which immediately followed this subsection, was deleted 1-10-1995 by
Ord. No. 879.
35. Editor’s Note: See
Ch. 127, Historic Preservation, and Ch. A264, Historic Resource Inventory.
§ 212-47.1.   Plans provided on magnetic media.
[Added 11-10-1998 by Ord. No. 979 [Amended 6-14-2011 by Ord. No. 11-1240, § 27]
Upon final approval of a plan of subdivision or land development , all final
plans shall be provided on a disk with digital files (.pdf format).
§ 212-48.   Plan recording.
[Amended 4-8-1997 by Ord. No. 933; 6-14-2011 by Ord. No. 11-1240, § 28; 5-14-
2013 by Ord. No. 13-1272, § 12]
Upon approval of a final plan of subdivision or land development , nine signed
and notarized copies of the record plan and Post Construction Stormwater
Management Plan, (one mylar copy and eight paper copies) shall be submitted to
the Township Engineer . The Engineer will review and sign the plans and forward
to the Township Manager for Township signatures and seal. Within 90 days of
such final approval, the plan shall be recorded by the Township Solicitor in
the office of the Recorder of Deeds, Norristown, Pennsylvania. One signed paper
copy will be returned to the owner/developer bearing the review stamp of the
Montgomery County Planning Commission and the deed book and page number in
which it is recorded. The Township Engineer will distribute the remaining mylar
and paper copies.
ARTICLE VII
Improvement Construction Requirements
§ 212-49.   Required improvements.
[Amended 1-10-1995 by Ord. No. 879; 6-14-2011 by Ord. No. 11-1240, § 29]
   A.   The applicant shall agree, in writing, to construct all improvements
required by this chapter. The work shall be performed in strict accordance with
the approved plans and the Township Standards and Specifications, 36 Bucks
County Water and Sewer Authority, or other Authority, or the applicable
provisions of the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation. No plan shall be
finally approved until the developer has completed all of the necessary and
appropriate improvements as required as a condition for final approval of the
plan ; or until such time as the applicant has provided a proper guaranty in
the form of a performance bond or bonds with surety satisfactory to the
Township, or by the deposit of funds or securities in escrow, equal to an
amount deemed necessary by the Township Engineer to cover the estimated
construction cost and engineering cost for such improve ments. The applicant
shall also guarantee that no lot will be sold or building constructed in any
flood-prone area prior to completion of all floodproofing measures planned for
such lot and necessary access facilities. [Amended 6-14-2011 by Ord. No. 11-
1240]
   B.   Any performance bond shall assure the complete installation of the
required improvements within a period, and the proceeds of such bond shall be
made payable directly to the Township for installation of the required
improvements . The Board of Commissioners, with the consent of all parties to
the bond, may extend such period upon written application of the subdivider
prior to the expiration of such period or upon its own motion at any time prior
to a declaration of a default in the bond.
36. Editor’s Note: The Standards are on file with the Public Works Department.
§ 212-50.   Release of construction security.
[Amended 1-10-1995 by Ord. No. 879; 6-14-2011 by Ord. No. 11-1240, § 30]
   A.   The construction security shall be released only upon complete
installation of the required improvements in accordance with the approved
improvement construction plan . Strict compliance with procedures established
by 53 P.S. § 10509, of the Pennsylvania Municipali ties Planning Code, shall be
followed with respect to the release of performance bond or other security. If
the Board fails to comply with the time limitations of said section, all
improvements will be deemed to have been approved, and the developer shall be
released from all liability pursuant to the performance bond.
   B.   If the required improvements are not completely installed within the
period fixed or extended by the Board , the Board shall declare a default and
authorize the Township Manager to collect the amount payable from the
construction security. Upon receipt of such amount, the Township shall install
such improvements as were covered by the construction security and as shown in
the approved plan , in accordance with 53 P.S. § 10511.
§ 212-51.   Public utilities and laterals.
All sewers (capped and operative), water, gas, electric, telephone and other
pipes and conduits and all service connections or laterals shall be laid to the
full width of the ultimate right-of-way , where the need therefor can be
reasonably anticipated, before streets are paved. The arrangements for said
service connections or laterals shall be the responsibility of the subdivider ,
developer or builder .
§ 212-52.   Inspections.
   A.   Notice.
      (1)   The Township Engineer shall be notified 48 hours in advance of the
commencement of any construction or installation operation in order that
provision may be made for inspection by the Township.
      (2)   Construction and installation operations shall also be subject to
inspection by Township officials during the progress of the work, and the
subdivider , developer or builder shall pay for all inspections.
   B.   Samples of materials. Samples of the materials shall be furnished to
the Township in the same manner as is required of contractors under the
Engineering and Construction Standards in force at the time and available at
the Township building . [Amended 1-10- 1995 by Ord. No. 87937]
37. Editor’s Note: Former Sec. 7.04, Off-Site Improvements, which immediately
followed this section, was deleted 1-10-1995 by Ord. No. 879.
§ 212-53.   Modifications.
[Amended 1-10-1995 by Ord. No. 879]
Modifications shall be in accordance with 53 P.S. § 10509(m). 38 1
38. Editor’s Note: Former Art. VIII, Guidelines in the Development of Planned
Building Groups, which immediately followed this section, was deleted 1-10-1995
by Ord. No. 879.
 
Notes
     Editor’s Note: Former Art. VIII, Guidelines in the Development of Planned
1 Building Groups, which immediately followed this section, was deleted 1-10-1995
  by Ord. No. 879.
ARTICLE VIII
Fees and Conditions of Acceptance
§ 212-54.   Fees and costs.
[Amended 6-14-2011 by Ord. No. 11-1240, § 31]
   A.   No application shall be approved until the application fees, escrow
funds, outfall sewer contribution and bonds required under this article shall
have been paid or furnished the Township. Application fees and costs provided
for herein shall not be refundable. The escrow funds and bonds required to be
furnished shall be furnished at the time the application for preliminary plans
is submitted for approval.
   B.   Application fees for preliminary plans shall be paid to the Township in
accordance with a fee schedule set forth by the Board of Commissioners.
      (1)   Final plan . If no preliminary plan fee has been paid, the
preliminary plan fee will be charged at the time of final plan submission.
[Amended 6-14-2011 by Ord. No. 11-1240]
   C.   Escrow funds. The applicant shall be required to reimburse the Township
for professional fees and other costs incurred in reviewing the plans and/or
processing the application and to furnish and maintain a cash escrow fund
sufficient for this purpose. The amount of the escrow fund will be initially
determined and thereafter it will be supplemented according to a schedule set
forth in the Township fee schedule. Upon completion of the review, whether the
application is approved or rejected, any moneys not expended in the review
shall be refunded to the applicant . In addition to any legal or equitable
remedy, the Township reserves the right to decline the issuance of permits, to
suspend any permits previously issued and to withhold any site  improvement
releases until receipt of payment if a written statement for a subsequent
escrow deposit or a written statement for the payment of charges remains unpaid
for 20 days. The professional fees and costs for which the applicant is
responsible and for which the escrow fund is chargeable include: [Amended 11-
12-2002 by Ord. No. 1096]
      (1)   Professional services: all services pertaining to the processing of
the application, plans and related documents, including any hearings required
by the application, rendered by the Township Engineer , Township Solicitor,
Traffic Engineer , Landscape Architect, Lighting Consultant, Environmental
Consultant, Structural Consultant and/or other professionals whose advice the
Township deems to be necessary in order to properly and fully review the plans
submitted.
      (2)   Material and facilities tests: the actual cost of all drainage ,
water and/or material tests.
      (3)   Inspection: the cost of inspection by Township personnel at a rate
per hour determined by the Township Manager on an annual basis.
      (4)   Public hearings and advertising, if required.
      (5)   Dedication: legal fees, advertising and other costs involved in the
dedication of streets , easements and public improvements to the Township.
      (6)   Recording: actual costs of recording.
      (7)   Additional costs: additional costs incurred by the Township in
completing project improvements following the default of the developer to the
extent security supplied by the developer is inadequate. 39
   D.   Open space contribution. There shall be paid to the Township as
contribution for the purchase and maintenance of open space , parks and
recreation areas a fee in accordance with a fee schedule set forth in the
Township fee schedule. 40
39. Editor’s Note: Former Subsection 4, Outfall Sewer Contribution, which
immediately followed this subsection, was deleted 1-10-1995 by Ord. No. 879.
40. Editor’s Note: Former Subsection 6, Road Improvement Contribution, which
immediately followed this subsection, was deleted 1-10-1995 by Ord. No. 879.
§ 212-55.   Conditions of acceptance.
   A.   Conditions. The Township shall have no obligation to take over and make
public any street or other improvement unless:
      (1)   The required improvements , utility mains and laterals and
monuments shown on an approved plan or plans have been constructed to all
requirements.
      (2)   It is established to the satisfaction of the Board of Commissioners
that there is a need for the improvements to be taken over and made public.
      (3)   An information certificate showing the state of the title of all
improvements , issued by a title insurance company with an office in Montgomery
County, is supplied to the Township.
      (4)   A deed of dedication to the Township and release of mortgage or
other liens, executed by all parties shown on the certificate to have an
interest in the improvements , is delivered to the Township.
      (5)   A maintenance bond for a period of 18 months from the date of
acceptance, in the amount of 15% of the cost of construction with surety
satisfactory to the Board of Commissioners, is supplied. [Amended 2-13-1996 by
Ord. No. 903]
   B.   Acceptance. The Township shall have no responsibility with respect to
any street or other improvement , notwithstanding the use of the same by the
public, unless the street or other improvement is accepted by an ordinance or
resolution of the Board of Commissioners.
   C.   Guaranty. The applicant shall guarantee, for a period of 18 months from
the date of the ordinance accepting dedication, to maintain the stability of
all materials and work and to promptly make good and replace all poor or
inferior materials and work and to remedy all defects in materials or
workmanship, all shrinkage, settlement or other faults of any kind whatsoever
arising therefrom, at his own expense, and to the satisfaction of the Township
Engineer , when notified in writing to do so by the Township Engineer , and in
order to secure the guaranty as herein required, the Township shall be assured
by means of a proper guaranty in the form of a bond, with surety satisfactory
to the Township, or the deposit of funds or securities in escrow in an amount
equal to 15% of the completion guaranty posted by the owner with the Township.
[Amended 2-13-1996 by Ord. No. 903]
ARTICLE IX
Amendments; Enforcement
§ 212-56.   Amendments.
[Amended 1-10-1995 by Ord. No. 879]
The Board of Commissioners of Upper Dublin Township may, from time to time,
amend, supplement, change, modify or repeal this chapter by proceeding in the
manner provided in 53 P.S. § 10505 and the definition of "public notice " in 53
P.S. § 10107.
§ 212-57.   Referral to Planning Commission.
All proposed amendments, before adoption, shall be referred to the Township
Planning Commission and the Montgomery County Planning Commission at least 30
days prior to the public hearing, for recommendation and report, which shall
not be binding.
§ 212-58.   Violations and penalties.
[Amended 1-10-1995 by Ord. No. 879]
Any person who shall subdivide or develop any lot , tract or parcel of land,
lay out, construct, open or dedicate any improvement for public use or travel
or for the common use of occupants of building abutting thereon or sell any lot
or erect any building in a subdivision without having first complied with the
provisions hereof or the provisions of 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq., shall be
punishable as provided in 53 P.S. § 10515.3 and 10515.1.
212 Attachment 1
TOWNSHIP OF UPPER DUBLIN
TABLE 1
MINIMUM PLANTING REQUIREMENTS
(See §
212-32.)
Land Use                              Individual  Parking     Detention
or       Street     Softening Screen  Lot         Area        Basin       Stream
Zoning    Trees   Buffer    Buffer3 Landscaping Landscaping Landscaping Buffer
District
Land Use or   Street     Softening Screen    Individual  Parking     Detention   Stream
Zoning         Trees   Buffer    Buffer3   Lot         Area        Basin       Buffer
District                                     Landscaping Landscaping Landscaping
                                             3 shade
A Residential                                trees per   Not
                                             unit1       required -
                                                         except when
                                                         a special
                                             2 shade     exception
B Residential                                trees per   or a
                                             unit1       conditional
                                                         use


C Residential
MD Multi-                                                                        2 shade
Dwelling      50 feet to                                                         trees
AHS Apartment 75 feet on                                                         4
House Special center     2 trees             1 shade                             understory
MHD Mobile    each side  and 6               tree per                1 shade     trees
Home          of street  shrubs    If        unit1                   tree per 40 15 shrubs
Development   , up to    per 100   screening                         feet of     per
M Motel-Motor 100 feet   feet of   required2                         perimeter   100 feet of
Inn-Motor     on center  property                                    of the      stream
Lodge         along      perimeter                                   basin1      edge, plus
CR Commercial major                                      1 shade                 groundcover
Retail        streets                        1 shade     tree per                (70%
                                             tree per    every 10                coverage)
                                             2,000       parking
OC Office                                    square feet spaces
Center                                       of gross
                                             floor area1

SC Shopping
Center                                       1 shade
INST                                         tree per
Institutional                                5,000
                                             square feet
EC Employment                                of gross
Center4                                      floor area1
 
NOTES: Nonconforming land uses proposed in areas zoned for other uses shall
comply with the strictest interpretation of landscape requirements for either
the use or the zone in which the development is located.
1 Up to fifty percent (50%) of shade trees may be substituted with flowering
trees or shrubs at the rate of two flowering trees or two evergreen trees for
every shade tree or ten shrubs for every shade tree.
2 Evergreen screening shall consist of trees in double rows, staggered five
feet to fifteen feet on center. The spacing will depend upon the type of trees
used:
Type of Tree Spacing (feet)
Type of Tree         Spacing (feet)
White pines          15
Japanese black pines 15
Arborvitae           5
American holly       8
Spruce               12
Fir                  12
Hemlocks             12
 
3 Refer to Table 2 for screen buffer requirements.
4 [Amended 7-14-1998 by Ord. No. 972]
[Amended 5-14-2013 by Ord. No. 13-1272]
212 Attachment 2
TOWNSHIP OF UPPER DUBLIN
TABLE 2
SCREEN BUFFER REQUIREMENTS
(See §
212-32.)
         Adjacent Land Use or Zoning District - Existing or Proposed
                                                                            M
                                                      AHS                   Motel
Proposed A           B           C           MD       Apartment MHD Mobile  -     CR         OC     SC       INST          EC
Land Use Residential Residential Residential Multi-   House     Home        Motor Commercial Office Shopping Institutional Employment
                                             Dwelling Special   Development Inn - Retail     Center Center                 Center3
                                                                            Motor
                                                                            Lodge
              Adjacent Land Use or Zoning District - Existing or Proposed
                                                                                 M
                                                           AHS                   Motel
Proposed Land A           B           C           MD       Apartment MHD Mobile  -     CR         OC     SC       INST          EC
Use           Residential Residential Residential Multi-   House     Home        Motor Commercial Office Shopping Institutional Employment
                                                  Dwelling Special   Development Inn - Retail     Center Center                 Center3
                                                                                 Motor
                                                                                 Lodge
A Residential No2         No          No          No       No        No          No    Yes        Yes    Yes      Yes           Yes
B Residential No          No2         No          No       No        No          No    Yes        Yes    Yes      Yes           Yes
C Residential Yes1        Yes1        No2         Yes1     Yes1,2    No          Yes1  Yes        Yes    Yes      Yes           Yes
MD Multi-     No          No          No          No2      No        No          No    Yes        Yes    Yes      Yes           Yes
Dwelling
AHS Apartment Yes1        Yes1        Yes1,2      Yes1     No2       No          Yes1  Yes        Yes    Yes      Yes           Yes
House Special
MHD Mobile
Home          Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes      Yes       No2         Yes   Yes        Yes    Yes      Yes           Yes
Development
M Motel -
Motor Inn -   No          No          Yes1        No       Yes1      No          No2   Yes        Yes    Yes      Yes           Yes
Motor Lodge
CR Commercial Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes      Yes       Yes         Yes   No2        No     No       No            No
Retail
OC Office     Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes      Yes       Yes         Yes   No         No2    No       No            No
Center
SC Shopping   Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes      Yes       Yes         Yes   No         No     No2      No            No
Center
INST          Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes      Yes       Yes         Yes   No         No     No       No2           Yes
Institutional
EC Employment Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes      Yes       Yes         Yes   Yes        Yes    Yes      Yes           No2
Center'
 
NOTES:
1 For townhouses, apartments and patio homes only.
2 When abutting an identical land use or zoning type, a screen buffer is not
required unless so determined by the Board of Commissioners.
3 [Amended 7-14-1998 by Ord. No. 972]
Chapter 218
SWIMMING POOLS
ARTICLE I
Construction Standards
§
218-1.   Permit required.
§
218-2.   Permit application.
§
218-3.   Permit fee.
§
218-4.   Barrier required.
§
218-5.   Drainage.
§
218-6.   Violations and penalties.
ARTICLE II
Public Pools
§
218-7. Definitions.
§
218-8. Exemptions.
§
218-9. Registration required.
§
218-10. Requirements.
§
218-11. Inspections.
§
218-12. Fees.
§
218-13. Violations and penalties.
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Board of Commissioners of the Township of Upper
Dublin: Art. I, 5-13-1986 as Title 3, Ch. 5, of the 1986 Code; Art. II, 5-13-
1986 as Title 5, Ch. 7, of the 1986 Code. Amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
 
Building construction — See  Parks and recreation areas — See
Ch. 73.                        Ch. 168.
Excavations — See            Property maintenance — See
Ch. 99.                        Ch. 180.
Fees — See fee schedule.     Wells — See
                               Ch. 244.
 
ARTICLE I
Construction Standards
[Adopted 5-13-1986 as Title 3, Ch. 5, of the 1986 Code]
§ 218-1.   Permit required.
[Amended 9-14-2004 by Ord. No. 1142; 9-8-2009 by Ord. No. 09- 1218, § 3]
It shall be unlawful for any person or persons to construct a bathing, swimming
place or swimming pool, spa, hot tub, artificial body of water, or any
excavation in which water may collect to a depth of two feet or greater,
including a stormwater management facility, until a permit is first obtained
from the Code Official of the Township of Upper Dublin.
§ 218-2.   Permit application.
[Amended 9-14-2004 by Ord. No. 1142; 9-8-2009 by Ord. No. 09-1218, § 3]
All applications for permits required by this Chapter shall comply with the
permit requirements of
Chapter 73, Building Construction – Uniform Construction Code, and shall
include such plans and drawings in duplicate or other data as may be required
by the Code Official and shall satisfactorily indicate the barrier method and
method of securing the barrier and the manner of emptying of the pool or body
of water.
§ 218-3.   Permit fee. 
[Amended 9-8-2009 by Ord. No. 09-1218, § 3]
The applicant for a permit shall, at the time of making the application, pay to
the Code Official for the use of the Township a fee in accordance with the
Township fee schedule.
§ 218-4.   Barrier required.
[Amended 9-14-2004 by Ord. No. 1142; 9-8-2009 by Ord. No. 09- 1218, § 3]
No person or persons shall construct or maintain a bathing, swimming place or
swimming pool, spa, hot tub, artificial body of water, or any excavation in
which water may collect in excess of two feet, including a stormwater
management structure within 300 feet of any property line of the property on
which the stormwater management structure is located, unless it is surrounded
by a barrier as specified by the requirements of
Chapter 73, Building Construction – Uniform Construction Code, with the
exception that the sides of an aboveground pool structure may not be used as a
barrier; however, barriers may be placed on top of aboveground pool structures
to comply with the barrier requirements. Barriers may not be less than four
feet nor more than six feet in height.
§ 218-5.   Drainage.
[Amended 9-14-2004 by Ord. No. 1142; 9-8-2009 by Ord. No. 09-1218, § 3]
Except as may be permitted under
Chapter 206, Stormwater Management, any drain or conveyance that allows
nonstormwater discharge including sewage, process waste water and wash water to
enter the waters of the Commonwealth is prohibited. As authorized under
Chapter 206, swimming pool, spa, hot tub, or other chemically treated water may
be discharged if the water is dechlorinated and if the discharge does not
otherwise significantly contribute to pollution of the waters of the
Commonwealth. Swimming pool, spa and hot tub water shall be discharged to a
stormwater management facility or on the property at a rate and volume to allow
for maximum absorption and infiltration. The discharge shall be dechlorinated
and free from pollutants. If authorized by the sanitary sewer operator,
swimming pool, spa and hot tub backwash water, neutralized cleaning wastewater
and standing water may be discharged to the sanitary sewer system. If a
sanitary sewer is not in the immediate area and swimming pool, spa or hot tub
water cannot be dechlorinated or otherwise treated onsite to remove pollutants,
the water must be hauled off-site for disposal at an approved treatment
facility.
§ 218-6.   Violations and penalties.
[Amended 8-9-1988 by Ord. No. 753; 1-10-1995 by Ord. No. 879; 9-8-2009 by Ord.
No. 09-1218, § 3]
Any person violating the provisions of this Chapter shall be guilty of a
summary offense, and upon conviction, shall be subject to a fine not exceeding
$1,000 for each and every violation, recoverable with costs. Each day that the
violation continues shall be a separate offense and penalties shall be
cumulative.
ARTICLE II
Public Pools
[Adopted 5-13-1986 as Title 5, Ch. 7, of the 1986 Code]
§ 218-7.   Definitions.
As used in this Article, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
   CLUB, CAMP OR PUBLIC POOL — Any swimming pool or artificial body of water
for the purpose of swimming or bathing, maintained by any person or
organization, which shall be for the use of other than the household of the
person maintaining the pool, which use shall be extended to others in return
for a fee, upon the basis of membership in an organization or for other
consideration.
§ 218-8.   Exemptions.
Nothing hereinabove shall be deemed to apply to any pool maintained by the
Township of Upper Dublin.
§ 218-9.   Registration required. 1
Any person or organization desiring to maintain a club or public pool within
the Township of Upper Dublin shall register with the proper authorities of the
township annually and obtain a certificate of inspection stating that the pool
complies with all applicable state and local statutes before such pool shall be
opened for use.
1. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see
Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
§ 218-10.   Requirements.
[Amended 4-9-2019 by Ord. No. 19-1350]
No person or organization shall open a club or public pool unless and until the
following requirements shall be complied with:
   A.   The pool shall meet the requirements for fencing under Article I of
this Article.
   B.   The water shall be subjected to a test to establish its purity and
shall at least meet the standards established by the Department of
Environmental Resources, Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
   C.   There shall be adequate toilet and shower facilities for the users of
the pool.
   D.   There shall be adequate facilities for the disposal of refuse and
garbage.
   E.   There shall be no area on the premises where rain or other untreated
water may collect and allow the breeding of mosquitoes.
   F.   There is no condition existing which might constitute a hazard to the
health and safety of the users of the pool or the residents of the township.
   G.   Lifeguards. 2
      (1)   At all club, camp or public pools as defined in §
218-7 of this Article, one (1) or more lifeguards in adequate numbers shall be
on duty waterside at all times such club, camp or public pools are open for use
by bathers. While they are on waterside duty, lifeguards shall not be assigned
other tasks that will divert their attention from the safety of the bathers.
Lifeguards need not be assigned to hot tubs, spas or whirlpools.
      (2)   Lifeguards shall be capable swimmers, skilled in lifesaving methods
and in methods of artificial resuscitation as evidenced by their possession of
a currently valid certificate from the American Red Cross in advanced
lifesaving, lifeguard or water safety instructor categories.
   (3)   Any public pool owned and operated by a community association formed
pursuant to the Pennsylvania Uniform Planned Community Act, 68 Pa. C.S.A.
§§5101 et seq., shall not be required to comply with this §
218-10.G. [Added 4-9-2019 by Ord. No. 19-1350]
2. Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code; see
Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
§ 218-11.   Inspections.
The designated official of the township shall have the power to make reasonable
inspections, from time to time, as he sees fit, of the premises and to require
tests of the water from time to time to establish that the water is of the
proper purity. The designated officer shall have the power to close the pool
for a failure to maintain the purity of the water or to maintain the premises
in a healthful and safe condition.
§ 218-12.   Fees.
A fee shall be paid in accordance with the fee rate established in the Township
fee schedule.
§ 218-13.   Violations and penalties.
[Amended 7-12-1988 by Ord. No. 7513 ]
Any person failing to comply with the terms of this Article shall subject to a
fine not exceeding one thousand dollars ($1,000.) and costs. Each day that such
person continues in violation shall constitute a separate offense punishable by
a like fine or imprisonment. "Person" shall include every natural person,
partnership, association or corporation. "Person," as applied to a partnership
or association, shall mean the partners or members thereof and, as applied to
corporations, shall mean officers thereof.
3. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see
Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
Chapter 221
TATTOOING AND BODY PIERCING
§
221-1.   Policy and purpose.
§
221-2.   Definitions.
§
221-3.   License and inspection certificate required.
§
221-4.   Application for license.
§
221-5.   Expiration and renewal of licenses.
§
221-6.   Regulations.
§
221-7.   Special regulations applicable to tattoo parlors.
§
221-8.   Suspension or revocation of license.
§
221-9.   Holders of other licenses.
§
221-10.   Certificate of inspection required.
§
221-11.   Inspection.
§
221-12.   Refusal to grant certificate or revocation of certificate.
§
221-13.   Rules and regulations.
§
221-14.   Violations and penalties.
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Board of Commissioners of the Township of Upper Dublin
12-9-2003 by Ord. No. 1121. Amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
 
Adult-oriented businesses — See  Fees — See fee schedule.
Ch. 54.
 
§ 221-1.   Policy and purpose.
The Board of Commissioners of Upper Dublin Township has determined that the
practice of utilizing invasive cosmetic procedures (ICP) for decorative and
cosmetic micropigmentation, commonly known as "body piercing," "tattooing" and/
or "branding," is on the increase with little regulation in place to protect
against illness and injury that may occur from such practices and with no
accounting requirements for operators. The governing body deems it to be in the
best interest of the residents of Upper Dublin Township and for the public
health, safety and welfare to adopt regulation and licensing provisions to that
end, and to provide for licensing fees to cover the costs of investigating,
administering and enforcing such provisions.
§ 221-2.   Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
   BOARD OF HEALTH — The Upper Dublin Township Board of Health.
   BODY PIERCING — Piercing of the skin for the express purpose of insertion of
any object, including but not limited to jewelry; provided, however, that the
piercing of the lobes of the ears shall be specifically excluded from the
purview of this chapter. The practice of branding, the marking of the human
skin by the intentional application of a hot object, shall be included in this
definition, and all regulations pertaining thereto shall apply to such practice
as applicable.
   CERTIFICATE OF SANITATION — A certificate issued to the owner or proprietor
of a body piercing or tattooing shop under the provisions of this chapter.
   HEALTH OFFICER — The Health Officer appointed by the Board of Commissioners
of Upper Dublin Township.
   LICENSE — A license issued to an operator under the provisions of this
chapter.
   OPERATOR — The owner, lessee, manager or person in charge of a premises
where body piercing or tattooing is performed.
   PRACTITIONER — Any person who performs the procedure or engages in the
practice of body piercing or tattooing or branding.
   TATTOO or TATTOOING — To mark or color the skin by pricking or by
subcutaneous introduction of nontoxic dyes or pigments so as to form indelible
marks or figures or by production of scars.
   TATTOO PARLOR — Any premises where an operator does tattooing for a fee or
other consideration.
§ 221-3.   License and inspection certificate required.
No practitioner, except a duly licensed health care provider, shall engage in
the practice of body piercing or tattooing in Upper Dublin Township unless the
operator where the procedure takes place has been issued a license by the
Department of Health and the premises has a current inspection certificate.
§ 221-4.   Application for license.
   A.   The operator where body piercing or tattooing is performed shall apply
to the Health Officer for a premises license, in writing, on forms supplied by
the Health Department for said purpose, which form shall be duly verified by
the applicant. The application must be accompanied by the license fee provided
for in the Township fee schedule, which fee shall include the cost of
inspection. The license application shall set forth such information as the
Health Department may require, including the following:
      (1)   The name and address of the operator of the premises being licensed
and the address of the premises.
      (2)   The local and permanent address(es) and telephone number(s) of the
operator.
      (3)   The name(s), local address(es) and telephone number(s) of the
manager of the business, if different from the operator.
      (4)   The name and address of a person residing in or employed in Upper
Dublin Township designated by the applicant to accept service of process of any
complaint arising out of an alleged violation of the provisions of this
chapter. Said designee may be the operator.
      (5)   A copy of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania Sales Tax Certificate.
      (6)   Federal employer identification number if the applicant is a
corporation, partnership or firm; social security number if the applicant is a
proprietorship.
      (7)   A certification that the applicant is a citizen of the United
States or, if not, is the holder of documentation authorizing the alien to be
employed in the United States, such as an alien registration card issued by the
United States Immigration and Naturalization Service on Form No. I-151, I-155,
I-94, with an endorsement authorizing employment in the United States, or the
like.
      (8)   If the applicant is a partnership, firm or corporation, all
information required by the application shall apply not only to the
partnership, firm or corporation, but also to each officer, director or holder
of 10% of the issued stock (if a corporation), and to all members of a
partnership or firm.
      (9)   Proof of public liability/bodily injury and property damage
insurance and professional liability insurance in the amount of $100,000 each,
per occurrence, or in such other amount as the Board of Health shall determine.
   B.   Each body piercing or tattooing license issued by the Health Officer
shall contain a registration number, and no such license shall be transferable.
§ 221-5.   Expiration and renewal of licenses.
Licenses issued pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall be good only
for the period of one year and shall be effective only from the date of issue
each year. No license will be issued for a subsequent year without again
complying with the provisions of §
221-4 of this chapter.
§ 221-6.   Regulations.
   A.   No practitioner shall engage in body piercing or tattooing in Upper
Dublin Township unless the premises at which such activity is to be conducted
and the equipment to be utilized in conjunction therewith meets the following
standards:
      (1)   The room in which body piercing or tattooing is done shall have an
impervious, smooth and cleanable surface on the floor, walls and ceiling.
      (2)   A toilet shall be adjacent to the area where body piercing or
tattooing is performed. The lavatory shall be supplied with hot and cold
running water, soap and single-use disposable towels.
      (3)   All tables shall be constructed of easily cleanable, impervious
materials, and shall be separated from waiting patrons or observers by a panel
at least six feet high for privacy.
      (4)   The entire premises and equipment shall be maintained in a clean,
sanitary condition and in good repair.
      (5)   The license issued by Upper Dublin Township shall be displayed upon
the premises, in plain view of all patrons coming to the premises for service.
   B.   It shall be a violation for anyone to pierce or tattoo any body part of
an individual under 18 years of age without authorization signed by the parent
or legal guardian of such person and witnessed by the business operator. The
operator shall be responsible for maintaining the original consent form and
copies of all consent information for a minimum period of three years or until
the patron turns 21 years old, whichever is later. All records are subject to
HIPAA regulations.
   C.   The practitioner must refuse the client if he/she is suspected to be
under the influence of alcohol, drugs or other behavior-modifying substance.
   D.   Each person wishing a body piercing or tattoo must fill out an
application which shall include the name, date of birth, address and telephone
number of the patron, as well as the body location(s) where the procedure is to
be performed, the name of the practitioner and the date of service.
   E.   Written guidelines shall be established for the care of the body
piercing site after piercing and shall be approved by the Board of Health. Each
patron shall receive a written copy of the guidelines for care of body piercing
or tattoo sites.
   F.   All practitioners shall have the hepatitis B vaccination series, or be
offered the series and decline, in writing. Those who decline shall be tested
for hepatitis B surface antigen (HgsAg) on an annual basis. Each practitioner
who elects to have the series shall have completed the initial vaccination
within 30 days of employment.
   G.   All practitioners will be required to attend a training program to
assure basic knowledge of sterile technique and universal precautions.
Verification of completion of the training program must be provided to the
Health Officer prior to licensing.
   H.   All practitioners shall utilize the following procedures in conducting
a body piercing or tattooing procedure:
      (1)   The practitioner shall wash his hands thoroughly with an
antibacterial cleanser and water before starting a procedure. The hands of the
operator shall be dried with individual, single-use towels.
      (2)   Single-use sterile gloves shall be worn with any procedure that
involves contact with client's blood. The hands of the practitioner shall be
thoroughly washed after the procedure has been completed.
      (3)   No piercing or tattooing shall be done on skin surface that has
rash, pimples, boils or infections, or manifests any evidence of unhealthy
conditions.
      (4)   The area to be pierced or tattooed shall first be thoroughly washed
with warm water and an antibacterial soap using antiseptic preparation. A
single-use sponge shall be used to scrub the area.
      (5)   Immediately after the piercing or tattooing, the patron shall be
advised in writing on the care of the site and any indications of infection or
other adverse events. Patrons should be advised to consult a physician at the
first sign of infection.
      (6)   All infections resulting from body piercing or tattooing which
become known to the operator or practitioner shall be reported to the Health
Officer within 24 hours.
      (7)   Ear piercing guns may not be used for body piercing.
   I.   All operators and practitioners shall utilize the following standards
of sanitation of instruments:
      (1)   All clean and ready-to-use needles and instruments, dyes, pigments,
carbon stencils and other paraphernalia shall be kept in a closed glass or
metal case or storage cabinet while not in use. Such cabinet shall be
maintained in a sanitary manner at all times. Individual cabinets containing
such paraphernalia shall be available for each individual practitioner.
      (2)   Only single-service or steam-sterilized needles shall be used.
      (3)   Nondisposable items used for body piercing or tattooing shall be
steam-sterilized before use on any patron. Any other method of sterilization
shall be approved by the Health Officer. In addition, the following guidelines
shall be followed:
         (a)   The sterilizer shall be well maintained with tight-fitting
gasket and a clean interior.
         (b)   The manufacturer's operating instructions and sterilization
specifications shall be at hand. The operation of the sterilizer shall conform
to the manufacturer's specifications with regard to temperature, pressure and
time of sterilization cycle.
         (c)   Proper functioning of sterilization cycles shall be verified by
the weekly use of biological indicator, i.e., spore tests. A log book of these
weekly test results shall be available, and a test may be required to be done
during inspections.
         (d)   Each item to be sterilized shall be individually wrapped using a
chemical indicator or strip to verify steam exposure.
      (4)   Forceps, accessory equipment and jewelry must be disinfected with a
chemical disinfectant registered by the Environmental Protection Agency as
being tuberculocidal when used at recommended dilutions. All operators and
practitioners shall follow the manufacturer's instructions when utilizing any
chemical disinfectant.
      (5)   All needles should be pre-sterilized, used on one person, in one
sitting, and immediately disposed of in a medical sharps container.
      (6)   All forceps, tubes, etc., are pre-sterilized, stored in sterile
bags, and used on one person, in one sitting. After one such use, they must be
autoclaved.
      (7)   All reusable, nonsterilizable implements, such as calipers, should
be nonporous and disinfected after each use with bleach solution or a
commercial hard-surface disinfectant liquid.
      (8)   Supplies, including corks, rubber bands, etc., will be pre-
sterilized in an autoclave or cleaned with disinfecting liquids, stored in a
clean, closed container, and disposed of immediately after a single use.
      (9)   A new pair of latex single-use gloves (sterile or nonsterile)
should be worn for every procedure, and gloves should be changed whenever the
slightest chance of cross- contamination might occur.
      (10)   The room used for body piercing or tattooing, as well as the
bathroom and other common areas, should be kept scrupulously clean and
disinfected frequently. All surfaces will be nonporous, to allow them to be
cleaned with a ten-percent bleach solution that is less than 24 hours old or
other disinfecting liquids whenever cross- contamination might occur.
      (11)   Only jewelry appropriate for the purpose will be used in
piercings. Jewelry with nickel or brass plating may not be used.
      (12)   All jewelry contaminated with only airborne pathogens (not
previously worn or contaminated) will be disinfected with a nonhazardous hard-
surface disinfectant such as Madacide. All jewelry contaminated or potentially
contaminated with blood-borne pathogens (previously worn by another person)
should be autoclaved.
   J.   Disposal of waste. The following guidelines shall be followed in regard
to the disposal of waste associated with body piercing or tattooing:
      (1)   Needles shall not be bent or broken prior to disposal. Operators
shall take precautions to prevent injuries from contaminated needles.
      (2)   Needles shall be disposed of directly into a solid, puncture-
resistant container.
      (3)   Needles, as well as single-use gloves, gauze and other materials
saturated with blood, shall be discarded in a plastic bag and placed into a
cardboard box prior to off-site disposal. A written agreement for disposal of
such waste shall be with an authorized service for disposal of medical waste.
   K.   Health of practitioner. No practitioner with any disease in a
communicable form or suspected of having such disease shall perform a body
piercing or tattooing procedure unless the practitioner has taken definitive
prophylactic steps to ensure prevention of communicability and protection of
the patron. Such diseases may include but shall not be limited to the common
cold, influenza, tuberculosis, HIV virus, scabies, impetigo, syphilis, chicken
pox, measles (rubeola), German measles (rubella), mumps, whooping cough,
hepatitis, infection on hands or arms, sore throat or jaundice of the skin or
sclera. The Health Officer may require a practitioner to provide a certificate
signed by a state licensed health practitioner stating that a practitioner is
free from communicable diseases before a practitioner may be present at a
procedure.
§ 221-7.   Special regulations applicable to tattoo parlors.
In addition to the other regulations set forth in this chapter, the following
additional regulations shall apply to tattoo parlors:
   A.   Each practitioner must wear a clean outer garment while providing
tattooing or body piercing services.
   B.   Each practitioner shall have an individual fingernail file and
individual handbrush which shall be clean and which shall be sterilized before
each use by boiling for 15 minutes or by immersion in an approved germicidal
solution for not less than 20 minutes. Germicidal solutions used to sterilize
shall be changed daily and the container thoroughly cleansed.
   C.   Before working on each patron, each practitioner shall clean his or her
fingernails with his or her individual nail file and shall thoroughly wash and
scrub his or her hands with hot running water, soap and his or her individual
handbrush.
   D.   That portion of the patron's skin to be tattooed shall be prepared by
washing with hot water and soap; by shaving with a sterile safety razor and a
single-service blade; and shaving shall be followed by a thorough cleansing
with hot water and soap applied with a clean disposable cotton or gauze. A
sterile handbrush shall be used, if necessary, to produce a clean skin area.
   E.   Following the cleansing of the patron's skin, the tattoo artist shall
again wash and scrub his or her hands in the manner prescribed above. He shall
allow his or her hands to dry with the use of sanitary or mechanical means
Before placing the design on the patron's skin, the practitioner shall treat
the skin area with 70% alcohol or other approved germicidal solution which
shall be applied with sterile cotton or sterile gauze.
   F.   Only petroleum jelly, United States Pharmacopoeia or National Formulary
shall be applied to the area to be tattooed, and it shall be in collapsible
metal or plastic tubes. The application may be spread by the use of sterile
gauze, but not directly with the fingers.
   G.   The stencil for transferring the design to the skin shall be thoroughly
cleansed and rinsed in an approved germicidal solution for at least 20 minutes
and then it shall be dried with sterile gauze or in the air before each use.
   H.   In preparing nontoxic dyes or pigments, only nontoxic or sterile
material shall be used. Single-service or individual portions of dyes or
pigments in clean, sterilized, individual containers or single-service
containers must be used for each patron. After tattooing, the remaining unused
dye or pigment in the single-service or individual containers must be
discarded. The individual container must be resterilized or discarded.
§ 221-8.   Suspension or revocation of license.
   A.   In addition to being subject to the penalties provided for in §
221-13 of this chapter, any license issued under this chapter may be revoked or
suspended by the Township for any misstatement in any application or for any
violation in this chapter.
   B.   No license shall be revoked or suspended until the licensee has been
afforded a hearing before the Board of Commissioners. Notice of the filing of a
notice of violation which seeks to suspend or revoke any license issued under
this chapter shall be served on the operator personally, or on the person
designated to receive service pursuant to this chapter, which notice will
establish a date for a hearing to be held, not more than 30 days from the date
of such notice, at which time the operator shall have the right to be
represented by counsel, call witnesses and cross-examine witnesses produced in
support of the notice of violation, as well as such other rights necessary in
order to ensure due process.
   C.   Should any license be revoked or suspended, no part of the license fee
shall be returned.
§ 221-9.   Holders of other licenses.
Nothing in this chapter shall be construed so as to affect the practice of
medicine or any other recognized profession or occupation by a person duly
licensed by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania to engage in such practice,
profession or occupation, and whose license would lawfully authorize the
piercing of the body or tattooing.
§ 221-10.   Certificate of inspection required.
   A.   It shall be unlawful for any operator to conduct or operate a premises
where body piercing or tattooing procedures are performed in the Township of
Upper Dublin without first obtaining a certificate of inspection from the Board
of Health of the Township or after revocation of the certificate as herein
provided. Said certificate shall be issued only after said Board shall have
ascertained by due inspection that the premises at which the procedures are to
be conducted complies in all respects with the provisions of this chapter.
   B.   Said certificate shall not be transferable and shall be valid for one
year from the date thereof and only for body piercing or tattooing
establishment located at the premises designated in said certificate.
   C.   Whenever any operator maintains more than one body piercing or
tattooing establishment in the Township, he shall be required to apply for and
procure a separate certificate for each such establishment.
§ 221-11.   Inspection.
The Health Officer shall have the power to enter at reasonable times upon
private or public property for the purpose of inspecting and investigating
conditions relating to the enforcement of the provisions of this chapter.
§ 221-12.   Refusal to grant certificate or revocation of certificate.
   A.   Any operator whose application for a certificate of inspection has been
denied may request and shall be granted a hearing before the Board of
Commissioners as herein provided.
   B.   Whenever the Board of Health, the Health Officer, or the duly
authorized representative of either, determines that there are reasonable
grounds to believe that there has been a violation of any provisions of this
chapter or of any regulation adopted pursuant thereto, notice of such alleged
violation shall be given to the person or persons responsible therefor, as
hereinafter provided.
      (1)   Such notices shall:
         (a)   Be put in writing.
         (b)   Include a statement of the reasons why it is being issued.
         (c)   Allow a reasonable time for the performance of any act it
requires.
         (d)   Be served upon the holder of a license issued under this chapter
or upon the owner or his agent or the occupant of any premises, provided that
such notice shall be deemed to have been properly served when a copy thereof
has been served personally or in accordance with any other method authorized or
required under the laws of this commonwealth.
      (2)   Such notice may:
         (a)   Contain an outline of remedial action, which, if taken, will
effect compliance with the provisions of this chapter.
         (b)   State that unless conditions or practices described in such
notice which violate this chapter are corrected within the reasonable time
specified in such notice, a license which has been issued pursuant to this
chapter may be suspended or revoked.
   C.   Any person who is affected by any notice which has been issued in
connection with the enforcement of any provisions of this chapter or of any
regulation adopted pursuant thereto may request and shall be granted a hearing
on the matter before the Board of Commissioners, provided that such person
shall file, in the offices of the Township, a written petition requesting such
hearing and setting forth a brief statement of the grounds therefor within 10
days after the day the notice was served. Upon receipt of such petition, the
Board of Commissioners shall set a time and place for such hearing and shall
give the petitioner written notice thereof. At such hearing, the petitioner
shall be given an opportunity to be heard. The hearing shall be commenced not
later than 10 days after the day on which the petition was filed, provided
that, upon application of the petitioner, the Board of Commissioners may
postpone the date of the hearing for a reasonable time beyond such ten-day
period when, in its judgment, the petitioner has submitted a good and
sufficient reason for such postponement.
   D.   After such hearing, the Board of Commissioners shall sustain, modify or
withdraw the notice, depending upon its finding based on such hearing as to
whether or not the provisions of this chapter and of the regulations adopted
pursuant thereto have been complied with. If the Board of Commissioners
sustains or modifies such notice,' it shall be deemed to be an order. Any
notice shall automatically become an order if a written petition for a hearing
has not been filed in the office of the Township Secretary within 10 days after
such notice was served. In the case of any notice which states that the license
required by this chapter may be suspended or revoked, the Board of Health may
suspend or revoke such license if an order is issued and corrective action has
not been taken within the time specified in the notice.
   E.   The proceedings at such hearing, including the findings and decision of
the Board of Commissioners, shall be summarized, put into writing and entered
as a matter of public record in the offices of the Township. Such record shall
include, also, a copy of every notice or order issued in connection with the
matter. Any person aggrieved by the decision of the Board of Commissioners may
seek relief therefrom in any court of competent jurisdiction, as provided by
the laws of this commonwealth.
   F.   Notwithstanding any other provision herein, whenever the Board of
Health or the Health Officer finds that an emergency exists involving a serious
health hazard which requires immediate action to protect the public health, it
may, without notice or hearing, issue a written order citing the existence of
such an emergency and the conditions violating this chapter or regulations
adopted pursuant thereto which require corrective action to remove such health
hazard. If such corrective action has not been taken, the Board of Health may
take such action as may be necessary to protect the public health, including
complete shutdown. Notwithstanding other provisions of this chapter, such order
shall be effective immediately, but, upon petition to the Board of
Commissioners, shall be afforded a hearing as soon as possible, but in any case
not later than five days after the petition was filed. After such hearing,
depending upon its finding as to whether or not the provisions of this chapter
and of the regulations adopted pursuant thereto have been complied with, the
Board of Health shall continue such order in effect or modify it or revoke it.
§ 221-13.   Rules and regulations.
The Board of Health is hereby authorized to promulgate specific rules and
regulations governing the performance of body piercing or tattooing procedures
and the maintenance of licensed premises.
§ 221-14.   Violations and penalties.
Any operator or practitioner who shall conduct a body piercing or tattooing
procedure in the Township of Upper Dublin without first having obtained a
premises license and certificate of inspection as herein provided or who shall
continue to conduct such procedures after the revocation of said license or
certificate or who shall violate any of the other provisions of this chapter
shall be subject to citation for each offense and payment of a fine of not less
than $300 nor more than $1,000.
Chapter 224
TAXATION
ARTICLE I
Realty Transfer Tax
§
224-1.   Title.
§
224-2.   Definitions and word usage.
§
224-3.   Imposition of tax; declaration of acquisition.
§
224-4.   Applicability.
§
224-5.   Interest.
§
224-6.   Late penalty.
§
224-7.   Collection.
§
224-8.   Taxes to become lien.
§
224-9.   Certification fee.
§
224-10.   Exemptions.
§
224-11.   Credits.
§
224-12.   Judicial sales.
§
224-13.   Collection.
§
224-14.   Violations and penalties.
ARTICLE II
Earned Income Tax
§
224-15.   Definitions.
§
224-16.   Imposition of tax.
§
224-17.   Payment of tax.
§
224-18.   Collection at source.
§
224-19.   Powers and duties of officer.
§
224-20.   Suit for collection.
§
224-21.   Interest.
§
224-22.   Violations and penalties.
§
224-23.   Confidentiality of tax information.
§
224-24.   (Reserved)
ARTICLE III
Administrative Appeals
§
224-25.   Taxpayer petitions.
§
224-26.   Hearing on petition.
§
224-27.   Hearing on petition.
§
224-28.   Tax Appeals Board.
§
224-29.   (Reserved)
ARTICLE IV
Local Services Tax
§
224-30.   Definitions.
§
224-31.   Levy of tax.
§
224-32.   Exemption and refunds.
§
224-33.   Duties of employers to collect.
§
224-34.   Returns.
§
224-35.   Dates for determining tax liability and payment.
§
224-36.   Self-employed individuals.
§
224-37.   Individuals engaged in more than one occupation or employed in more
than one political subdivision.
§
224-38.   Nonresidents subject to tax.
§
224-39.   Administration of tax.
§
224-40.   Suits for collection.
§
224-41.   Violations and penalties.
§
224-42.   Interpretation.
ARTICLE V
Alternate Collector of Delinquent Real Estate Taxes
§
224-43.   Appointment.
§
224-44.   Interest.
§
224-45.   Charges, expenses and fees.
§
224-46.   Authorization and empowerment.
§
224-47.   Construed.
§
224-48.   Right to amend.
§
224-49.   Effective date.
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Board of Commissioners of the Township of Upper Dublin
as indicated in article histories. Amendments noted where applicable.]
ARTICLE I
Realty Transfer Tax
[Adopted 11-11-1986 by Ord. No. 716]
§ 224-1.   Title.
This article shall be known and may be cited as the “Realty Transfer Tax
Ordinance.”
§ 224-2.   Definitions and word usage.
   A.   Throughout this article, the singular shall include the plural, and the
masculine shall include the feminine and neuter.
   B.   As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
      ACCEPTANCE — The making, execution or final delivery of a document by all
parties to a transaction.
      ACQUIRED COMPANY — A real estate company where a change in the ownership
interest in the company, however effected:
      (1)   Does not affect the continuity of the company; and
      (2)   Of itself or together with prior changes, has the effect of
transferring, directly or indirectly, 90% or more of the total ownership
interest in the company within a period of three years.
      ASSOCIATION — A partnership, limited partnership or any other form of
unincorporated enterprise owned or conducted by two or more persons other than
a private trust or decedents estate.
      BOARD — The Board of Township Commissioners of the Township of Upper
Dublin, Montgomery County, Pennsylvania.
      CORPORATION — A corporation or joint-stock association, business trust or
banking institution which is organized under the laws of this Commonwealth, the
United States or any other state, territory or foreign country or dependency.
      DISTRICT — The Township of Upper Dublin, Montgomery County, Pennsylvania.
      DOCUMENT — Any deed, instrument or writing which conveys, transfers,
demises, vests, confirms or evidences any transfer or demise of title to real
estate, but does not include wills, mortgages, deeds of trust or other
instruments of like character given as security for a debt and deeds of release
thereof to the debtor, land contracts whereby the legal title does not pass to
the grantee until the title consideration specified in the contract has been
paid or any cancellation thereof unless the consideration is payable over a
period of time exceeding 30 years or instruments which solely grant, vest, or
confirm a public utility easement. “Document” shall also include a declaration
of acquisition required to be presented for recording under §
224-3B of this article.
      MEMBERS OF THE SAME FAMILY — Any individual, such individual’s brothers
and sisters, the brothers and sisters of such individual’s parents and
grandparents, the ancestors and lineal descendants of any of the foregoing, a
spouse of any of the foregoing and the estate of any of the foregoing.
Individuals related by the half blood or legal adoption shall be treated as if
they were related by the whole blood.
      PERSON — Every natural person, association or corporation. Whenever used
in any subsection prescribing and imposing a fine or imprisonment, or both, the
term “person,” as applied to associations, shall include the responsible
members or general partners thereof, and as applied to corporations, the
officers thereof.
      REAL ESTATE —
      (1)   Any lands, tenements or hereditaments within this commonwealth,
including without limitation buildings, structures, fixtures, mines, minerals,
oil, gas, quarries, spaces with or without upper or lower boundaries, trees and
other improvements, immovables or interest which by custom, usage or law pass
with a conveyance of land, but excluding permanently attached machinery and
equipment in an industrial plant.
      (2)   A condominium unit.
      (3)   A tenant-stockholder’s interest in a cooperative housing
corporation, trust or association under a proprietary lease or occupancy
agreement.
      REAL ESTATE COMPANY — A corporation or association which is primarily
engaged in the business of holding, selling or leasing real estate, 90% or more
of the ownership interest in which is held by 35 or fewer persons and which:
      (1)   Derives 60% or more of its annual gross receipts from the ownership
or disposition of real estate; or
      (2)   Holds real estate, the value of its entire tangible asset holdings
exclusive of tangible assets which are freely transferable and actively traded
on an established market.
      SECRETARY — The Secretary of the Board of Township Commissioners of the
Township of Upper Dublin, Montgomery County, Pennsylvania.
      TAX — The tax imposed, assessed and levied by this article.
      TITLE TO REAL ESTATE —
      (1)   Any interest in real estate which endures for a period of time, the
termination of which is not fixed or ascertained by a specific number of years,
including without limitation an estate in fee simple, life estate or perpetual
leasehold; or
      (2)   Any interest in real estate enduring for a fixed period of years
but which, either by reason of the length of the term or the grant of a right
to extend the term by renewal or otherwise, consists of a group of rights
approximating those, including without limitation a leasehold interest or
possessory interest under a lease or occupancy agreement for a term of 30 years
or more or a leasehold interest or
possessory interest in real estate in which the lessee has equity. In
determining the term of a lease, it shall be presumed that a right or option to
renew or extend a lease will be exercised if the rental charge to the lessee is
fixed or if a method for calculating the rental charge is established.
      TRANSACTION — The making, executing, delivering, accepting or presenting
for recording of a document.
      TREASURER — The duly elected and acting Treasurer of the Township of
Upper Dublin, Montgomery County, Pennsylvania.
      VALUE —
      (1)   In the case of any bona fide sale of real estate at arm’s length
for actual monetary worth, the amount of the actual consideration therefor,
paid or to be paid, including liens or other encumbrances thereon existing
before the transfer and not removed thereby, whether or not the underlying
indebtedness is assumed, and ground rents, or a commensurate part thereof where
such liens or other encumbrances and ground rents also encumber or are charged
against other real estate.
      (2)   In the case of a gift, sale by execution upon a judgment or upon
the foreclosure of a mortgage by a judicial officer, transactions without
consideration or for consideration less than the actual monetary worth of the
real estate, a taxable lease, an occupancy agreement, a leasehold or possessory
interest, any exchange of properties, or the real estate of an acquired
company, the actual monetary worth of the real estate determined by adjusting
the assessed value of the real estate for local real estate tax purposes for
the common level ratio of assessed values to market values of the taxing
district as established by the State Tax Equalization Board, or a commensurate
part of the assessment where the assessment includes other real estate.
      (3)   In the case of an easement or other interest in real estate, the
value of which is not determinable under definitions (1) or (2) above, the
actual monetary worth of such interest.
      (4)   The actual consideration for or actual monetary worth of any
executory agreement for the construction of buildings, structures or other
permanent improvements to real estate between the grantor and other persons
existing before the transfer and not removed thereby or between the grantor,
the agent or principal of the grantor or a related corporation, association or
partnership and the grantee existing before or effective with the transfer.
§ 224-3.   Imposition of tax; declaration of acquisition.
[Amended 9-25-2007 by Ord. No. 1185, § 1]
   A.   The Township of Upper Dublin adopts the provisions of Article XI-D of
the Tax Reform Code of 1971 and imposes a realty transfer tax as authorized
under that Article, subject to the rate limitations therein. Every person who
makes, executes, delivers, accepts or presents for recording any document or in
whose behalf any document is made, executed, delivered, accepted or presented
for recording shall be subject to pay, for and in respect to the transaction or
any part thereof, a tax at the rate of 1% of the value of the real estate
represented by such document, which tax shall be payable at the earlier of the
time the document is presented for recording or within 30 days of acceptance of
such document or within 30 days of becoming an acquired company. [Amended 9-25-
2007 by Ord. No. 1185]
   B.   Within 30 days after becoming an acquired company, such company shall
present a declaration of acquisition with the Recorder of Deeds of each county
in which it holds real estate for the affixation of documentary stamps and
recording. Such declaration shall set forth the value of real estate holdings
of the acquired company in such county.
   C.   Except as otherwise provided in §
224-10, documents which make, confirm or evidence any transfer or demise of
title to real estate between associations or corporations and the members,
partners, shareholders or stockholders thereof are fully taxable. For the
purposes of this article, corporations and associations are entities separate
from their members, partners, stockholders or shareholders.
§ 224-4.   Applicability.
[Amended 9-25-2007 by Ord. No. 1185, § 2]
   A.   The tax hereby levied shall apply to or be imposed upon all
transactions, transfers or privileges arising out of agreements or contracts to
sell or any other arrangements made and entered into by the parties hereto,
prior to the date of the adoption of this article.
   B.   The tax hereby levied shall apply to or be imposed upon all
transactions, transfers or privileges arising out of agreements or contracts to
sell or any other arrangements made and entered into by the parties thereto,
after the date of the adoption of this article.
   C.   The tax hereby levied shall apply to or be imposed upon all
transactions, transfers or privileges where there are no agreements made and
entered into by the parties thereto.
   D.   The tax imposed under §
224-3 and all applicable interest and penalties shall be administered,
collected and enforced under the Act of December 31, 1965 (P.L. 1257, No. 511,
as amended, known as the “Local Tax Enabling Act”); provided, that if the
correct amount of the tax is not paid by the last date prescribed for timely
payment, Upper Dublin Township, pursuant to § 1102-D of the Tax Reform Code of
1971 (72 P.S. § 8102-D), authorizes and directs the Department of Revenue of
the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania to determine, collect and enforce the tax,
interest and penalties. [Amended 9-25-2007 by Ord. No. 1185]
§ 224-5.   Interest.
[Amended 9-25-2007 by Ord. No. 1185, § 3]
All taxes imposed by this article not paid when due shall bear interest as
prescribed for interest on delinquent municipal claims under the Act of May 16,
1923 (P.L. 207, No. 153) (53 P.S. § 7101 et seq.), as amended, known as the
“Municipal Claims and Tax Liens Act.” The interest rate shall be the lesser of
the interest rate imposed upon delinquent Commonwealth taxes as provided in §
806 of the Act of April 19, 1929 (P.L. 343, No. 176) (72 P.S. § 806), as
amended, known as the “Fiscal Code,” or the maximum interest rate permitted
under the Municipal Claims and Tax Liens Act for tax claims.
§ 224-6.   Late penalty.
A penalty of 10% is hereby imposed upon all taxes which are unpaid at the time
they are due and payable in accordance with the provisions of this article.
§ 224-7.   Collection.
All taxes imposed by this article, together with interest from the due date and
the penalty thereof, may be recovered as other debts of like character are now
by law recovered.
§ 224-8.   Taxes to become lien.
[Amended 9-25-2007 by Ord. No. 1185, § 4]
   A.   The tax imposed by this article shall become a lien upon the lands,
tenements or hereditaments, or any interest therein, situate wholly or partly
within the Township, which are described in or conveyed by the document which
is the subject of tax imposed under §
224-3, the said lien to begin at the time when the tax is due and payable and
continue until discharged by payment, or in accordance with law. The Township
Solicitor is authorized to file a municipal or tax claim for said tax in the
Court of Common Pleas of Montgomery County in accordance with the provisions of
the Municipal Lien Act of 1923, 1 the amendments and supplements thereto.
   B.   If any person fails to pay any tax imposed under this article for which
that person is liable, the Department of Revenue of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania is authorized to make a determination of additional tax, penalty
and interest due by the person pursuant to regulations applicable to such
determinations. [Amended 9-25-2007 by Ord. No. 1185]
   C.   Any tax that the Department of Revenue determines to be due under this
article and remains unpaid after demand for the same, and all penalties and
interest thereon, shall be a lien in favor of the Township upon the property,
both real and personal, of the person but only after the lien has been entered
and docketed of record by the Prothonotary of Montgomery County. [Amended 9-25-
2007 by Ord. No. 1185]
1. Editor’s Note: See 53 P.S. § 7101 et seq.
§ 224-9.   Certification fee.
[Amended 5-12-1992 by Ord. No. 819; 1-10-1995 by Ord. No. 879]
There shall be a fee for preparing and providing by mail a real estate tax
certification for any single tax parcel within the Township, and which fee
shall be assessed and collected by the Township Tax Collector and retained by
the Tax Collector for providing such services. 2 1
2. Editor’s Note: See fee schedule.
 
Notes
1    Editor’s Note: See
  Ch. 110, Fees.
§ 224-10.   Exemptions.
   A.   Exempt parties. The United States, the Commonwealth or any of their
instrumentalities, agencies or political subdivisions shall be exempt from
payment of the tax imposed by this article. The exemption of such governmental
bodies shall not, however, relieve any other party to a transaction from
liability for the tax.
   B.   Excluded transactions. The tax imposed by §
224-3 shall not apply to the following:
      (1)   A transfer to the commonwealth or to any of its instrumentalities,
agencies or political subdivisions by gift, dedication or deed in lieu of
condemnation or deed of confirmation in connection with condemnation
proceedings or a reconveyance by the condemning body of the property condemned
to the owner of record at the time of condemnation, which reconveyance may
include property line adjustments, provided that said reconveyance is made
within one year from the date of condemnation.
      (2)   A document which the commonwealth is prohibited from taxing under
the Constitution or Statutes of the United States.
      (3)   A conveyance to a municipality, Township, school district or county
pursuant to acquisition by the municipality, Township, school district or
county of a tax delinquent property at Sheriff’s sale or Tax Claim Bureau sale.
      (4)   A transfer for no or nominal actual consideration which corrects or
confirms a transfer previously recorded, but which does not extend or limit
existing record legal title or interest.
      (5)   A transfer of division in kind for no or nominal actual
consideration or property passed by testate or intestate succession and held by
cotenants; however, if any of the parties take shares greater in value than
their undivided interest, tax is due on the excess.
      (6)   A transfer between husband and wife, between persons who were
previously husband and wife who have since been divorced, provided that the
property or interest therein subject to such transfer was acquired by the
husband and wife or husband or wife prior to the granting of the final decree
in divorce, between parent and child or the spouse of such child, between
brother or sister or spouse of a brother or sister and brother or sister or the
spouse of a brother or sister and between a grandparent and grandchild or the
spouse of such grandchild, except that a subsequent transfer by the grantee
within one year shall be subject to tax as if the grantor were making such
transfer.
      (7)   A transfer for no or nominal actual consideration of property
passing by testate or intestate succession from a personal representative of a
decedent to the decedent’s devisee or heir.
      (8)   A transfer for no or nominal actual consideration to a trustee of
an ordinary trust where the transfer of the same property would be exempt if
the transfer were made directly from the grantor to all of the possible
beneficiaries, whether or not such beneficiaries are contingent or specifically
named. No such exemption shall be granted unless the Recorder of Deeds is
presented with a copy of the trust instrument that clearly identifies the
grantor and all possible beneficiaries.
      (9)   A transfer for no or nominal actual consideration from a trustee to
a beneficiary of an ordinary trust.
      (10)   A transfer for no or nominal actual consideration from trustee to
successor trustee.
      (11)   A transfer for no or nominal actual consideration between
principal and agent or straw party; or from or to an agent or straw party
where, if the agent or straw party were his principal, no tax would be imposed
under this article. Where the document by which title is acquired by a grantee
or statement of value fails to set forth that the property was acquired by the
grantee from or for the benefit of his principal, there is a rebuttable
presumption that the property is the property of the grantee in his individual
capacity if the grantee claims an exemption from taxation under this
subsection.
      (12)   A transfer made pursuant to the statutory merger or consolidation
of a corporation or statutory division of a nonprofit corporation, except where
it is reasonably determined that the primary intent for such merger,
consolidation or division is avoidance of the tax imposed by this article.
      (13)   A transfer from a corporation or association of real estate held
of record in the name of the corporation or association where the grantee owns
stock of the corporation or an interest in the association in the same
proportion as his interest in or ownership of the real estate being conveyed
and where the stock of the corporation or the interest in the association has
been held by the grantee for more than two years.
      (14)   A transfer from a nonprofit industrial development agency or
authority to a grantee of property conveyed by the grantee to that agency or
authority as security for a debt of the grantee or a transfer to a nonprofit
industrial development agency or authority.
      (15)   A transfer from a nonprofit industrial development agency or
authority to a grantee purchasing directly from it, but only if:
         (a)   The grantee shall directly use such real estate for the primary
purpose of manufacturing, fabricating, compounding, processing, publishing,
research and development, transportation, energy conversion, energy production,
pollution control, warehousing or agriculture; and
         (b)   The agency or authority has the full ownership interest in the
real estate transferred.
      (16)   A transfer by a mortgagor to the holder of a bona fide mortgage in
default in lieu of a foreclosure or a transfer pursuant to a judicial sale in
which the successful bidder is the bona fide holder of a mortgage, unless the
holder assigns the bid to another person.
      (17)   Any transfer between religious organizations or other bodies or
persons holding title for a religious organization if such real estate is not
being or has not been used by such transferor for commercial purposes.
      (18)   A transfer to a conservancy which possesses a tax-exempt status
pursuant to Section 501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1954 [68A Stat.
3, 26 U.S.C. § 501(c)(3)] and which has as its primary purpose preservation of
land for historic, recreational, scenic, agricultural or open-space
opportunities.
      (19)   A transfer of real estate devoted to the business of agriculture
to a family farm corporation by a member of the same family which directly owns
at least 75% of each class of the stock thereof.
      (20)   A transfer between members of the same family of an ownership
interest in a real estate company or family farm corporation.
      (21)   A transaction wherein the tax due is $1 or less.
      (22)   Leases for the production or extraction of coal, oil, natural gas
or minerals and assignments thereof.
   C.   In order to exercise any exclusion provided in this section, the true,
full and complete value of the transfer shall be known on the statement of
value. For leases of coal, oil, natural gas or minerals, the statement of value
may be limited to an explanation of the reason such document is not subject to
tax under this article.
§ 224-11.   Credits.
[Amended 9-25-2007 by Ord. No. 1185, § 5]
   A.   Where there is a transfer of a residential property by a licensed real
estate broker which property was transferred to him within the preceding year
as consideration for the purchase of other residential property, a credit for
the amount of the tax paid at the time of the transfer to him shall be given to
him toward the amount of the tax due upon the transfer.
   B.   Where there is a transfer by a builder of residential property which
was transferred to the builder within the preceding year as consideration for
the purchase of new, previously unoccupied residential property, a credit for
the amount of the tax paid at the time of the transfer to the builder shall be
given to the builder toward the amount of the tax due upon the transfer.
   C.   Where there is a transfer of real estate which is demised by the
grantor, a credit for the amount of tax paid at the time of the demise shall be
given the grantor toward the tax due upon the transfer.
   D.   Where there is a conveyance by deed of real estate which was previously
sold under a land contract by the grantor, a credit for the amount of tax paid
at the time of the sale shall be given the grantor toward the tax due upon the
deed.
   E.   If the tax due upon the transfer is greater than the credit given under
this section, the difference shall be paid. If the credit allowed is greater
than the amount of tax due, no refund or carryover credit shall be allowed.
   F.   Whenever the amount due upon determination, re-determination or review
is less than the amount paid on account thereof, the Township shall refund the
difference. [Amended 9-25- 2007 by Ord. No. 1185]
   G.   Where there has been no determination of unpaid tax, application for
refund shall be made to the Township in the manner prescribed by the Act of
December 31, 1965 (P.L. 1257, No. 511), known as the “Local Tax Enabling Act,”
or as otherwise provided by law. [Amended 9-25-2007 by Ord. No. 1185]
§ 224-12.   Judicial sales.
The tax herein imposed shall be fully paid and have priority out of the
proceeds of any judicial sale of real estate before any other obligation,
claim, lien, judgment, estate or costs of the sale and of the writ upon which
the sale is made, and the sheriff or other officer conducting said sale shall
pay the tax herein imposed out of the first moneys paid to him in connection
therewith. If the proceeds of the sale are insufficient to pay the entire tax
herein imposed, the purchaser shall be liable for the remaining tax.
§ 224-13.   Collection.
[Amended 9-25-2007 by Ord. No. 1185, § 6]
   A.   The Recorder of Deeds of Montgomery County is hereby authorized and
empowered to act as the collector of the taxes imposed herein and to remit such
taxes to the Treasurer of the Township on a monthly basis.
   B.   The tax herein imposed and all applicable interest and penalties shall
be administered, collected and enforced under the Act of December 31, 1965
(P.L. 1257, No. 511), as amended, known as the “Local Tax Enabling Act”;
provided, that if the correct amount of the tax is not paid by the last date
prescribed for timely payment, the Township, pursuant to Section 1102-D of the
Tax Reform Code of 1971 (72 P.S. § 8102-D), authorizes and directs the
Department of Revenue of the Commonwealth of Pennsylva nia to determine,
collect and enforce the tax, interest and penalties.
   C.   If any part of any underpayment of tax imposed under this article is
due to fraud, an amount equal to 50% of the underpayment shall be added to the
tax.
§ 224-14.   Violations and penalties.
[Amended 9-25-2007 by Ord. No. 1185, § 7]
   A.   It shall be unlawful for any person to make, execute, issue, deliver or
accept or cause to be made, executed, issued, delivered or accepted any
document without the full amount of tax thereon being duly paid.
   B.   Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall be
liable to a fine or penalty not exceeding $600 for each and every offense and,
further, shall be required to pay the amount of tax, together with interest as
is otherwise provided for herein, which should have been paid upon the document
or documents. [Amended 9-25-2007 by Ord. No. 1185]
   C.   If any part of any underpayment of tax imposed under this article is
due to fraud, an amount equal to 50% of the underpayment shall be added to the
tax. [Amended 9-25-2007 by Ord. No. 1185]
ARTICLE II
Earned Income Tax
[Adopted 11-11-1986 as Ord. No. 717]
§ 224-15.   Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
   ASSOCIATION — A partnership, limited partnership or any other unincorporated
group of two or more persons.
   BUSINESS — An enterprise, activity, profession or any other undertaking of
an unincorporated nature conducted for profit or ordinarily conducted for
profit, whether by persons, partnerships, associations or any other entity.
   CORPORATION — A corporation or joint-stock association organized under the
laws of the United States, the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania or any other state,
territory, foreign country or dependency.
   CURRENT YEAR — The calendar year for which the tax is levied.
   DOMICILE — The place where one lives and has his permanent home, and to
which he has the intention of returning whenever he is absent. Actual residence
is not necessarily “domicile,” for “domicile” is the fixed place of abode
which, in the intention of the taxpayer, is permanent rather than transitory.
“Domicile” is the voluntary fixed place of habitation of a person, not for a
mere special or limited purpose, but with the present intention of making a
permanent home, until some event occurs to induce him to adopt some other
permanent home. In the case of businesses or associations, the “domicile” is
the place considered as the center of business affairs and the place where its
functions are discharged.
   EARNED INCOME — Salaries, wages, commissions, bonuses, incentive payments,
fees, tips and other compensation received by a person or his personal
representative for services rendered, whether directly or through an agent, and
whether in cash or in property; not including, however, wages or compensation
paid to persons on active military service, periodic payments for sickness,
disability other than regular wages received during a period of sickness,
disability or retirement or payments arising under workers’ compensation acts,
occupational disease acts and similar legislation or payments commonly
recognized as old age benefits, retirement pay or pensions paid to persons
retired from service after reaching a specific age or after a stated period of
employment compensation payments by any governmental agency or payments to
reimburse expenses or payments made by employers or labor unions for wage and
salary supplemental programs, including but not limited to programs covering
hospitalization, sickness, disability or death, supplemental unemployment
benefits, strike benefits, social security and retirements.
   EMPLOYER — A person, partnership, association, corporation, institution,
governmental body or unit or agency or any other entity employing one or more
persons for a salary, wage, commission or other compensation.
   INCOME TAX OFFICER OR OFFICERS — The person, public employee or private
agency designated by the governing body to collect and administer the tax on
earned income and net profits.
   LESSOR — Any individual or individuals, corporation, partnership or other
entity which owns, leases or otherwise possesses or controls any real property,
condominium unit or rental unit, including residential, commercial, office,
institutional or industrial real property, condominium unit or rental unit, and
in turn leases or subleases such real property to any other individual or
individuals, corporation, partnership or other entity. For the purposes of this
article, "lessor" shall include any agent, manager, condominium association or
other entity which acts on behalf of the owner of the real property,
condominium unit or rental unit. [Amended 12-12-1989 by Ord. No. 775]
   NET PROFITS — The net income from the operation of a business, profession or
other activity, except corporations, after provisions for all costs and
expenses incurred in the conduct thereof, determined either on a cash or
accrual basis in accordance with the accounting system used in such business,
profession or other activity, but without deduction of taxes based on income.
   NONRESIDENT — A person, partnership, association or other entity domiciled
outside the taxing district.
   PERSON OR INDIVIDUAL — A natural person.
   PRECEDING YEAR — The calendar year before the current year.
   RESIDENT — A person, partnership, association or other entity domiciled in
the taxing district.
   SUCCEEDING YEAR — The calendar year following the current year.
   TAXPAYER — A person, partnership, association or any other entity required
hereunder to file a return of earned income or net profits or to pay a tax
thereon.
§ 224-16.   Imposition of tax.
[Amended 6-1-1993 by Ord. No. 842; 1-10-1995 by Ord. No. 879]
A tax at the rate of 1% on each dollar is hereby imposed on all earned income
and net profits, as defined herein, earned by residents of the Township of
Upper Dublin and on all earned income and net profits earned by nonresidents of
the Township of Upper Dublin for work done or services performed or rendered in
said Township.
§ 224-17.   Payment of tax.
   A.   Net profits.
      (1)   Every taxpayer making net profits shall, on or before April 15th of
each year, make and file with the officer on a form prescribed by the officer a
declaration of his estimated net profits during the period beginning January 1
and ending December 31 of the current year and pay to the officer in four equal
quarterly installments the tax due thereon as follows: the first installment at
the time of filing the declaration and the other installments on or before June
15 of the current year, September 15 of the current year and January 15 of the
succeeding year.
      (2)   On or before April 15 of the succeeding year, every taxpayer shall
make and file a final return on a form prescribed by the officer showing the
amount of net profits earned, the total amount of tax due and the total amount
of tax paid thereon. At the time of filing the final return, the taxpayer shall
pay to the officer the balance of the tax due or shall make demand for refund
or credit in the case of overpayment. An incomplete or improperly completed tax
return shall be considered as not having been filed. Each final return shall be
substantiated and supported by such United States federal income tax return
forms as required by the officer, which shall at least include a copy of the
Federal W-2 Form in the case of an earned income taxable, and Schedule C of the
Federal Return as to net profits taxable.
   B.   Earned income. Every taxpayer shall, on or before April 15 of the
succeeding year, make and file with the officer a final return showing the
amount of earned income received during the period beginning January 1 of the
current year and ending December 31 of the current year, the total amount of
tax due thereon, the amount of tax paid thereon, the amount of tax thereon that
has been withheld pursuant to the provisions relating to the collection at
source and the balance of tax due. At the time of filing the final return, the
taxpayer shall pay the balance of the tax due or shall make demand for refund
or credit in the case of overpayment. An incomplete or improperly completed tax
return shall be considered as not having been filed. Each final return shall be
substantiated and supported by such United States federal income tax return
forms as required by the officer, which shall include a copy of the Federal W-
2 Form in the case of an earned income taxable and Schedule "C" of the Federal
return as to a net profits taxable.
   C.   Earned income not subject to withholding. Every taxpayer who is
employed for a salary, wage, commission or other compensation and who received
any earned income not subject to the provisions relating to collection at
source shall make and file with the officer on a form prescribed or approved by
the officer a quarterly return on or before April 30 of the current year, July
31 of the current year, October 31 of the current year and January 31 of the
succeeding year, setting forth the aggregate amount of earned income not
subject to withholding by him during the three-month periods ending March 31 of
the current year, June 30 of the current year, September 30 of the current year
and December 31 of the current year, respectively, and subject to the tax,
together with such other information as the officer may require. Every taxpayer
making such return shall, at the time of filing thereof, pay to the officer the
amount of tax shown as due thereon.
§ 224-18.   Collection at source.
   A.   Every employer having an office, factory, workshop, branch, warehouse
or other place of business within the Township who employs one or more persons,
other than domestic servants, for a salary, wage, commission or other
compensation shall deduct, at the time of payment thereof, the tax imposed by
the Board of Commissioners of Upper Dublin Township on the earned income due to
his employee or employees and shall, on or before April 30 of the current year,
July 31 of the current year, October 31 of the current year and January 31 of
the succeeding year, file a return and pay to the officer the amount of taxes
deducted during the preceding three-month periods ending March 31 of the
current year, June 30 of the current year, September 30 of the current year and
December 31 of the current year, respectively. Such returns, unless otherwise
agreed upon between the officer and employer, shall show the name and social
security number of each such employee, the earned income of such employee
during such preceding three-month period, the tax deducted therefrom, the
political subdivision imposing the tax upon such employee and the political
subdivision in which the employee resides, the total earned income of all such
employees during such preceding three-month period and the total tax deducted
therefrom and paid with the return.
   B.   Any employer who, for two of the preceding four quarterly periods, has
failed to deduct the proper tax or any part thereof or has failed to pay over
the proper amount of tax to the taxing authority may be required by the officer
to file his return and pay the tax monthly. In such cases, payments of tax
shall be made to the officer on or before the last day of the month succeeding
the month for which the tax was withheld.
   C.   On or before February 28 of the succeeding year, every employer shall
file with the officer:
      (1)   An annual return showing the total amount of earned income paid,
the total amount of tax deducted and the total amount of tax paid to the
officer for the period, beginning January 1 of the current year and ending
December 31 of the current year.
      (2)   A return showing withholding statement for each employee employed
during all or part of the period beginning January 1 of the current year and
ending December 31 of the current year setting forth the employee's name,
address, social security number, the amount of earned income paid to the
employee during said period, the amount of tax deducted, the political
subdivisions imposing the tax upon such employee and the amount of tax paid to
the officer. Every employer shall furnish two copies of the individual return
to the employee for whom it is filed.
   D.   Every employer who discontinues business prior to December 31 of the
current year shall, within 30 days after the discontinuance of business, file
the returns and withholding statements herein above required and pay the tax
due.
   E.   Except as otherwise provided, every employer who willfully or
negligently fails or omits to make the deductions required by this section
shall be liable for payment of the taxes which he was required to withhold to
the extent that such taxes have not been recovered from the employee.
   F.   The failure or omission of any employer to make the deductions required
by this section shall not relieve any employee from the payment of the tax or
from complying with the requirements of this article relating to the filing of
declarations and returns.
   G.   It shall be the duty of every lessor to file with the Township a list,
certified to be true, correct and complete, of the names and addresses of all
tenants, lessees or sublessees of any real property, condominium unit or rental
unit, on or before January 31, 1990, and thereafter on or before December 31,
1990, and each December 31 of each succeeding year, or within 30 days of the
date any change of tenancy of such real property, condominium unit or rental
unit. [Added 12-12-1989 as Ord. No. 775]
§ 224-19.   Powers and duties of officer.
   A.   It shall be the duty of the officer to collect and receive the taxes,
fines and penalties imposed by this article. It shall also be his duty to keep
a record showing the amount received by him from each person or business paying
the tax and the date of such receipt.
   B.   Each officer, before entering upon his official duties, shall give and
acknowledge a bond to the Township of Upper Dublin. If the Board of
Commissioners shall by resolution designate any bond previously given by the
officer as adequate, such bond shall be sufficient to satisfy the requirements
of this subsection.
      (1)   Each such bond shall be joint and several, with one or more
corporate sureties which shall be surety companies authorized to do business in
this Commonwealth and duly licensed by the Insurance Commissioner of this
Commonwealth.
      (2)   Each bond shall be conditioned upon the faithful discharge by the
officer, his clerks, assistants and appointees of all trusts confided in him by
virtue of his office, upon the faithful execution of all duties required by him
according to law, of all moneys and all balances thereof paid to, received or
held by him by virtue of his office and upon the delivery to his successor or
successors in office of all books, papers, documents or other official things
held in right of his office.
      (3)   Each such bond shall be taken in the name of the appointing
authority or authorities and shall be for the use of the political subdivision
or political subdivisions appointing the officer and for the use of such other
person or persons for whom money shall otherwise appear, in case of a breach of
any of the conditions thereof by the acts or neglect of the principal on the
bond.
   C.   The officer charged with the administration and enforcement of the
provisions of this article is hereby empowered to prescribe, adopt, promulgate
and enforce rules and regulations relating to any matter pertaining to the
administration and enforcement of this article, including provisions for the
reexamination and correction of declarations and returns and of payments
alleged or found to be incorrect or as to which an overpayment is claimed or
found to have occurred, and to make refunds in case of overpayment, for any
period of time not to exceed six years subsequent to the date of payment of the
sum involved, and to prescribe forms necessary for the administration of this
article. No rule or regulation of any kind shall be enforceable unless it has
been approved by the Board of Commissioners of the Township of Upper Dublin. A
copy of such rules and regulations currently in force shall be available for
public inspection.
   D.   The officer shall refund, on petition of and proof by the taxpayer,
earned income tax paid on the taxpayer's ordinary and necessary business
expenses, to the extent that such expenses are not paid by the taxpayer's
employer.
   E.   The officer and agents designated by him are hereby authorized to
examine the books, papers and records of any employer or of any taxpayer or of
any person whom the officer reasonably believes to be an employer or taxpayer,
in order to verify the accuracy of any declaration or return or, if no
declaration or return was filed, to ascertain the tax due. Every employer and
every taxpayer and every person whom the officer reasonably believes to be an
employer or taxpayer is hereby directed and required to give to the officer or
to any agent designated by him the means, facilities and opportunity for such
examination and investigations as are hereby authorized.
   F.   Any information gained by the officer, his agents or by any other
official or agent of the taxing district as a result of any declarations,
returns, investigations, hearings or verifications required or authorized by
this article shall be confidential, except for official purposes and except in
accordance with a proper judicial order or as otherwise provided by law.
   G.   The officer is authorized to establish different filing, reporting and
payment dates for taxpayers whose fiscal years do not coincide with the
calendar year.
§ 224-20.   Suit for collection.
   A.   The officer may sue in the name of the Township for recovery of taxes
due and unpaid under this article.
   B.   Any suit brought to recover the tax imposed by this article shall begin
within three years after such tax is due or within three years after the
declaration or return has been filed, whichever date is later; provided,
however, that this limitation shall not prevent the institution of a suit for
the collection of any tax due or determined to be due in the following cases:
      (1)   Where no declaration or return was filed by any person, although a
declaration or return was required to be filed by him under provisions of this
article, there shall be no limitation.
      (2)   Where an examination of the declaration or return filed by any
person or of other evidence relating to such declaration or return in the
possession of the officer reveals a fraudulent evasion of taxes, there shall be
no limitation.
      (3)   In the case of substantial understatement of tax liability of 25%
or more and no fraud, suit shall begin within six years.
      (4)   Where any person has deducted taxes under the provisions of this
article and has failed to pay the amounts so deducted to the officer or where
any person has willfully failed or omitted to make the deductions required by
this section, there shall be no limitation.
   C.   This section shall not be construed to limit the Township from
recovering delinquent taxes by any other means provided by law.
   D.   The officer may sue for recovery of an erroneous refund, provided that
such suit is begun two years after making such refund, except that the suit may
be brought within five years if it appears that any part of the refund was
induced by fraud or misrepresentation of material fact.
§ 224-21.   Interest.
If for any reason the tax is not paid when due, interest at the rate of 6% per
annum on the amount of said tax, and an additional penalty of 1/2 of 1% of the
amount of the unpaid tax for each month or fraction thereof during which the
tax remains unpaid, shall be added and collected. Where suit is brought for the
recovery of any such tax, the person liable therefor shall, in addition, be
liable for the costs of collection and the interest and penalties herein
imposed.
§ 224-22.   Violations and penalties.
   A.   Any person who fails, neglects or refuses to make any declaration or
return required by this article, any employer who fails, neglects or refuses to
deduct or withhold the tax from his employees, any person who refuses to permit
the officer or any agent designated by him to examine his books, records and
papers and any person who knowingly makes any incomplete, false or fraudulent
return or attempts to do anything whatsoever to avoid the full disclosure of
the amount of his net profits or earned income in order to avoid the payment of
the whole or any part of the tax imposed by this article shall, upon conviction
thereof before any Justice of the Peace, Alderman or Magistrate or court of
competent jurisdiction in the county, be sentenced to pay a fine of not more
than $500 for each offense and costs. Each violation shall constitute a
separate offense, punishable by a like fine or imprisonment for each day of
continued violation. [Amended 1-10-1995 by Ord. No. 879]
   B.   Any person who divulges any information which is confidential under the
provisions of this article shall, upon conviction thereof before any Justice of
the Peace, Alderman or Magistrate or court of competent jurisdiction, be
sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $500 for each offense and costs.
[Amended 1-10-1995 by Ord. No. 879]
   C.   The penalties imposed under this section shall be in addition to any
other penalty imposed by any other section of this article.
   D.   The failure of any person to receive or procure forms required for
making the declaration or returns required by this article shall not excuse him
from making such declaration or return.
§ 224-23.   Confidentiality of Tax Information.
[Added 3-9-1999 by Ord. No. 992]
Any information gained by the Township as a result of any audit, return,
report, investigation, hearing or verification shall be confidential tax
information. Except for official purposes or as provided by law, the Township
shall not:
   A.   Divulge or make known in any manner any confidential information gained
in any return, investigation, hearing or verification to any person;
   B.   Permit confidential tax information or any book containing any abstract
or particulars thereof to be seen or examined by any person; or
   C.   Print, publish or make known in any manner any confidential tax
information.
§ 224-24.   (Reserved)
ARTICLE III
Administrative Appeals
[Adopted 3-9-1999 by Ord. No. 992]
§ 224-25.   Taxpayer petitions.
Taxpayers wishing to appeal the decision of the income tax officer relating to
any assessment, determination, ruling or refund of any tax levied under Article
II hereof shall file a petition for review and decision.
   A.   A petition is timely filed if the letter transmitting the petition is
postmarked by the United States Postal Service on or before the final day on
which the petition is required to be filed. Deadlines for filing petitions are
as follows:
      (1)   Refund petitions shall be filed within three years after the due
date for filing the final return as extended or one year after actual payment
of an eligible tax, whichever is later. If no final return is required, the
petition shall be filed within three years after the due date for payment of
the tax or within one year after actual payment, whichever is later.
      (2)   Petitions for reassessment and from rulings of the income tax
officer shall be filed within 90 days of the date of the assessment notice or
of the ruling.
   B.   All petitions shall be filed by hand delivery or by registered or
certified mail to the Finance Director, Upper Dublin Township, 801 Loch Alsh
Avenue, Fort Washington, PA 19034.
   C.   The petition shall be in writing on a form provided by the tax officer
and shall contain the following information:
      (1)   The name and address of the taxpayer and his representative, if
any.
      (2)   The tax years in question.
      (3)   A copy of the income tax officer's decision to which the petition
relates.
      (4)   A full and complete statement of the taxpayer's position, including
all supporting documents which the taxpayer seeks to have considered. The
taxpayer may, if it chooses, submit any legal authority or citations which
support its position.
      (5)   A request that a hearing be held on the petition, or a statement
that a hearing is waived.
   D.   Upon receipt of the petition the Finance Director shall forward a copy
to the Tax Appeals Board together with any information pertinent to the
petition in the hands of the Finance Director.
§ 224-26.   Hearing on petition.
   A.   A hearing on the petition may be requested, but shall not be mandatory.
If requested and granted, the hearing shall be scheduled by the Tax Appeals
Board within 45 days of its filing. All hearings shall be held at the Upper
Dublin Township Administrative Building, unless the Tax Appeals Board, the
taxpayer and the Township agree otherwise.
   B.   All testimony before the Tax Appeals Board shall be sworn, but
customary rules of evidence may be waived in the interest of fairness and
judicial economy. It is not required that testimony be transcribed.
   C.   Any request for a continuance of the hearing by the taxpayer must be
accompanied by a letter agreeing to an extension of time for the Tax Appeals
Board to make a decision on the petition, which extension must be at least
equal to the number of days delay caused by the request.
§ 224-27.   Hearing on petition.
   A.   The Tax Appeals Board's decision on the petition shall be in writing
and shall be forwarded by regular mail to the taxpayer and the Township within
60 days of the date a complete and accurate petition is received. Failure to
act within 60 days (unless waived or extended by the taxpayer) shall result in
the petition being deemed approved.
   B.   The Tax Appeals Board's decision shall be based on principles of law
and equity.
   C.   Any person aggrieved by the Tax Appeals Board's decision who has a
direct interest in the decision shall have the right to appeal de novo to the
Court of Common Pleas of Montgomery County within 30 days of the date of the
decision.
§ 224-28.   Tax Appeals Board.
The Tax Appeals Board shall be appointed by the Board of Commissioners of Upper
Dublin Township, which shall determine the qualifications and compensation, if
any, of its members. The Tax Appeals Board shall consist of at least three, but
not more than seven members. The Tax Appeals Board may establish those
procedures consistent with due process and not inconsistent with the provisions
of this chapter or the regulations promulgated by the income tax officer which
the Tax Appeals Board deems appropriate for the conduct of hearings and the
orderly presentation of testimony.
§ 224-29.   (Reserved)
ARTICLE IV
Local Services Tax
[Adopted 11-13-2007 by Ord. No. 1189]3 1
3. Editor’s Note: Ord. 1189, 11-13-2007, superseded Ord. 1160, 1-10-2006,
enacting an emergency and municipal services tax, codified as the prior Chapter
224, Article IV, “Emergency and Municipal Services Tax.” Section 2 of Ord. 1189
provides, in pertinent part: “Nothing in this Ordinance . . . shall be
construed to affect any suit or proceedings . . ., any rights acquired or
liability incurred, any permit issued, or any cause or causes of action
existing . . ., or to repeal the imposition and collection of an occupation
privilege tax, plus applicable penalties and interest, for calendar year 2005
and all prior calendar years, or of an emergency and municipal services tax,
plus applicable penalties and interest, for calendar years 2006 and 2007, as
the same exist prior to this [ordinance].”
 
Notes
     Editor’s Note: Ord. 1189, 11-13-2007, superseded Ord. 1160, 1-10-2006,
  enacting an emergency and municipal services tax, codified as the prior Chapter
  224, Article IV, “Emergency and Municipal Services Tax.” Section 2 of Ord. 1189
  provides, in pertinent part:
   
1 “Nothing in this Ordinance . . . shall be construed to affect any suit or
  proceedings . . ., any rights acquired or liability incurred, any permit issued,
  or any cause or causes of action existing . . ., or to repeal the imposition and
  collection of an occupation privilege tax, plus applicable penalties and
  interest, for calendar year 2005 and all prior calendar years, or of an emergency
  and municipal services tax, plus applicable penalties and interest, for calendar
  years 2006 and 2007, as the same exist prior to this [ordinance].”
§ 224-30.   Definitions.
As used in this article, unless the context clearly indicates a different
meaning, the following words shall have the meanings set forth below:
   COLLECTOR — The Township Manager of the Township of Upper Dublin or his
designated representative.
   EARNED INCOME — Compensation as this term is defined in Section 13 [relating
to earned income taxes] of the Local Tax Enabling Act, the Act of December 31,
1965, P.L. 1257, § 13, 53 P.S. § 6913 as amended.
   EMPLOYER — An individual, partnership, association, limited liability
corporation, limited liability partnership, corporation, governmental body,
agency or other entity employing one or more persons on a salary, wage,
commission or other compensation basis, including a self- employed person.
   HE, HIS or HIM — Indicates the singular and plural number, as well as male,
female and neuter genders.
   INDIVIDUAL — Any person, male or female, engaged in any occupation, trade or
profession within the Township of Upper Dublin.
   NET PROFITS —The net income from the operation of a business, profession; or
other activity, as this term is defined in Section 13 [relating to earned
income taxes] of the Local Tax Enabling Act, the Act of December 31, 1965, P.L.
1251, § 13, as amended, 53 P.S. § 6913, as amended.
   OCCUPATION — Any trade, profession, business or undertaking of any type,
kind or character, including services, domestic or other, earned on or
performed within the Township of Upper Dublin for which compensation is charged
or received; whether by means of salary, wages, commission or fees for services
rendered.
   POLITICAL SUBDIVISION — Any county, city, borough, incorporated town,
township, school district, vocational school district with the authority to
levy the local services tax.
   TAX — The local services tax at the rate fixed in §
224-30 of this article.
   TAX YEAR — The period from January 1 until December 31 in any year; a
calendar year.
   TOWNSHIP — The Township of Upper Dublin.
§ 224-31.   Levy of tax.
   A.   For specific revenue purposes, an annual tax is hereby levied and
assessed, commencing January 1, 2008; upon the privilege of engaging in an
occupation with a primary place of employment within the Township during the
tax year. Each natural person who exercises such privilege for any length of
time during any tax year shall pay the tax for that year in the amount of $52,
assessed in accordance with the provisions of this article.
   B.   This tax may be used solely for the following purposes as the same may
be allocated by the Board of Commissioners from time to time:
      (1)   Emergency services, which shall include emergency medical services,
police services and/or fire services;
      (2)   Road construction and/or maintenance;
      (3)   Reduction of property taxes; or
      (4)   Property tax relief through implementation of a homestead and
farmstead exclusion in accordance with 53 Pa.C.S., Ch. 85, Subch. F (relating
to homestead property exclusion).
   C.   The Township shall use no less than 25% of the funds derived from the
tax for emergency services. This tax is in addition to all other taxes of any
kind or nature heretofore levied by the Township.
   D.   The tax shall be no more than $52 on each person for each calendar
year, irrespective of the number of political subdivisions within which a
person maybe employed.
§ 224-32.   Exemption and refunds.
   A   Exemption. Any person whose total earned income and net profits from all
sources within the Township is less than $12,000 for any calendar year in which
the tax is levied is exempt from the payment of the tax for that calendar year.
In addition, the following persons are exempt from payment of the tax:
      (1)   Any person who has served in any war or armed conflict in which the
United States was engaged and is honorably discharged or released under
honorable circumstances from active service if, as a result of military
service, the person is blind, paraplegic or a double or quadruple amputee or
has a service-connected disability declared by the United States Veterans’
Administration or its successor to be a total 100% disability.
      (2)   Any person who serves as a member of a reserve component of the
armed forces and is called to active duty at any time during the taxable year.
For the purposes of this subparagraph, “reserve component of the armed forces”
shall mean the United States Army Reserve, United States Navy Reserve, United
States Marine Corps Reserve, United States Coast Guard Reserve, United States
Air Force Reserve, the Pennsylva nia Army National Guard or the Pennsylvania
Air National Guard. Active duty does not include weekend training sessions or
two week summer service.
   B.   Procedure to Claim Exemption.
      (1)   A person seeking to claim an exemption from the local services tax
must annually file an exemption certificate with the Township and with the
person’s employer pursuant to the Township’s regulations affirming that the
person reasonably expects to receive earned income and net profits from all
sources within the Township of less than $12,000 in the calendar year for which
the exemption certificate is filed. The exemption certificate shall have
attached to it a copy of all the employee’s last pay stubs or W-2 forms from
employment within the Township for the year prior to the fiscal year for which
the employee is requesting to be exempted from the tax. Upon receipt of the
exemption certificate and until otherwise instructed by the Township or except
as required by Subsection B(2) of this section the employer shall not withhold
the tax from the person during the calendar year or the remainder of the
calendar year for which the exemption certificate applies. Employers shall
ensure that the exemption certificate forms are readily available to employees
at all times and shall furnish each new employee with a form at the time of
hiring. The exemption certificate form shall be the uniform form provided by
the Township.
      (2)   With respect to a person who claimed an exemption for a given
calendar year from the tax, upon notification to an employer by the person or
by the Township that the person has received earned income and net profits from
all sources within the Township equal to or in excess of $12,000 in that
calendar year or that the person is otherwise ineligible for the tax exemption
for that calendar year, or upon an employer’s payment to the person of earned
income within the Township in an amount equal to or in excess of $12,000 in
that calendar year, an employer shall withhold the local services tax from the
person under Subsection B(3).
      (3)   If a person who claimed an exemption for a given calendar year from
the tax becomes subject to the tax for the calendar year under Subsection B(2)
of this section, the employer shall withhold the tax for the remainder of that
calendar year. The employer shall withhold from the person, for the first
payroll period after receipt of the notification under Subsection B(2) of this
section, a lump sum equal to the amount of tax that was not withheld from the
person due to the exemption claimed by the person under this subsection, plus
the per payroll amount due for that first payroll period. The amount of tax
withheld per payroll period for the remaining payroll periods in that calendar
year shall be the same amount withheld for other employees. In the event the
employment of a person subject to withholding of the tax under this subsection
is subsequently severed in that calendar year, the person shall be liable for
any outstanding balance of tax due, and the Township may pursue collection
under this article.
      (4)   Except as provided in Subsection B(2), it is the intent of this
subsection that employers shall not be responsible for investigating exemption
certificates, monitoring tax exemption eligibility or exempting any employee
from the local services tax.
   C.   Refunds. The Township shall establish procedures for the processing of
refund claims for any tax paid by any person who is eligible for exemption,
which procedures shall be in accord with provisions of the general municipal
law relating to refunds of overpayments and interest on overpayments. Refunds
made within 75 days of a refund request or 75 days after the last day the
employer is required to remit the tax for the last quarter of the calendar
year, whichever is later, shall not be subject to interest. No refunds shall be
made for amounts overpaid in a calendar year that do not exceed $1. The
Collector shall determine eligibility for exemption and provide refunds to
exempt persons.
§ 224-33.   Duty of employers to collect.
   A   Each employer within the Township, as well as those employers situated
outside the Township but who engage in business within the Township, is hereby
charged with the duty of collecting the tax from each of his employees engaged
by him or performing for him within the Township and making a return and
payment thereof to the Collector. Further, each employer is hereby authorized
to deduct this tax for each employee in his or her employ, whether said
employee is paid by salary, wage or commission and whether or not all such
services are performed within the Township.
   B.   A person subject to the tax shall be assessed by the employer a pro
rata share of the tax for each payroll period in which the person is engaging
in an occupation. The pro rata share of the tax assessed on the person for a
payroll period shall be determined by dividing the rate of the tax levied for
the calendar year by the number of payroll periods established by the employer
for the calendar year. For purposes of determining the pro rata share, an
employer shall round down the amount of the tax collected each payroll period
to the nearest one- hundredth of a dollar. Collection of the tax shall be made
on a payroll period basis for each payroll period in which the person is
engaging in an occupation, except as provided in Subsection D of this section,
For purposes of this subsection, combined rate shall mean the aggregate annual
rate of the tax levied by the Upper Dublin School District and the Township.
   C.   No person shall be subject to the payment of the local services tax by
more than one municipality during each payroll period.
   D.   In the case of concurrent employment, an employer shall refrain from
withholding the tax if the employee provides a recent pay statement from a
principal employer that includes the name of the employer, the length of the
payroll period and the amount of the tax withheld and a statement from the
employee that the pay statement is from the employee’s principal employer and
the employee will notify other employers of a change in principal place of
employment within two weeks of its occurrence. The employee’s statement shall
be provided on the form approved by Pennsylvania Department of Community and
Economic Development.
   E.   The tax shall be no more than $52 on each person for each calendar
year, irrespective of the number of political subdivisions within which a
person maybe employed. The Township shall provide a taxpayer a receipt of
payment upon request by the taxpayer.
   F.   No employer shall he held liable for failure to withhold the tax or for
the payment of the withheld tax money to the Township if the failure to
withhold taxes arises from incorrect information submitted by the employee as
to the employee’s place or plates of employment, the employee’s principal
office or where the employee is principally employed. Further, an employer
shall not be liable for payment of the local services tax in an amount
exceeding the amount withheld by the employer if the employer complies with the
provisions of Subsection B of §
224-30 of this article and this section and remits the amount so withheld in
accordance with this article.
   G.   Employers shall be required to remit the local services taxes 30 days
after the end of each quarter of a calendar year. tax, whether or not the
employer makes collection thereof from the employee’s salary.
§ 224-34.   Returns.
Each employer shall prepare and file a return showing a computation of the tax
on forms to be supplied to the employer by the Collector. If an employer fails
to file the return and pay the wages or commissions paid by him or her to an
employee, except as provided hereafter in this article, the employer shall be
responsible for the payment of the tax in full as though the tax had been
originally levied against the employer.
§ 224-35.   Dates for determining tax liability and payment.
In each tax year, each employer shall use his or her employment records to
determine the number of employees from whom such tax shall be deducted and paid
over to the Collector on or before the thirtieth day following the end of each
calendar quarter of each such tax year.
§ 224-36.   Self-employed individuals.
Each self-employed individual who performs services of any type or kind or
engages in any occupation or profession within a primary place of employment
within the Township shall be required to comply with this article and pay the
pro rata portion of the tax due to the Collector on or before the thirtieth day
following the end of the first quarter or any subsequent quarter in which they
become self-employed within the Township. For purposes of determining the pro-
rata share, self-employed individuals shall be deemed to have one pay period
per year and the pro- rata share shall be deemed to be $52.
§ 224-37.   Individuals engaged in more than one occupation or employed in more
than one political subdivision.
   A.   The sites of the tax shall be the place of employment on the first day
the person becomes subject to the tax during each payroll period. In the event
a person is engaged in more than one occupation, that is, concurrent
employment, or an occupation which requires the person working in more than one
political subdivision during a payroll period, the priority of claim to collect
the local services tax shall be in the following order:
      (1)   First, the political subdivision in which a person maintains his or
her principal office or is principally employed;
      (2)   Second, the political subdivision in which the person resides and
works if the tax is levied by that political subdivision;
      (3)   Third, the political subdivision in which a person is employed and
which imposes the tax nearest in miles to the person’s home. In case of
dispute, a tax receipt of the taxing authority for that calendar year declaring
that the taxpayer has made prior payment constitutes prima facie certification
of payment to all other political subdivisions.
§ 224-38.   Nonresidents subject to tax.
All employers and self-employed individuals residing or having their places of
business outside of the Township but who perform services of any type or kind
or engage in any occupation or profession within the Township do, by virtue
thereof, agree to be bound by and subject themselves to the provisions,
penalties and regulations promulgated under this article with the same force
and effect as though they were residents of the Township. Further, any
individual engaged in an occupation within the Township and an employee of a
nonresidential employer may, for the purpose of this article, be considered a
self-employed person, and in the event his or her tax is not paid, the Township
shall have the option of proceeding against either the employer or employee for
the collection of this tax as hereinafter provided.
§ 224-39.   Administration of tax.
   A.   It shall be the duty of the Collector to accept and receive payments of
this tax and to keep a record thereof showing the amount received by him from
each employer or self-employed person, together with the date the tax was
received.
   B.   The Collector is hereby charged with the administration and enforcement
of this article and is hereby charged and empowered, subject to approval of the
Board of Commissioners, to proscribe, adopt and promulgate rules and
regulations relating to any matter pertaining to the administration and
enforcement of this article, including provisions for the examination of
payroll records of any employer subject to this article, the examination and
correction of any return made in compliance with this article and any payment
alleged or found to be incorrect or as to which overpayment is claimed or found
to have occurred. Any person aggrieved by any decision of the Collector shall
have the right to appeal the Collector’s decision pursuant to the Township’s
procedures under the Local Taxpayer’s Bill of Rights as in other cases
provided.
   C.   The Collector is hereby authorized to examine the books and payroll
records of any employer in order to verify the accuracy of any return made by
an employer or, if no return was made, to ascertain the tax due. Each employer
is hereby directed and required to give the Collector the means, facilities and
opportunity for such examination.
§ 224-40.   Suits for collection.
   A.   In the event that any tax under this article remains due or unpaid 30
days after the due dates above set forth, the Collector may sue for the
recovery of any such tax due or unpaid under this article, together with
interest and penalty.
   B.   If for any reason the tax is not paid when due, interest at the rate of
1½% per month on the amount of such tax shall be calculated beginning with the
due date of the tax and a penalty of 10% shall be added to the flat rate of
such tax for nonpayment thereof. Where suit is brought for the recovery of this
tax or other appropriate remedy undertaken, the individual liable therefor
shall, in addition, be responsible and liable for the costs of collection.
§ 224-41.   Violations and penalties.
   A.   Whoever makes any false or untrue statement on any return required by
this article, or whoever refuses inspection of the books, records or accounts
in his or her custody and control setting forth the number of employees subject
to this tax who are in his or her employment, or whoever fails or refuses to
file any return required by this article or whoever fails to collect or
withhold or, having collected and withheld, fails to pay the tax due, shall,
upon conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine or penalty to the Township
of not more than $600 and costs of prosecution for each offense. The action to
enforce the penalty herein prescribed may be instituted against any person in
charge of the business of any employer who shall have failed or who refuses to
file a return required by this article and shall include self-employed
individuals.
   B.   Any employee or individual who submits false statements regarding
eligibility for exemption or submits a false exemption certificate shall be
guilty of a violation of this article, and, upon conviction thereof, shall be
sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $600 and costs of prosecution for each
offense.
§ 224-42.   Interpretation.
   A.   Nothing contained in this article shall he construed to empower the
Township to levy and collect the tax hereby imposed on any occupation not
within the taxing power of the Township under the Constitution of the United
States and the laws of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
   B.   If the tax hereby imposed under the provisions of this article shall be
held by any court of competent jurisdiction to be in violation of the
Constitution of the United States or of the laws of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania as to any individual, the decision of the court shall not affect
or impair the right to impose or collect said tax or the validity of the tax so
imposed on other persons or individuals as herein provided.
ARTICLE V
Alternate Collector of Delinquent Real Estate Taxes
[Adopted 12-11-2012 by Ord. No. 12-1262]
§ 224-43.   Appointment.
In addition to the authorization for the collection of taxes and institution of
tax sales authorized by the Real Estate Tax Sales Law (“RETSL”), 72 P.S. §
5860.201 et seq., the Montgomery County Tax Claim Bureau is appointed as
alternative collector and is authorized and directed to file liens for existing
delinquent real estate taxes with the Prothonotary of Montgomery County in
accordance with the provisions of the Municipal Claims and Tax Liens Act, 53
P.S. § 7101 et seq.
§ 224-44.   Interest.
In accordance with MCTLA and RETSL, interest at the rate of 9% per annum shall
be assessed from and after but not before the first day of the month following
the return by the Tax Collector of unpaid tax duplicates to the Montgomery
County Tax Claims Bureau.
§ 224-45.   Charges, expenses and fees.
Pursuant to § 7106 of the MCA, it is hereby established that the reasonable
charges, expenses and fees incurred in the collection of any delinquent account
under the MCTLA are hereby fixed at 5% of the total amount of the delinquent
taxes (including interest and penalties), and that additional reasonable
attorney's fees incurred in the collection of any delinquent taxes shall be
fixed at 1% of the total amount of the delinquent taxes (including interest and
penalties), and that said charges for attorney's fees and for all charges,
expenses and fees set forth herein, shall be paid to the County of Montgomery
through the Montgomery County Tax Claim Bureau in lieu of payment of
commissions pursuant to § 207 of RETSL.
§ 224-46.   Authorization and empowerment.
The proper officials of the Township are hereby authorized and empowered to
take such additional action as they may deem necessary or appropriate to
implement this article.
§ 224-47.   Construed.
Nothing in this article shall be construed to affect any suit or process in any
court, any rights acquired or liability incurred, any permit issued, or any
causes of action existing prior to the adoption of this article.
§ 224-48.   Right to amend.
The Township reserves the right to amend this article or any portion thereof
from time to time as it shall deem advisable in the best interest of the
promotion of the purposes and intent of this article, and the effective
administration thereof. All ordinances inconsistent with the above provisions
are repealed to the extent of their inconsistency.
§ 224-49.   Effective date.
This article shall take effect and be in force from and after January 1, 2013.
Chapter 230
VEHICLES, ABANDONED
§
230-1. Definitions.
§
230-2. Nuisances.
§
230-3. Owner to remove.
§
230-4.   Refusal to remove.
§
230-5. Enforcement.
§
230-6.   Violations and penalties.
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Board of Commissioners of the Township of Upper Dublin
5-13-1986 as Title 7, Ch. 8, of the 1986 Code. Amendments noted where
applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
 
Junkyards — See  Property maintenance — See
Ch. 135.           Ch. 180.
 
§ 230-1.   Definitions.
   A.   When not inconsistent with the context, words used in the singular
include the plural, and words in the plural include the singular, and words
used in the present tense include the future. The word "shall" is always
mandatory.
   B.   The following words, terms and phrases as used in this chapter shall
have the meanings given herein:
      ABANDONMENT — Includes, among other things, the abandoning,
relinquishing, leaving or giving up control of a vehicle.
      LESSEE — Includes the operator or custodian of the vehicle.
      NOTICE — A notice, in writing, delivered by actual delivery, certified
mail, registered mail or first class mail to the owner, if known, and, if not
known, by posting or attaching said notice to the vehicle. [Amended 2-8-2000 by
Ord. No. 1021]
      OWNER — Includes the registered, titled or true owner of the vehicle.
      PERSON — Includes an individual, male or female, the partners of a
partnership and the officers of a corporation.
      POLICE — The Police of the Township of Upper Dublin.
      STREET or HIGHWAY – A street or highway open for private use within the
Township of Upper Dublin.
      TOWNSHIP — The Township of Upper Dublin, Montgomery County, Pennsylvania.
      VEHICLE — Includes all vehicles covered by the Vehicle Code of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, hereinbefore or hereinafter enacted. 1
1 Editor's Note: See 75 P.S. § 101 et seq.
§ 230-2.   Nuisances.
   A.   The abandonment of a vehicle, wrecked vehicle or tractor within the
township, either upon private or public property, shall be deemed a public
nuisance.
   B.   The abandonment of a vehicle, wrecked vehicle or tractor upon any
highway within the township shall be deemed a public nuisance.
§ 230-3.   Owner to remove.
Following the effective date of this chapter, it shall be the duty of any
owner, or the owner, lessee or occupant of the real property upon which there
is an abandoned or wrecked vehicle or tractor, to remove or cause to be removed
said abandoned or wrecked vehicle or tractor within a reasonable time, but not
exceeding 15 days, of the receipt of notice to do so.
§ 230-4.   Refusal to remove.
The refusal or neglect of any owner of an abandoned or wrecked vehicle or
tractor, or the owner, lessee or occupier of any real property within the
township upon which there is an abandoned or wrecked vehicle or tractor, to
remove or cause to be removed said abandoned or wrecked vehicle or tractor as
provided in §
230-3 above shall be a violation of the provisions of this chapter, and each
day of continued abandonment shall be deemed a separate offense and punishable
as hereinafter provided.
§ 230-5.   Enforcement.
[Amended 2-8-2000 by Ord. No. 1021]
The enforcement of the provisions of this chapter shall be under the direction
and supervision of the police. Upon the finding of any abandoned or wrecked
vehicle or tractor believed to be abandoned, the police shall give notice to
the owner or lessee of the vehicle and the owner, lessee or occupant of the
real property upon which the abandoned or wrecked vehicle or tractor is found.
Notice to the owner, lessee or occupier of the real property shall be in
writing and delivered to the owner, lessee or occupier, if known, and by
posting a true and compared copy on said abandoned vehicle. Where the owner,
lessee or occupier of the real property is not known or cannot be found in the
township, said notice shall be sent by registered, certified or first class
mail to the owner as indicated on the tax duplicate of the township.
§ 230-6.   Violations and penalties.
[Amended 8-9-1988 by Ord. No. 753; 1-10-1995 by Ord. No. 879]
Any owner, lessee or operator who shall fail to remove any abandoned vehicle as
in this chapter is provided shall be in violation of the provisions of this
chapter and shall, upon summary conviction before a Justice of the Peace, be
sentenced to pay a fine of not less than $100 nor more than $1,000 for each
offense, and costs. A new and separate offense shall be deemed to have been
committed for each day a violation exists. Such fines shall be collected and
distributed as like fines are now collected by law.
Chapter 233
VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC
 
ARTICLE I
General Provisions; Administration and Enforcement
§
233-1.   Definitions and interpretation.
§
233-2.   Adoption of permanent traffic and parking regulations; schedules.
§
233-3.    Temporary and emergency regulations.
§
233-4.   Experimental regulations.
§
233-5.   Streets closed or restricted for construction, maintenance or special
events.
§
233-6.   Authority for administration and enforcement.
ARTICLE II
Traffic Regulations
§
233-7.   Speed limits.
§
233-8.   Traffic control signals.
§
233-9.   Prohibited right turns on red signal.
§
233-10.   Prohibited turns at intersections.
§
233-11.   U-turns.
§
233-12.   One-way streets.
§
233-13.   No-passing zones.
§
233-14.   Through streets.
§
233-15.   Stop intersections.
§
233-16.   Yield intersections.
§
233-17.   Closing of certain streets to certain vehicles.
§
233-18.   Vehicle weight limits.
§
233-18.1.   Crosswalks.
§
233-18.2.   Closing of Camp Hill Road to certain vehicle use.
§
233-18.3.   Do not enter streets.
ARTICLE III
Parking Regulations
§
233-19.    Parking on public property.
§
233-19.1.   Stopping, standing and parking prohibited.
§
233-20.   Parking without lights authorized.
§
233-21.   Parking prohibited at all times.
§
233-22.   Parking prohibited certain hours.
§
233-23.   Time limit parking.
§
233-23.1.   Parking permit program.
§
233-24.   Penalties for parking violations.
ARTICLE IV
Towing of Certain Vehicles
§
233-25.   Definitions.
§
233-26.   Repossession activity.
§
233-27.   Authorized towing services.
§
233-27.1.   Procedure for use of duty tow providers.
§
233-27.2.   Prohibited acts.
§
233-28.   Towing fees for vehicles weighing 10,000 pounds or less.
§
233-28.1.   Towing fees for vehicles weighing more than 10,000 pounds but less
than 26,001 pounds.
§
233-28.2.   Towing costs for vehicles weighing 26,001 pounds or more.
§
233-29.   Towing/storage fee schedule.
§
233-30.   Liability of owner or operators for fine or penalty.
§
233-31.   Violations and penalties.
ARTICLE V
Handicapped Parking
§
233-32.   Definitions.
§
233-33.   Parking restricted.
§
233-34.   Enforcement.
§
233-35.   Violations and penalties.
ARTICLE VI
Snow and Ice Emergencies
§
233-36.   Declaration of snow and ice emergency.
§
233-37.   Restrictions on snow emergency routes.
§
233-38.   Snow emergency routes.
§
233-39.   Parking prohibited on all streets.
§
233-40.   Violations and penalties.
ARTICLE VII
Violations and Penalties
§
233-41.   Generally.
ARTICLE VIII
Schedules
§
233-42.   Schedule I: Speed Limits.
§
233-43.   Schedule II: Traffic Control Signals.
§
233-44.   Schedule III: Prohibited Right Turns on Red Signal.
§
233-45.   Schedule IV: Prohibited Turns at Intersections.
§
233-46.   Schedule V: U-Turns.
§
233-47.   Schedule VI: One-Way Streets.
§
233-48.   Schedule VII: No-Passing Zones.
§
233-49.   Schedule VIII: Through Streets.
§
233-50.   Schedule IX: Stop Intersections.
§
233-51.   Schedule X: Yield Intersections.
§
233-52.   Schedule XI: Closing of Certain Streets to Certain Vehicles.
§
233-53.   Schedule XII: Vehicle Weight Limits.
§
233-54.   Schedule XIII: Parking Prohibited at All Times.
§
233-55.   Schedule XIV: Parking Prohibited Certain Hours.
§
233-56.   Schedule XV: Time Limit Parking.
§
233-57.   Schedule XVI: Snow Emergency Routes.
§
233-58.   Schedule XVII: Traffic and Parking Regulations on Public Property.
§
233-59.   Schedule XVIII: Stopping, Standing and Parking Prohibited.
§
233-60.   Schedule XIX: Crosswalks.
§
233-61.   Schedule XX: Do Not Enter Streets.
ARTICLE IX
Crossing Guards
§
233-62.   Position established.
§
233-63.   Duties.
§
233-64.   Qualifications for appointment.
§
233-65.   Compensation.
§
233-66.   Guards not subject to civil service.
§
233-67.   Appointment and removal.
§
233-68.   Training; designation of locations and stations.
§
233-69.   Uniforms.
 
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Board of Commissioners of the Township of Upper Dublin
3-12-1996 as Ord. No. 908. Amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
 
Streets and sidewalks — See  Abandoned vehicles — See
Ch. 207.                       Ch. 230.
 
ARTICLE I
General Provisions; Administration and Enforcement
§ 233-1.   Definitions and interpretation.
   A.   Words and phrases, when used in this chapter, except for sections or
Articles to which different or additional definitions apply, shall have the
meanings ascribed to them in the Vehicle Code, 75 Pa.C.S.A. § 101 et seq. (the
Act of June 17, 1976, P.L. 162, No. 81), as amended, except that in this
chapter the word "street" may be used interchangeably with the word "highway"
and shall have the same meaning as the word "highway" as defined in the Vehicle
Code.
   B.   The term "legal holidays," as used in this chapter, shall mean and
include New Year's Day, Memorial Day, Independence Day, Labor Day, Thanksgiving
Day and Christmas Day.
   C.   In this chapter, the singular shall include the plural, the plural
shall include the singular and the masculine shall include the feminine.
§ 233-2.   Adoption of permanent traffic and parking regulations; schedules.
   A.   Manner of adoption. All traffic and parking regulations of a permanent
nature shall be adopted as ordinances or as parts of ordinances or as
amendments to ordinances of the Township of Upper Dublin by the Board of
Commissioners in accordance with the provisions of the Vehicle Code and the
First Class Township Code.
   B.   Schedules. For the purpose of maintaining an accurate record of all
regulations adopted under the provisions of this chapter, there is hereby
established a system of schedules, appearing as Article VDT of this chapter, in
which shall be entered all regulations after adoption. Such schedules shall be
deemed a part of the section to which they refer. All regulations shall be
adopted with reference to the appropriate schedule as indicated in the various
sections of this chapter.
§ 233-3.   Temporary and emergency regulations.
   A.   The Police Department or its designated authorities shall have the
following powers to regulate traffic and parking temporarily and in time of
emergency:
      (1)   In the case of fire, flood, storm or other emergency, to establish
temporary traffic and/or parking regulations.
      (2)   In the case of emergency public works or public events of limited
scope or duration, to restrict or prohibit traffic and/or parking in limited
areas for periods of not more than 72 hours.
   B.   These temporary and emergency regulations shall he enforced by the
Police Department in the same manner as permanent regulations. Any person who
drives or parks a vehicle in violation of any such regulation or who shall
move, remove, destroy, injure or deface any sign or marking erected, posted or
made to give notice of any such regulation shall, upon conviction thereof, be
liable to the penalty set forth in the law or elsewhere in this chapter for a
violation of such nature.
§ 233-4.   Experimental regulations.
   A.   The Board of Commissioners may, from time to time, designate places
upon and along the streets in the Township where, for a period of not more than
90 days, specific traffic and/or parking regulations, prohibitions and
restrictions shall be in force and effect and shall designate those locations
by proper signs and markings. Such regulations, prohibitions and restrictions
shall be effective just as if they had been specified in this chapter. No
person shall drive or park a vehicle in violation of any such regulation,
prohibition or restriction, and no person shall move, remove, destroy or deface
any sign or marking erected, posted or made by authority of this section. Any
person who violates any provision of this section shall, upon conviction, be
liable to the penalty set out in the law or elsewhere in this chapter for a
violation of such nature.
   B.   The purpose of this section is to allow for test and experimental
determination of the feasibility and desirability of permanent changes in the
ordinances of the Township relative to traffic and parking.
§ 233-5.   Streets closed or restricted for construction, maintenance or
special events.
   A.   The Board of Commissioners shall have authority to close any street or
specific part of a street to vehicular traffic, or to restrict access to any
street or specific part of a street, and to place barriers or appropriate
signage or to station police officers at each end of the closed portion while
construction or maintenance work is under way or a special event is being
conducted on the closed portion. It shall be unlawful for any person to drive a
vehicle upon any such closed portion.
   B.   The Board of Commissioners shall have authority to establish a
restricted traffic area upon any street where construction or maintenance work
is under way and to station flagmen at each end of the restricted portion. It
shall be unlawful for any person to drive a vehicle upon any such restricted
traffic area at any time when the flagman is displaying a sign directing that
vehicle to stop or is signaling that vehicle, by a flag or other device, not to
proceed.
§ 233-6.   Authority for administration and enforcement.
   A.   Administration. This chapter shall be administered jointly by the Board
of Commissioners and the Police Department.
   B.   Enforcement. This chapter shall be enforced by the Police Department of
the Township of Upper Dublin which is hereby given authority to direct traffic
on the highways and intersections of the Township in accordance with the
provisions of this chapter and the laws of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
   C.   Severability. The provisions of this chapter shall be severable, and if
any of its provisions shall be held to be unconstitutional, illegal or
otherwise invalid, such decision shall not affect the validity of any of the
remaining provisions of this chapter. It is hereby declared as a legislative
intent that this chapter would have been adopted had such unconstitutional,
illegal or otherwise invalid provision not been included herein.
ARTICLE II
Traffic Regulations
§ 233-7.   Speed limits.
   A.   Except those highways under the jurisdiction of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania Department of Transportation or the Montgomery County Department
of Road and Bridges, all roads, streets and highways within the Township of
Upper Dublin shall have speed limits of 25 miles per hour unless otherwise
provided for by this chapter.
   B.   The speed limit for both directions of traffic along the streets or
parts thereof described in Schedule I (§
233-42), attached to and made a part of this chapter, is hereby established at
the rate of speed indicated in said schedule. It shall be unlawful for any
person to drive a vehicle at a higher speed than the maximum prescribed for
that street or part of a street.
§ 233-8.   Traffic control signals.
Traffic control signals shall be installed and operated at the intersection of
those streets described in Schedule II (§
233-43), attached to and made a part of this chapter.
§ 233-9.   Prohibited right turns on red signal.
No person shall make a right turn (or a left turn from a one-way street into
another one-way street) when facing a steady red signal at any of the locations
described in Schedule III (§
233-44), attached to and made a part of this chapter.
§ 233-10.   Prohibited turns at intersections.
It shall be unlawful for the driver of any vehicle to make a turn of the kind
designated (left, right, all) at any of the intersections described in Schedule
IV (§
233-45), attached to and made a part of this chapter.
§ 233-11.   U-turns.
It shall be unlawful for the driver of any vehicle to make a U-turn on any of
the streets or parts of streets described in Schedule V (§
233-46), attached to and made a part of this chapter.
§ 233-12.   One-way streets.
The streets or parts of streets described in Schedule VI (§
233-47), attached to and made a part of this chapter, are hereby designated as
one-way streets in the direction indicated, and it shall be unlawful for any
person to drive a vehicle on any one-way street other than in the direction
established for traffic on that street.
§ 233-13.   No-passing zones.
No-passing zones are hereby established along those streets or parts of streets
described in Schedule VII (§
233-48), attached to and made a part of this chapter, and it shall be unlawful
for the driver of any vehicle to overtake or pass another vehicle or to drive
on the left side of the roadway in any no-passing zone described in said
schedule.
§ 233-14.   Through streets.
The streets or parts of streets described in Schedule VIII (§
233-49), attached to and made a part of this chapter, are hereby established as
through streets; and the driver of any vehicle, upon approaching any such
street at any intersection thereof (except for such intersections where there
are now or shall hereafter be located official traffic signals), shall come to
a full stop or yield the right-of-way, as the case may be, before entering any
such through street.
§ 233-15.   Stop intersections.
The intersections described in Schedule IX (§
233-50), attached to and made a part of this chapter (in addition to
intersections with the through streets established by this chapter), are hereby
established as stop intersections, and official stop signs shall be erected in
such a position upon the first-named street as to face traffic approaching the
second-named street in the direction or directions indicated in said schedule.
Every driver of a vehicle approaching any such intersection upon the first-
named street, in the direction or directions indicated in each case, shall come
to a full stop before entering any such intersection.
§ 233-16.   Yield intersections.
The intersections described in Schedule X (§
233-51), attached to and made a part of this chapter (in addition to
intersections with the through streets established by this chapter), are hereby
established as yield intersections, and official yield signs shall be erected
in such a position upon the first-named street as to face traffic approaching
the second-named street in the direction or directions indicated. Every driver
of a vehicle approaching any such intersection upon the first-named street, in
the direction or directions indicated in each case, shall slow down or stop the
vehicle and then yield the right-of-way to any vehicle in the intersection or
approaching on the second-named street so closely as to constitute a hazard
during the time that the driver is moving across or within such intersection.
§ 233-17.   Closing of certain streets to certain vehicles.
With the exception of vehicles making local deliveries, it shall be unlawful
for the owner or operator of any truck, commercial vehicle, tractor, trailer or
tractor-trailer combination with a gross vehicle weight in excess of five tons
to operate such vehicle on the streets or parts of streets described in
Schedule XI (§
233-52), attached to and made a part of this chapter.
§ 233-18.   Vehicle weight limits.
It shall be unlawful for any person to drive any commercial vehicle or other
tractor, trailer or tractor-trailer combination having a gross vehicle weight
in excess of that respectively prescribed upon any of the streets or bridges or
portions thereof, described in Schedule XII (§
233-53), attached to and made a part of this chapter, except for the purpose of
making local deliveries on said streets.
§ 233-18.1.   Crosswalks.
[Added 4-8-1997 by Ord. No. 936]
Crosswalks for pedestrians are hereby established as part of the streets or
highways, or portions thereof, described in Schedule XIX (§
233-60). Pedestrians shall use the crosswalks where provided and shall not use
any other part of the highway.
§ 233-18.2.   Closing of Camp Hill Road to certain vehicle use.
[Added 5-11-1999 by Ord. No. 996]
It shall be unlawful for any operator of any vehicle to access Camp Hill Road
to or from a property located in the Fort Washington Office Center at any point
between the intersection of Camp Hill Road with Virginia Drive and the
intersection of Camp Hill Road with Office Center Drive except in emergency
situations.
§ 233-18.3.   Do not enter streets.
[Added 10-14-2008 by Ord. No. 1207, § 1]
It shall be unlawful for the owner or operator of any vehicle to enter any
street during the hours and at the intersection(s) described in Schedule XX (§
233-61), attached to and made a part of this chapter.
ARTICLE III
Parking Regulations
§ 233-19.   Parking on public property.
[Added 5-14-1996 by Ord. No. 909]
   A.   Regulations controlling and restricting the movement and parking of
vehicles are hereby established upon the parking lots, parks, playgrounds and
other municipally owned or leased properties described in Schedule XVII. Such
regulations shall be as listed and designated in said schedule and may include
but are not limited to:
      (1)   Designation of areas where parking is prohibited at all times,
prohibited at certain times or limited to certain time periods.
§ 233-19.1.   Stopping, standing and parking prohibited.
[Added 8-13-1996 by Ord. No. 913]
No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle at any time, except in accordance
with official traffic control devices, upon any of the highway or parts thereof
described in Schedule XVIII (§
233-59), provided that vehicles licensed for public transportation shall be
permitted to stop at authorized stations.
§ 233-20.   Parking without lights authorized.
The boundary limits of the Township of Upper Dublin are hereby established as a
zone in which motor vehicles may remain standing without lights, and all
highways within such boundary limits are hereby designated as highways where
motor vehicles may remain standing without lights.
§ 233-21.   Parking prohibited at all times.
No person shall park a vehicle at any time upon any of the streets or parts
thereof described in Schedule XIII (§
233-54), attached to and made a part of this chapter.
§ 233-22.   Parking prohibited certain hours.
No person shall park a vehicle upon any of the streets or parts of streets
described in Schedule XIV (§
233-55), attached to and made a part of this chapter, during the hours
specified in said schedule, on any day except Saturdays, Sundays and holidays.
§ 233-23.   Time limit parking.
No person shall park a vehicle or allow the same to remain parked upon any of
the streets or parts of streets described in Schedule XV (§
233-56), attached to and made a part of this chapter, between the hours
specified, for longer than the time indicated in said schedule.
§ 233-23.1.   Parking permit program.
[Added 8-13-1996 by Ord. No. 912]
   A.   Purpose. The Commissioners of the Township of Upper Dublin deem it to
be in the interest of the citizens of the Township to provide for the
establishment of a parking permit program to ensure primary access to available
parking spaces by adjacent property owners as well as to alleviate potentially
hazardous traffic conditions and to relieve streets and roads overburdened by
traffic.
   B.   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following terms shall
have the following meanings designated for each:
      COMMUTER VEHICLE — A motor vehicle parked in a parking permit area by a
person who is not the owner of adjacent property.
      OWNER — A person who owns or leases real property within a permit parking
area and who maintains either a voting address, bona fide occupancy at or
ownership of that address, including any individual 18 years of age or older
who resides at such property.
      PARKING PERMIT — A parking permit authorized by this section.
      PERMIT PARKING AREA—A contiguous area containing public highways
primarily abutting residential property or residential and nonbusiness property
such as schools, churches, parks and nursing homes.
   C.   Designation of permit parking areas.
      (1)   The Board of Commissioners may designate permit parking areas when
it determines that owners in a proposed parking area are adversely affected by
entries into the area and curbside parking by nonowners and/or by Township
parking regulations. In making this determination, the Board shall consider the
following:
         (a)   The difficulty experienced by owners in the proposed area to
obtain curbside parking for themselves and their invitees reasonably accessible
to their residences or properties.
         (b)   The desire of the owners in the proposed permit area for the
institution of a permit parking system.
         (c)   The availability of off-street parking facilities for the use of
commuter vehicles.
      (2)   Permit parking areas enumerated. The following shall be permit
parking areas during the times indicated:
         (a)   Until June 30, 2002, parking without a permit shall be unlawful
between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 3:00 p.m., Mondays through Fridays, except
on legal holidays, on Loch Alsh Avenue, north side, from Fort Washington Avenue
to the 309 Expressway Overpass. [Amended 8-12-1997 by Ord. No. 945; 6-9-1998 by
Ord. No. 970; 5-11-1999 by Ord. No. 997; 7-11-2000 by Ord. No. 1038; 10-9- 2001
by Ord. No. 1069]
   D.   Regulations. It shall be unlawful and a violation of this section for a
vehicle to park in a designated parking area during the times such parking is
prohibited, unless the vehicle displays a parking permit authorized by this
section. A parking permit shall only authorize the stopping or standing or
parking of a vehicle in a designated permit parking area when posted with
official signs.
   E.   Issuance of permits. The Township Police Department shall issue parking
permits to the owners of property adjacent to public streets in a designated
parking area for each curbside parking space available and may adopt
regulations for the issuance and use of such permits. Any person to whom a
permit has been issued who violates any provision of this section or the
regulations promulgated hereunder shall be subject to revocation of such
permit.
§ 233-24.   Penalties for parking violations.
[Amended 5-8-2010 by Ord. No. 10-1232, § 1]
Any person who violates any provision of this article shall, upon conviction,
be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $50 and costs; provided, however,
that it shall be the duty of the police officers and of parking enforcement
personnel of the Township to report to the Chief of Police all violations of
any provision of this article, indicating, in each case, the section violated,
the license number of the vehicle involved in the violation, the location where
the violation took place and any other facts that might be necessary in order
to secure a clear understanding of the circumstances attending the violation.
The police officer or other person making the report shall also attach to or
place upon every such vehicle a notice stating that the vehicle was parked in
violation of this article. The notice shall contain instructions to the owner
or driver of the vehicle that if he will report to the Township Finance
Department and pay the sum of $20 within 10 days of the notice, that act will
save the violator from prosecution and from payment of the fine and costs
prescribed in the first sentence of this section.
ARTICLE IV
Towing of Certain Vehicles
§ 233-25.   Definitions. [Amended 6-10-2025 by Ord. No. 25-1405]
Unless otherwise expressly stated, the following words and phrases shall be
construed throughout this Article to have the meanings indicated below:
DEPARTMENT — The Upper Dublin Township Police Department.
DUTY TOW PROVIDER — A towing service authorized under this Article who will be
called by the Upper Dublin Township Police Department to crashes, disabled
vehicles, abandoned vehicles or other vehicles in need of towing on behalf of
Upper Dublin Township and the Upper Dublin Township Police Department. This
term shall include persons employed by the duty tow provider (i.e., tow vehicle
driver/operator).
PERSON — Any individual, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company
or organization of any kind.
STANDARD TOWING OF A VEHICLE — The towing of a vehicle at the direction of the
Upper Dublin Township Police Department from crashes, disabled vehicles,
abandoned vehicles or other vehicles in need of towing within the boundaries of
Upper Dublin Township.
§ 233-26.   Repossession activity. [Amended 6-10-2025 by Ord. No. 25-1405]
Notwithstanding the provisions of this Article, towing companies will be
generally exempt from compliance with this chapter while they are engaged in
repossession of vehicles on behalf of holders of liens on vehicles, provided
that:
   A.   Prior to beginning the repossession of a vehicle, the towing company
notifies the Upper Dublin Township Police Department of its intention to
repossess the vehicle and give the Upper Dublin Township Police Department the
name of the vehicle owner and the address at which the vehicle repossession is
going to take place. Furthermore, the towing company shall present to the
Police Department proof of its right to repossess the vehicle.
   B.   When not engaged in repossession activity, towing companies must comply
with this Article. The mere fact that a towing company performs repossession
services from time to time in the Township does not provide the towing company
with a blanket exemption from this Article.
§ 233-27.   Authorized towing services. [Amended 6-10-2025 by Ord. No. 25-1405]
Duty tow providers shall be the only towing services in Upper Dublin Township
authorized to tow vehicles or provide service at the request of the Upper
Dublin Township Police Department. A list of duty tow providers shall be
compiled as follows:
   A.   At any given time, or when the need arises, the Chief of Police, in
consultation with the Township Manager, shall appoint no more than four towing
companies to serve in the capacity of a duty tow provider.
   B.   Duty tow providers shall be selected from applicants based upon a
criterion consisting of, but not limited to, applicant's quality of service,
the location and security features of applicant's facility, their compliance
with codes, their standing with the Township, their number of vehicles
available and their compliance with the provisions of this Code.
   C.   Duty tow providers that were providing service to the Township at the
time this Article was adopted shall not be required to submit an application to
the Township to continue to serve as a duty tow provider, but they are subject
to the requirements of this Article.
   D.   Duty tow providers shall tow Upper Dublin Township Police Department
vehicles free of charge if they become disabled or inoperable within the
jurisdictional boundaries of Upper Dublin Township.
   E.   Minimum standards: Duty tow providers shall be required to ensure that:
      (1)   No tow truck shall be used unless it is properly registered and
inspected as required by the Motor Vehicle Law of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania.
      (2)   Each tow truck shall meet all of the requirements of the laws of
the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania and, if applicable, the United States Code of
Federal Regulations.
      (3)   Each tow vehicle driver/operator shall be appropriately licensed in
compliance with the laws of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania and, if
applicable, the United States Code of Federal Regulations.
      (4)   Duty tow providers shall have equipment that enables the transport
of vehicles that are four-wheel-drive or all-wheel-drive.
      (5)   Fees charged for towing and related services shall not exceed the
maximum rates established in this Article.
      (6)   An invoice for each tow service shall be completed by the duty tow
provider and a copy of the invoice shall be provided to the Upper Dublin
Township Police Department and the invoice shall include the following
information:
         (a)   Incident number.
         (b)   Date and location.
         (c)   Whether a police release is required.
         (d)   The make, model, vehicle identification number and license plate
number.
         (e)   Indication of status (i.e., wrecked, stolen, abandoned, disabled
or impounded).
      (7)   Duty tow providers must completely clean and sweep all debris from
a crash scene prior to leaving same.
   F.   Application and Licensure:
      (1)   Notwithstanding the provision under § 233.27.C., a license shall
not be issued unless an affidavit of application therefor has been filed with
the Chief of Police. The application shall include the following information
for each license:
         (a)   The name and business address of the applicant and, if a natural
person, his or her age and residential address.
         (b)   The registration number of each tow truck to be operated.
         (c)   The location, description and hourly availability of the tow
trucks operated by the applicant.
         (d)   Location of space for properly storing, accommodating and
protecting all towed vehicles.
         (e)   Such other information as the Chief of Police and Township
Manager shall find reasonably necessary to effectuate the purpose of this
chapter and to arrive at a fair determination of whether the terms of this
Chapter have been complied with.
      (2)   No license shall be considered for issuance by the Township under
this Article unless the entire application has been received.
      (3)   Application for each such license shall be mailed on a form
provided by the Upper Dublin Township Police Department.
      (4)   A license issued pursuant to this Article shall not expire unless
rescinded by the Chief of Police, in consultation with the Township Manager,
for cause.
      (5)   A license shall not be transferable and any change in ownership of
a licensee shall serve as a termination of such license.
      (6)   The licensing of duty tow providers pursuant to this Article shall
create no new or additional liability for the Township. The duties performed by
the Township pursuant to this chapter are general duties owed to the public. No
person is authorized to create a special duty to anyone either by
representation, act or omission. Duty tow providers pursuant to this Article
shall indemnify the Township to the fullest extent allowable by law.
§ 233-27.1.   Procedure for use of duty tow providers. [Amended 6-10-2025 by
Ord. No. 25-1405]
   A.   The Upper Dublin Township Police Department Communications Center shall
be responsible for maintaining a rotating on-call list of duty tow providers.
The rotation shall be established as follows: each duty tow provider shall be
assigned a one-week on-call period beginning at 0600 hours on a Monday and
ending at 0600 hours on the following Monday.
   B.   If a duty tow provider will be unavailable during their assigned on-
call period due to vacation or other circumstances, they shall advise the Upper
Dublin Township Police Department Communications Center and that on-call period
will be skipped and the next duty tow provider in the rotation will be
assigned.
   C.   Duty tow providers shall respond to calls for service in a reasonable
amount of time after being contacted by the Upper Dublin Township Police
Department Communications Center.
   D.   If the duty tow provider cannot respond to a service call within a
reasonable amount of time, the duty tow provider shall so advise the Upper
Dublin Township Police Department Communications Center. If the duty tow
provider is delayed while in transit to the requested location, the towing
vehicle operator shall advise the Upper Dublin Township Police Department
Communications Center of the delay and their present location, whereupon a
determination shall be made by the patrol shift supervisor as to whether an
alternate duty tow provider shall be called.
§ 233-27.2   Prohibited acts. [Amended 6-10-2025 by Ord. No. 25-1405]
   A.   The provisions of this section shall apply to both licensed duty tow
providers and private tow providers.
   B.   Removal from scene of a crash: It shall be a violation of this Article
for any person or duty tow provider to service or tow away any motor vehicle
which has been involved in a crash without the prior consent of the police
officer in charge of the crash or the Upper Dublin Township Police Department
shift supervisor.
   C.   Failure to remove debris: When called to the scene of a crash by the
Upper Dublin Township Police Department, the duty tow provider shall be
responsible for removing debris from the roadway, such as glass, metal
fragments, etc., leaving the roadway free from such debris. Failure to remove
debris shall be a violation of this Article.
   D.   Solicitation:
      (1)   It shall be a violation of this Article for any person or duty tow
provider to drive along any public street or highway within the Township for
the sole purpose of soliciting towing and/or repair work.
      (2)   It shall be a violation of this Article for any person or duty tow
provider to solicit towing or repair work at the scene of any crash on private
property or on a public highway within the Township.
   E.   Destination of towed vehicles:
      (1)   In cases where a vehicle is not being impounded or otherwise
secured for further investigation, the destination of the towed vehicle will be
the storage facility of the duty tow provider that is towing the vehicle, with
the following exceptions:
         (a)   The duty tow provider may make arrangements with the owner or
the vehicle to tow the vehicle to a destination other than the storage facility
of the duty to provider. If that destination is outside the borders of Upper
Dublin Township, the duty tow provider shall inform the vehicle's owner of
additional mileage fees. Failure to inform the vehicle's owner of the
additional mileage fee shall be a violation of this Article.
         (b)   In the event a duty tow provider's storage facility is
unavailable, the duty tow provider shall make arrangements for storage of the
towed vehicle at the facility of another authorized duty tow provider.
      (2)   In all other cases the destination of the towed vehicle shall be
determined by the Police Officer in charge of the related investigation or call
for service or by the Upper Dublin Township Police Department shift supervisor.
   F.   Fees: No duty tow provider operating pursuant to this Article shall
charge a vehicle owner and/or a vehicle insurance company fees for any towing
or storage services in excess of the fees established in this Chapter. Charging
any fee not authorized by this chapter shall be a violation of this Code.
   G.   Subcontracting: In the event a duty tow provider is unable to comply
with the request for towing or service, the duty tow provider shall contact
another authorized duty tow provider to complete the tow or service.
Subcontracting is otherwise prohibited.
§ 233-28.   Towing fees for vehicles weighing 10,000 pounds or less. [Amended
6-10-2025 by Ord. No. 25-1405]
   A.   The fee for the standard towing of a vehicle weighing 10,000 pounds or
less, shall not be in excess of $185 for each crane tow, wheel lift, flatbed
tow, or any other type of tow.
   B.   The fee for storage of a vehicle weighing 10,000 pounds or less, shall
not be in excess of $80 per day after the first 24 hours since the vehicle was
placed in the storage of the duty tow provider. No storage fee shall be
assessed for the first 24 hours after the vehicle was placed in the storage of
the duty tow provider.
   C.   Additional fees related to the towing of a vehicle weighing 10,000
pounds or less shall not exceed the following amount for each service rendered
and shall be assessed in addition to the towing fee listed under § 233-28.A.:
      (1)   Per Hour Fee —$100 per hour or part thereof may be charged after
the first one-half hour has elapsed following tow truck arrival at the scene.
      (2)   Clean-Up Fee — $70.
      (3)   Oil Dry — $25 per bag used or part thereof.
      (4)   Winching Fee — $110 flat fee for vehicles that require specialized
winching (i.e., overturned vehicles, vehicles off of the roadway, vehicles
without all wheels, vehicles heavily entangled, etc.). A winching fee may not
be charged for the normal winching of a vehicle on to a flatbed from a paved
surface.
      (5)   Mileage Fee — $7.50 per mile for towing a vehicle outside of Upper
Dublin Township.
   D.   Under no circumstances, and in no cases, shall an administrative fee,
fuel surcharge fee or other like fee be charged.
§ 233-28.1.   Towing fees for vehicles weighing more than 10,000 pounds but
less than 26,001 pounds. [Amended 6-10-2025 by Ord. No. 25-1405]
   A.   The fee for the standard towing of a vehicle weighing more than 10,000
pounds but less than 26,001 pounds, shall not be in excess of $275 for each
crane tow, wheel lift, flatbed tow, or any other type of tow.
   B.   The fee for storage of a vehicle weighing more than 10,000 pounds but
less than 26,001 pounds, shall not be in excess of $120 per day after the first
24 hours since the vehicle was placed in the storage of the duty tow provider.
No storage fee shall be assessed for the first 24 hours after the vehicle was
placed in the storage of the duty tow provider.
   C.   Additional fees related to the towing of a vehicle weighing more than
10,000 pounds but less than 26,001 pounds shall not exceed the following amount
for each service rendered and shall be assessed in addition to the towing fee
listed under § 233-28.1.A:
      (1)   Per Hour Fee — $100 per hour or part thereof may be charged after
the first one-half hour has elapsed following tow truck arrival at the scene.
      (2)   Clean-Up Fee — $70.
      (3)   Oil Dry — $25 per bag used or part thereof.
      (4)   Winching Fee — $110 flat fee for vehicles that require specialized
winching (i.e., overturned vehicles, vehicles off of the roadway, vehicles
without all wheels, vehicles heavily entangled, etc.). A winching fee may not
be charged for the normal winching of a vehicle on to a flatbed from a paved
surface.
      (5)   Mileage Fee — $7.50 per mile for towing a vehicle outside of Upper
Dublin Township.
   D.   Under no circumstances, and in no cases, shall an administrative fee,
fuel surcharge fee or other like fee be charged.
§ 233-28.2.   Towing costs for vehicles weighing 26,001 pounds or more.
[Amended 6-10-2025 by Ord. No. 25-1405]
   A.   The hourly rate fee for the standard towing a vehicle weighing 26,001
pounds or more, shall not be in excess of $475 for each crane tow, wheel lift,
flatbed tow, or any other type of tow.
   B.   The fee for storage of a vehicle weighing 26,001 pounds or more, shall
not be in excess of $150 per day after the first 24 hours since the vehicle was
placed in the storage of the duty tow provider. No storage fee shall be
assessed for the first 24 hours after the vehicle was placed in the storage of
the duty tow provider.
   C.   Additional fees related to the towing of a vehicle weighing 26,001
pounds or more shall not exceed the following amount for each service rendered
and shall be assessed in addition to the towing fee listed under § 233-28.2.A:
      (1)   Per Hour Fee — $100 per hour or part thereof may be charged after
the first one-half hour has elapsed following tow truck arrival at the scene.
      (2)   Clean-Up Fee — $70.
      (3)   Oil Dry — $25 per bag used or part thereof.
      (4)   Winching Fee — $110 flat fee for vehicles that require specialized
winching (i.e., overturned vehicles, vehicles off of the roadway, vehicles
without all wheels, vehicles heavily entangled, etc.). A winching fee may not
be charged for the normal winching of a vehicle on to a flatbed from a paved
surface.
      (5)   Mileage Fee — $7.50 per mile for towing a vehicle outside of Upper
Dublin Township.
   D.   Under no circumstances, and in no cases, shall an administrative fee,
fuel surcharge fee or other like fee be charged.
§ 233-29.   Towing/storage Fee Schedule**** [Amended 6-10-2025 by Ord. No. 25-
1405]
SERVICE MAXIMUM FEE
SERVICE                                                      MAXIMUM FEE
Standard Towing - 10,000 lbs. or less                        $185
Standard Towing - 10,001 lbs. to 26,000 lbs.                 $275
Standard Towing*** - 26,001 lbs. or more                     $475
Storage Per Day* - 10,000 lbs. or less                       $80
Storage Per Day* - 10,001 lbs. to 26,000 lbs.                $120
Storage Per Day* - 26,001 lbs. or more                       $150
Per Hour Fee**                                               $100
Clean Up (per crash)                                         $70
Oil Dry (per bag or part thereof)                            $25
Winching (per hour)                                          $110
Mileage Fee (per mile outside of the borders of Upper Dublin $7.50
Township)
* Storage applies to a vehicle placed in the storage of the duty tow
provider and no storage fee shall be assessed for the first 24 hours
after the vehicle was placed in the storage of the duty tow provider.
** No per hour fee shall be assessed for the first one-half hour
following the arrival of the tow vehicle at the scene.
*** This fee shall be an hourly rate.
****This Towing/Storage Fee Schedule set forth in §§
233-28 to
233-28.2 may be amended from time to time by resolution.
 
§ 233-30.   Liability of owner or operators for fine or penalty. [Amended 6-10-
2025 by Ord. No. 25-1405]
The payment of towing and storage fees authorized by this Article shall not
serve to relieve the owner or operator of any vehicle from liability for any
other fine or penalty.
§ 233-31.   Violations and penalties. [Amended 6-10-2025 by Ord. No. 25-1405]
   A.   Revocation:
      (1)   The Chief of Police, in consultation with the Township Manager,
upon determining that any provisions of this Article have been violated, may
revoke a license issued hereunder, together with the right to reapply for a
subsequent license, for a period of up to two years.
      (2)   Appeal from such revocation shall be made in writing to the Board
of Commissioners.
   B.   Equitable relief: Further, the appropriate officers or agents of the
Township are hereby authorized to file a complaint for violations of this
Article and seek any other available relief at law or equity, including
injunction, to enforce compliance with this chapter.
ARTICLE V
Handicapped Parking
§ 233-32.   Definitions.
As used in this Article, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
HANDICAPPED PERSON — Any person who:
   A.   Does not have full use of a leg or both legs or an arm or both arms.
   B.   Is blind.
   C.   Is in loco parentis of a person who has the disabilities set forth in
Subsections A or B above.
      HANDICAPPED PLATE — The special vehicle registration plate issued by the
Pennsylvania Department of Transportation pursuant to Section 1338 of the
Pennsylvania Vehicle Code (75 Pa. C.S.A. § 1338).
      HANDICAPPED TEMPORARY TAG — A permit to be issued by the Upper Dublin
Police Department to any person who shall apply for such permit, who is
temporarily a handicapped person as defined herein, by reason of a nonpermanent
disability, injury or sickness. Such person when applying shall supply a letter
from the physician setting forth the nature of the temporary handicap. Such
permit shall be valid for a period of 30 days only but may be renewed for
subsequent periods.
§ 233-33.   Parking restricted.
It shall be unlawful for any person to park any vehicle in a parking space
designated by an appropriate sign for the exclusive use of handicapped person
unless such person shall be a handicapped person, as that term is defined
herein, or unless such person's vehicle is equipped with a handicapped plate or
handicapped temporary tag.
§ 233-34.   Enforcement.
Officers of the Upper Dublin Township Police Department are hereby authorized
to enforce the provisions of this Article.
§ 233-35.   Violations and penalties.
Any person who shall violate the provisions of this Article shall be guilty of
a summary offense and shall, upon conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of not
more than $15.
ARTICLE VI
Snow and Ice Emergencies
§ 233-36.   Declaration of snow and ice emergency.
In order to facilitate the movement of traffic and to combat the hazards of
snow and ice on the snow emergency routes named pursuant to this Article, a
snow and ice emergency (designated in this Article as a "snow emergency") shall
be deemed to have been declared upon a continuous fall of snow within the
Township for a period of one hour or for a depth of three inches, whichever
first occurs. Information on the existence of a snow emergency may be given by
the Township through radio, newspaper or other available media, and information
on the termination of the emergency may be given by use of the same media.
§ 233-37.   Restrictions on snow emergency routes.
After any snow emergency is declared, it shall be unlawful at any time during
the continuance of the emergency for any person to:
   A.   Park a motor vehicle or allow that vehicle to remain parked anywhere on
any snow emergency route designated pursuant to this Article; or
   B.   Drive any motor vehicle on any such snow emergency route unless that
vehicle is equipped with snow tires or chains.
§ 233-38.   Snow emergency routes.
The streets or parts of streets described in Schedule XVI (§
233-57), attached to and made a part of this chapter, are hereby designated as
snow emergency routes.
§ 233-39.   Parking prohibited on all streets.
   A.   During a snow emergency, all public streets and highways within the
Township of Upper Dublin shall be deemed snow emergency routes for the plowing
of the snow and ice accumulated thereon.
   B.   Parking shall be prohibited on all streets during a snow emergency, and
it shall be unlawful to park, abandon or leave any vehicle upon a Township
street or highway until the snow fall ceases or until the snow and/or ice is
plowed or substantially removed from the Township streets or highways,
whichever event is later.
   C.   The provisions above shall not be enforced against any owner, lessee or
operator of any vehicle parked upon a Township street or highway where the
abutting properties have no access to off-street parking, provided that said
vehicle is placed on even-numbered days on the side of the street on which
houses have even numbers and on odd-numbered days on the side of the street
abutting odd-numbered houses.
§ 233-40.   Violations and penalties.
Any owner, lessee or operator of a motor vehicle parked, abandoned or left upon
any Township street or highway in violation of the provisions of §
233-39 shall, upon conviction thereof, be liable to pay a fine of not less than
$25 nor more than $300, provided that, for a first offense under this Article,
the Chief of Police shall deliver to such violator a notice of such violation,
which notice shall contain instructions that the owner may avoid prosecution by
payment of the sum of $10 for the first offense within 72 hours after receipt
of such notice; and further provided that, for a second offense, such
prosecution may be avoided by payment of the sum of $20 within 72 hours after
receipt of such notice; third and subsequent offenses shall be subject to
prosecution in accordance with the terms of this chapter. A new and separate
offense shall be deemed to have been committed for each day that any violation
of the provisions of this Article shall continue to exist.
ARTICLE VII
Violations and Penalties
§ 233-41.   Generally.
Unless another penalty is expressly provided by the Vehicle Code (75 Pa.C.S.A.
§ 101 et seq.) or except as herein specified, every person convicted of a
violation of a provision of this chapter, or any supplement thereto, shall be
liable to a penalty of $25 and costs of prosecution.
ARTICLE VIII
Schedules
§ 233-42.   Schedule I: Speed Limits. 
[Amended 8-9-2011 by Ord. No. 11-1243, § 1]
In accordance with the provisions of §
233-7, speed limits are hereby established upon the following described streets
or parts thereof:
Name of Street Speed limit (mph) Location
Name of Street                Speed limit (mph) Location
Ambler Road                   25                From Bannockburn Avenue to
                                                Bethle hem Pike
Broad Street                  35                Entire length
Camp Hill Road [Amended 8- 9- 25                From Susquehanna Road to
2011 by Ord. No. 11-1243]                       Virginia Drive
Camp Hill Road                25                From Virginia Drive to
                                                Pennsylvania Avenue
                                                From Susquehanna Road to
Cedar Road                    25                intersection with Lindenwold
                                                Terrace
Commerce Drive                35                Entire length
Delaware Avenue               35                Entire length
Dillon Road                   35                Entire length
Dreshertown Road              40                From Bluebird Lane to Welsh
                                                Road
Fort Washington Avenue        35                Entire length
Highland Avenue               35                Entire length
Jarrettown Road               35                Entire length
Jenkintown Road               40                From North Hills Avenue to
                                                Limekiln Pike
Lindenwold Terrace            25                From intersection with Cedar
                                                Road to Bethlehem Pike
Loch Alsh Avenue              25                Entire length
Meetinghouse Road             35                Entire length
Pinetown Road                 35                Entire length
Twining Road [Amended 1-9-    25                Entire length, except as noted
2001 by Ord. No. 1053]                          below
                                                From a point 685 feet northeast
Twining Road [Added 1-9- 2001 35                of Ayr Lane proceeding in a
by Ord. No. 1053]                               northeasterly direc tion for
                                                4,000 feet
Virginia Drive                35                Entire length
 
§ 233-43.   Schedule II: Traffic Control Signals.
In accordance with the provisions of §
233-8, traffic control signals shall be installed and operated at the following
described intersections:
Intersection
Intersection
Bethlehem Pike and Butler Pike
Bethlehem Pike and Highland Avenue
Bethlehem Pike and Tennis Avenue
Butler Pike and Norristown Road
Butler Pike and Susquehanna Road
Butler Pike and Welsh Road
Fitzwatertown Road and Jenkintown Road
Fitzwatertown Road and Susquehanna Road
Fort Washington Avenue and Highland Avenue
Fort Washington Avenue and Meetinghouse Road
Fort Washington Avenue and Limekiln Pike
Limekiln Pike, Dillon Road and Meetinghouse Road
Limekiln Pike, Dreshertown Road and Virginia Drive
Limekiln Pike and Susquehanna Road (westbound)
Limekiln Pike and Susquehanna Road (eastbound)
Limekiln Pike, Twining Road and Jenkintown Road
Morris Road and Butler Pike
Norristown Road and Limekiln Pike
North Hills Avenue and Jenkintown Road
North Hills Avenue, Fitzwatertown Road and Woodland Road
Pennsylvania Avenue and Summit Avenue
Susquehanna Road and Camphill Road
Susquehanna Road and Fort Washington Avenue
Susquehanna Road and Pinetown Road (Broad Street)
Susquehanna Road and Twining Road
Susquehanna Road and Virginia Drive
Virginia Drive and Office Center Drive
Welsh Road and Blair Mill Road (entrance to Prudential Insurance)
Welsh Road and Computer Avenue (exit from Prudential Insurance)
Welsh Road and Dreshertown Road
Welsh Road and Jarrettown Road
Welsh Road and Kimball Avenue
Welsh Road and Limekiln Pike
Welsh Road and Norristown Road
Welsh Road and Twining Road
 
§ 233-44.   Schedule   Prohibited Right Turns on Red Signal.
In accordance with the provisions of §
233-9, no person shall make a right turn (or a left turn from a one-way street
onto another one-way street) when facing a steady red signal at any of the
locations described below:
Name of Street Direction of Travel Prohibited Right Turn on Red Signal Onto
Name of Street                 Direction of Travel Prohibited Right Turn on Red
                                                   Signal Onto
Butler Pike                    Both                Norristown Road
Butler Pike                    North               Susquehanna Road
Dillon Road                    Both                Limekiln Pike
Dreshertown Road               South               Limekiln Pike
Fitzwatertown Road             North               Susquehanna Road
Fitzwatertown Road             South               Jenkintown Road
Fort Washington Avenue         Both                Highland Avenue
Fort Washington Avenue [Added                      Limekiln Pike, between 8:00
3-13-2001 by Ord. No. 1060]    Both                a.m. and 4:00 p.m., Monday
                                                   through Friday
Fort Washington Avenue         North               Susquehanna Road
Fort Washington Avenue         South               Meetinghouse Road
Highland Avenue                Both                Fort Washington Avenue
Jenkintown Road                Both                North Hills Avenue
Jenkintown Road                North               Twining Road
Limekiln Pike [Added 3-13-2001                     Fort Washington Avenue,
by Ord. No. 1060]              Both                between 8:00 a.m. and 4:00
                                                   p.m., Monday through Friday
Limekiln Pike                  South               Dillon Road
Limekiln Pike                  South               Twining Road
Meetinghouse Road              Both                Dillon Road
Meetinghouse Road              East                Fort Washington Avenue
Norristown Road                Both                Butler Pike
North Hills Avenue             Both                Jenkintown Road
North Hills Avenue             South               Woodland Avenue
Pinetown Road                  North               Susquehanna Road
Susquehanna Road               Both                Fort Washington Avenue
Susquehanna Road               East                Butler Pike
Susquehanna Road               East                Camp Hill Road
Susquehanna Road               East                Fitzwatertown Road
Susquehanna Road               East                Pinetown Road
Susquehanna Road               West                Twining Road
Twining Road                   North               Jenkintown Road
Twining Road                   North               Welsh Road
Twining Road                   South               Susquehanna Road
Virginia Drive                 North               Limekiln Pike
Welsh Road                     East                Dreshertown Road
Woodland Road                  East                Fitzwatertown Road
 
§ 233-45.   Schedule IV: Prohibited Turns at Intersections.
In accordance with the provisions of §
233-10, no driver of any vehicle shall make a turn of the kind designated below
at any of the following intersections:
Name of Street Direction of Travel Prohibited Turn Hours At Intersection of
Name of Street    Direction of Travel Prohibited Turn Hours At Intersection of
Camp Hill Road    Both                Left and right  All   Virginia Drive
Montgomery Avenue
[Added 3-12-2002  East                Right           All   Washington Lane
by Ord. No. 1078]
Montgomery Avenue
[Added 3-12-2002  West                Left            All   Washington Lane
by Ord. No. 1078]
Montgomery Aveneu
[Added 3-12-2002  West                Left            All   Bethlehem Pike
by Ord. No. 1078]
Peg Street        West                Left            All   Susquehanna Road
Pennsylvania
Avenue            East                Left            All   Summit Avenue
[Added 3-12-2002
by Ord. No. 1078]
Pennsylvania
Avenue            West                Right           All   Summit Avenue
[Added 3-12-2002
by Ord. No. 1078]
Virginia Drive    Both                Left and right  All   Camp Hill Road
 
§ 233-46.   Schedule V: U-Turns.
In accordance with the provisions of §
233-11, no driver of any vehicle shall make a U-turn on any of the streets or
parts thereof described below:
 
Name of Street Location
(Reserved)
 
§ 233-47.   Schedule VI: One-Way Streets.
In accordance with the provisions of §
233-12, the following described streets or parts thereof are hereby designated
as one-way streets in the direction indicated:
Name of Street Direction of Travel Limits
Name of Street   Direction of Travel Limits
Argyle Avenue    West                From Douglas Street to Bethlehem Pike
Church Street    West                From Bethlehem Pike to South Main Street
Limekiln Pike    East                From Susquehanna Road to a point 500 feet
                                     east of Peg Street
Limekiln Pike    South               From Limekiln Pike northbound to
                                     Susquehanna Road
Peg Street       West                From Limekiln Pike to Susquehanna Road
Randolph         East                From South Main to Ambler Road
Renfrew Avenue   South               From Trinity Avenue to Bannockburn Avenue
Water Tower Road West                From Susquehanna Road to Office Center
                                     Drive
 
§ 233-48.   Schedule VII: No-Passing Zones.
In accordance with the provisions of §
233-13, no-passing zones are hereby established upon the following described
streets or parts thereof:
Name of Street Direction of Travel Limits
Name of Street         Direction of Travel Limits
Fitzwatertown Road     Both                From Jenkintown Road to Susquehanna
                                           Road
Fort Washington Avenue Both                From Pennsylvania Avenue to
                                           Meetinghouse Road
Jarrettown Road        Both                From Limekiln Pike to Welsh Road
Susquehanna Road       Both                From Limekiln Pike to Twining Road
Susquehanna Road       Both                From Tennis Avenue to Dorsey Place
Twining Road           Both                From Pennsylvania Avenue to Welsh
                                           Road
Welsh Road             East                From Brittany Drive to Dresher Road
Welsh Road             East                From Howe Lane to Farmview Road
Welsh Road             East                From Tennis Avenue to Butler Pike
 
§ 233-49.   Schedule VIII: Through Streets.
In accordance with the provisions of §
233-14, the following described streets or parts thereof are hereby established
as through streets:
 
Name of Street Limits
(Reserved)
 
§ 233-50.   Schedule IX: Stop Intersections
[Amended 12-9-2025 by Ord. No. 25-1409, § 1].
In accordance with the provisions of §
233-15, the following described intersections are hereby established as stop
intersections, and stop signs shall be installed as provided therein:
Stop Sign on Direction of Travel At Intersection of
Stop Sign on                         Direction of Travel At Intersection of
Afton Road                           West                Twining Road
Aidenn Lair Drive                    Both                Derry Drive
Aidenn Lair Drive                    East                Dreshertown Road
Aidenn Lair Drive                    South               Tralee Drive
Aidenn Lair Drive                    West                Jarrettown Road
Aidenn Lair Road                     East                Jarrettown Road
Alba Road                            Both                Elliot Avenue
Alba Road                            East                North Hills Avenue
Alpin Drive                          East                Fitzwatertown Road
Alpin Drive                          West                Dundee Drive
Ambler Road                          East                Bethlehem Pike
Ambler Road                          North               Bannockburn Avenue
Anbury Lane                          East                Jill Road
Anbury Lane                          West                Patricia Avenue
Annasmead Road                       East                Webster Lane
Annasmead Road                       North               Tennis Avenue
Apel Avenue                          Both                Orlando Avenue
Apel Avenue                          South               Pennsylvania Avenue
Applewood Drive                      East                Dreshertown Road
Ardross Avenue                       East                Cedar Road
Ardross Avenue                       West                Bethlehem Pike
Argyle Avenue                        East                Cedar Road
Argyle Avenue                        West                Bethlehem Pike
Argyle Avenue                        West                Douglas Street
Arran Way                            Both                Aidenn Lair Drive
Arrowhead Trail                      North               Tennis Avenue
Arrowhead Trail                      West                Susquehanna Road
Atkinson Lane                        West                Butler Bike
Audubon Drive                        Both                Martin Lane
Avenue "H"                           Both                Quarry Avenue
Ayr Lane                             East                Dundee Drive
Ayr Lane                             West                Twining Road
Bala Avenue                          Both                Orlando Avenue
Bala Avenue                          North               Wischman Avenue
Bala Avenue                          South               Pennsylvania Avenue
Bannockburn Avenue                   East                Bethlehem Pike
Bannockburn Avenue                   West                Church Street
Bantry Drive                         East                Dreshertown Road
Barton Drive                         Both                Pinetown Road
Barton Drive [Added 8-9-2005 by Ord. West                Victor Lane
No. 1153]
Bauman Drive                         West                Dillon Road
Beacon Hill Drive                    West                Dreshertown Road
Bell Lane                            Both                Dillon Road
Bell Lane                            Both                Fort Washington Avenue
Bell Lane                            Both                Limekiln Pike
Bell Lane                            Both                Terrace Drive
Bell Lane                            East                North Spring Hill Road
Bellaire Avenue                      Both                Highland Avenue
Benjamin Drive                       East                Clinton Drive
Benjamin Drive                       North               Executive Drive
Bernard Avenue                       Both                Woodland Road
Berrywood Lane                       West                Castlewood Drive
Blair Lane                           East                Dillon Road
Bluebird Lane                        West                Dreshertown Road
Boden Place                          West                Madison Avenue
Booth Lane                           West                Cedar Road
Brentwood Drive                      Both                Jill Road
Brentwood Drive                      East                North Hills Avenue
Brentwood Drive                      West                Patricia Ave
Brittany Drive                       North               Welsh Road
Broad Street                         North               Limekiln Pike
Brookwood Drive                      West                Bethlehem Pike
Burn Brae Drive                      Both                Dundee Drive
Burn Brae Drive                      East                Fitzwatertown Road
Burn Brae Drive                      South               East Bruce Drive
Camphill Road                        Both                Virginia Drive
Camphill Road                        South               Dreshertown Road
Candlebrook Drive                    East                Limekiln Pike
Candlebrook Drive                    South               Susquehanna Road
Carey Drive                          East                Morris Road
Cardinal Drive                       North               Thrush Drive
Carmel Place                         East                North Spring Hill Road
Carpenter Lane                       North               Norristown Road
Castlewood Drive                     Both                Nicole Drive
Castlewood Drive                     East                Redgate Road
Castlewood Drive                     South               Signal Hill Road
Cavan Drive                          East                Arran Way
Cavan Drive                          West                Deny Drive
Cavendish Drive                      South               Meadowbrook Avenue
Cavendish Drive                      West                Butler Pike
Cedar Road [Added 12-9-2025 by Ord.  Both                Loch Alsh Avenue
No. 25-1409]
Cedar Road                           North               Susquehanna Road
Chapel Road                          North               Eastview Drive
Chaucer Drive                        North               Norristown Road
Chelsea Avenue                       East                Summit Avenue
Chelsea Avenue                       South               Chestnut Avenue
Chelsea Avenue                       South               Mount Carmel Avenue
Chestnut Avenue                      Both                Logan Avenue
Chestnut Avenue                      East                Chelsea Avenue
Cheston Lane                         West                Tennis Avenue
Church Street                        South               Bannockburn Avenue
Cinnamon Drive                       East                Camphill Road
Cinnamon Drive                       North               Susquehanna Road
Cinnamon Circle                      South               Susquehanna Road
Clarrige Drive                       East                Brentwood Drive
Clarrige Drive                       East                Jill Road
Clemens Avenue                       South               Susquehanna Road
Clover Lane                          East                Clinton Drive
Clover Lane                          West                Executive Drive
College Lane                         South               Bell Lane
Comly Court                          West                North Spring Hill Road
Commerce Drive                       North               Delaware Avenue
Conwell Drive                        North               Bell Lane
Cooper Drive                         West                Stout Road
Corsley Court                        East                South Spring Hill Road
Craig-Y-Nos Avenue                   East                Twining Road
Creek Drive                          East                Fort Washington Avenue
Creek Drive                          North               Highland Avenue
Crestview Drive                      East                Dreshertown Road
Crosby Drive                         Both                Pinetown Road
Crosby Drive                         North               Susquehanna Road
Crystal Valley Way                   South               Susquehanna Road
Daisy Lane                           North               Welsh Road
Dale Road                            Both                Patricia Avenue
Dale Road                            East                Jill Road
Dale Road                            West                Twining Road
David Drive                          North               Susquehanna Road
David Drive                          West                Fitzwatertown Road
Dawn Drive                           East                North Spring Hill Road
Dawn Drive                           West                Holmes Road
Delaware Avenue                      West                Pinetown Road
Delaware Avenue                      West                Virginia Drive
Denston Drive                        Both                Fort Washington Avenue
Denston Drive                        Both                Joel Drive
Derry Drive                          North               Dublin Road
Derry Drive                          West                Kenmare Drive
Devonshire Road                      South               Saint George's Road
Devonshire Road                      West                Tuckerstown Road
Dillon Road                          Both                Susquehanna Road
Dillon Road                          North               Welsh Road
Dogwood Drive                        West                Butler Pike
Dorsey Place                         North               Susquehanna Road
Douglas Street [Added 12-9-2025 by   Both                Loch Alsh Avenue
Ord. No. 25-1409]
Douglas Street                       East                Meadowbrook Avenue
Dreshertown Road                     West                Camphill Road
Dublin Road                          Both                Jarrettown Road
Dublin Road                          East                Arran Way
Duncan Drive                         North               Burn Brie Drive
Duncan Drive                         South               Alpin Drive
Dundee Drive                         Both                Woodland Road
East Bruce Drive                     South               Ayr Lane
East Casals Place                    South               Butler Pike
East Fairway Avenue                  West                Twining Road
East Ormandy Place                   South               North Beecham Drive
Eastview Drive                       East                North Hills Avenue
Eastview Drive                       West                Fitzwatertown Road
Eastwind Circle                      West                Nicole Drive
Edison Drive                         North               Bell Lane
Edison Drive                         South               Fort Washington Avenue
Ellerslie Avenue                     East                Bethlehem Pike
Ellerslie Avenue                     West                Ambler Road
Elliger Avenue                       Both                Spring Avenue
Elliot Avenue                        East                North Hills Avenue
Elliot Avenue [Added 6-12-2001 by    Northwest           Jill Road
Ord. No. 1064]
Elon Circle                          East                Pinetown Road
Executive Drive                      West                Tennis Avenue
Farm Lane                            North               Loch Alsh Avenue
Farm Lane                            South               Highland Avenue
Farmview Road                        Both                Franklin Lane
Farmview Road                        North               Welsh Road
Farmview Road                        South               Bell Lane
Firethorn Circle                     East                Castlewood Drive
Fitzwatertown Road                   West                Limekiln Pike
Flick Drive                          North               Dreshertown Road
Forsythe Drive [Added 8-8-2006 by    East                Dillon Road
Ord. No. 1171]
Forsythe Drive [Added 8-8-2006 by    West                Hawthorne Lane
Ord. No. 1171]
Fort Washington Avenue               Both                Terrace Drive
Fort Washington Avenue               North               Welsh Road
Fort Washington Avenue               South               Pennsylvania Avenue
Franklin Lane                        Both                Terrace Drive
Franklin Lane                        East                Fort Washington Avenue
Franklin Lane [Added 12-14-1999 by   West                Howe Lane
Ord. No. 1016]
Friends Lane                         South               Meetinghouse Road
Fulton Drive                         Both                Limekiln Pike
Fulton Road                          North               Fort Washington Avenue
Galway Place                         South               Kenmare Drive
Garden Road                          North               Valley Road
Garden Road                          West                Twining Road
Garrison Drive                       North               Tannerie Run Road
Gentleman's Way                      West                Broad Street
Girard Avenue                        All                 Chestnut Avenue
Girard Avenue                        South               Pennsylvania Avenue
Glen Burnie Drive                    North               Burn Brae Drive
Glenburnie Drive                     South               Alpin Drive
Glencoe Avenue                       Both                Randolph Avenue
Glencoe Avenue                       South               Hartranft Avenue
Glenecho Lane                        South               Kirks Lane
Glen Drive                           Both                Whitehouse Road
Glen Drive                           East                Pembrook Road
Goentner Road                        West                Kimball Avenue
Goodman Drive                        North               Wentz Drive
Haddon Place                         North               Wallace Drive
Hagues Mill Road                     East                Bethlehem Pike
Hagues Mill Road                     East                Butler Pike
Hamer Drive                          East                Butler Pike
Harris Road                          South               Kirks Lane
Harris Road                          West                Limekiln Pike
Hartranft Avenue                     Both                Bellaire Avenue
Hartranft Avenue                     Both                Highland Avenue
Hartranft Avenue                     North               Madison Avenue
Hartranft Avenue                     South               Madison Avenue
Hartranft Avenue                     West                Bethlehem Pike
Hartranft Avenue                     West                Summit Avenue
Hawthorne Lane                       Both                Tressler Drive
Hawthorne Lane                       West                Fort Washington Avenue
Hazelwood Drive                      West                Donna Drive
[Added 8-9-2005 by Ord. No. 1153]
Heard Drive                          South               Jarrettown Road
Heard Drive                          West                Pembrook Road
Heller Way                           East                Leah Drive
Heller Way                           West                Camphill Road
Highland Avenue                      East                Camphill Road
Highland Avenue                      East and West       Stevens Drive
Hoffman Road                         West                Cedar Road
Hoffman Road                         West                Loch Alsh Avenue
Holly Hill Lane                      East                Jarrettown Road
Holly Hill Lane                      West                Waterford Way
Holmes Road                          South               Bell Lane
Holmes Road                          West                Purdie Lane
Homestead Lane                       West                Bethlehem Pike
Honey Run Road                       East                Honey Run Road
Honey Run Road                       South               Susquehanna Road
Hood Lane                            North               Dogwood Drive
Hood Lane                            North and South     Norristown Road
Hopegate Drive                       East                Pembrook Road
Hopegate Drive                       West                South Spring Hill Road
Howe Lane                            East and West       Limekiln Pike
Howe Lane                            North               Welsh Road
Hutchins Lane                        West                Butler Pike
Inverness Avenue [Added 4-14-1998 by Both                Bellaire Avenue
Ord. No. 967]
Inverness Avenue                     West                Bethlehem Pike
Ironwood Way                         East                Westwind Way
Ironwood Way                         West                Westwind Way
Isaacs Court                         East                South Spring Hill Road
Jackson Avenue                       South               Pennsylvania Avenue
Jarrettown Road                      West                Limekiln Pike
Jeffrey Drive                        East                Twining Road
Jeffrey Drive                        West                Limekiln Pike
Jem Drive                            West                Tennis Avenue
Jill Road                            North               Maple Avenue
Joel Drive                           North               Meetinghouse Road
Joel Drive                           South               Susquehanna Road
Kane Drive                           East                Temple Drive
Kane Drive                           West                Butler Pike
Keilsel Lane                         East                Dillon Road
Keisel Lane [Added 10-10-2006 by     North               Schirra Drive
Ord. No. 1172]
Kenmare Drive                        East                Arran Way
Kenmare Drive                        North               Jarrettown Road
Kenyon Drive                         Both                Thomas Drive
Kingsway Drive                       South               Meadowbrook Avenue
Kirks Lane                           North               Aiman Circle
Kirks Lane                           West                Limekiln Pike
Lafayette Avenue                     Both                Orlando Avenue
Lafayette Avenue                     North               Wischman Avenue
Lafayette Avenue                     South               Pennsylvania Avenue
Lake Drive                           East                Loch Alsh Avenue
Lake Drive                           North               Loch Alsh Avenue
Larkspur Lane [Added 12-9-2025 by    South               Hood Lane
Ord. No. 25-1409]
Lenape Drive                         West                Twining Road
Lexington Drive                      South               Jarrettown Road
Limekiln Pike                        North               Jenkintown Road
Limerick Lane                        West                Dublin Road
Lincoln Avenue                       East                Avenue "G"
Lincoln Drive                        North               Butler Pike
Lincoln Drive                        South               Susquehanna Road
Linden Avenue                        Both                Chestnut Avenue
Linden Avenue                        Both                Walnut Avenue
Linden Avenue                        North               Beechwood Avenue
Linden Avenue                        South               Pennsylvania Avenue
Lindenwold Terrace                   West                Bethlehem Pike
Loch Alsh Avenue                     Both                Cedar Road
Loch Alsh Avenue                     East                Fort Washington Avenue
Loch Alsh Avenue                     West                Bethlehem Pike
Locust Lane                          South               Elliger Avenue
Locust Road                          Both                Spring Avenue
Logan Avenue                         Both                Chestnut Avenue
Logan Avenue                         Both                Walnut Avenue
Logan Avenue                         South               Pennsylvania Avenue
Ludwell Drive                        Both                Bell Lane
Ludwell Drive                        West                Fort Washington Avenue
Madison Avenue                       Both                Spring Avenue
Madison Avenue                       North               Highland Avenue
Madison Avenue                       South               Montgomery Avenue
Malcom Drive                         East                Dundee Drive
Manor Place                          East                Mill Road
Maple Avenue                         East                Willow Avenue
Maple Avenue                         North               Jill Road
Martin Lane                          East                Limekiln Pike
Maryland Drive                       South               New Jersey Drive
Meadowbrook Avenue                   East                Cedar Road
Meadowbrook Avenue                   West                Butler Pike
Meetinghouse Road                    West                Butler Pike
Melissa Drive                        North               Farm Lane
Melissa Drive                        South               Van Sant Lane
Mill Road                            South               Pennsylvania Avenue
Montgomery Avenue                    Both                Fort Washington Avenue
Montgomery Avenue                    Both                Summitt Avenue
Montgomery Avenue                    West                Bethlehem Pike
Morgan Drive                         South               Norristown Road
Morningside Drive                    North               Beacon Hill Drive
Mundock Road                         East                Limekiln Pike
Mundock Road                         South               Susquehanna Road
Nash Drive [Added
8-9-2005 by Ord. No.                 East                Victor Lane
1153]
New Jersey Drive                     East                Pinetown Road
New York Drive                       East                New Jersey Drive
Nicole Drive                         West                Dreshertown Road
North Beecham Drive                  East                Stout Road
North Fiedler Drive                  East                Stout Road
North Hills Avenue                   North               Fitzwatertown Road
Northview Drive                      East                North Hills Avenue
Oakwood Drive                        North               Signal Hill Road
Orchard Lane                         East                Bethlehem Pike
Orchard Lane                         West                Ambler Road
Oriole Lane                          East                Dreshertown Road
Orlando Avenue                       East                Twining Road
Overlook Circle                      North               Westwind Way
Patricia Avenue                      East                Brentwood Drive
Patrick Court                        West                North Spring Hill Road
Pebblewood Drive                     West                Twining Road
Peg Street                           West                Susquehanna Road
Pembrook Road                        North               Brittany Drive
Pembrook Road                        West                Dublin Road
Penns Lane                           North               Hamer Drive
Penns Lane                           South               Norristown Road
Pinetown Road                        All                 Highland Avenue
Pinetown Road                        South               Delaware Avenue
Powers Place                         South               Timber Lane
Primrose Lane [Added 12-9-2025 by    South               Hood Lane
Ord. No. 25-1409]
Prospect Avenue                      Both                Elliger Avenue
Prospect Avenue                      Both                Fort Washington Avenue
Prospect Avenue                      Both                Madison Avenue
Prospect Avenue                      Both                Summit Avenue
Prospect Avenue                      West                Bethlehem Pike
Purdie Lane                          Both                Dillon Road
Purdie Lane                          North               Welsh Road
Quarry Avenue                        South               Avenue "G"
Quarry Avenue                        West                North Hills Avenue
Randolph Avenue                      East                Ambler Road
Randolph Avenue                      West                Bethlehem Pike
Rapp Run Road                        North               Westwind Way
Rech Avenue                          Both                Orlando Avenue
Rech Avenue                          South               Pennsylvania Avenue
Redgate Road                         West                Eastwind Circle
Renfrew Avenue                       North               Highland Avenue
Renfrew Avenue                       South               Bannockburn Avenue
Saint George's Road                  East                Dreshertown Road
Saint George's Road                  West                Tuckerstown Road
Sarah Court                          South               Firethorn Circle
Saxon Lane                           West                Waterford Way
Schiavone Drive                      North               Farm Lane
Schirra Drive                        North               Meetinghouse Road
Schirra Drive                        South               Denston Drive
School Lane                          East                North Hills Avenue
Scott Lane                           East                Camphill Road
Shalimar Lane                        East                Dillon Road
Shaw Drive [Added 8-8-2006 by Ord.   South               Forsythe Drive
No. 1171]
Shaw Drive                           West                Tressler Drive
Shepard Drive                        West                Limekiln Pike
Sherwood Lane                        East                Twining Road
Signal Hill Road                     East                Nicole Drive
Slayton Drive                        North               Bell Lane
Southwind Way                        East                Candlebrook Drive
Southwind Way                        South               Candlebrook Drive
Spring Avenue                        Both                Elliger Avenue
Spring Avenue                        Both                Fort Washington Avenue
Spring Avenue                        Both                Summit Avenue
Spring Avenue                        West                Bethlehem Pike
Spring Hill Drive                    North               Welsh Road
Stevens Drive                        South               Highland Avenue
Stevens Drive                        West                Vigor Lane
Stout Road                           North               Tennis Avenue
Stout Road                           South               Butler Pike
Stuart Lane                          East                Bethlehem Pike
Stuart Lane                          West                Ambler Road
Summit Avenue                        Both                Linden Avenue
Summit Avenue                        East                Chelsea Avenue
Summit Avenue [Added 10-12-2004 by   Both                Montgomery Avenue
Ord. No. 1144]
Summit Avenue [Added 10-12-2004 by   Both                Prospect Avenue
Ord. No. 1144]
Summit Avenue                        North               Highland Avenue
Summit Avenue                        West                Linden Avenue
Susquehanna Road                     West                Tennis Avenue
Tally-ho Drive                       North               Norristown Road
Tally-ho Drive                       South               Butler Pike
Tannerie Run Road                    Both                Fort Washington Avenue
Tannerie Run Road                    East                Schirra Drive
Tannerie Run Road                    West                Joel Drive
Temple Drive                         North               Bell Lane
Temple Drive                         South               Meetinghouse Road
Terrace Drive                        North               Welsh Road
Thomas Drive                         East                Victor Lane
Thomas Drive                         West                Fort Washington Avenue
Thornbury Drive                      East                Limekiln Pike
Three Tuns Lane                      East                Tally-ho Drive
Three Tuns Lane                      West                Stout Road
Thrush Drive                         East                Audubon Drive
Thrush Drive                         West                Oriole Lane
Timber Lane                          West                Twining Road
Tralee Drive                         West                Kenmare Drive
Travis Lane                          East                Dillon Road
Trinity Avenue                       South               Highland Avenue
Trinity Place                        North               Bannockburn Avenue
Tuckerstown Road                     East                Dreshertown Road
Tuckerstown Road                     West                Jarrettown Road
Twining Road                         North               Valley Road
Twining Road                         South               Pennsylvania Avenue
Valley Road                          South               Golf Road
Valley Road                          West                Twining Road
Van Saint Lane                       South               Highland Avenue
Vance Drive                          West                Jenkintown Road
Victor Lane [Added 8-9-2005 by Ord.  North               Hazelwood Drive
No. 1153]
Villa Drive                          East                Farm Lane
Waldheim Drive                       East                Penns Lane
Waldheim Drive                       West                Clinton Drive
Wallace Drive                        East                Stevens Drive
Walnut Avenue                        East                Chelsea Avenue
Walnut Avenue [Added 3-9-2004 by     Both                Girard Avenue
Ord. No. 1125]
Washington Lane                      Both                Montgomery Avenue
Washington Lane                      Both                Prospect Avenue
Washington Lane                      Both                Spring Avenue
Washington Lane                      West                Bethlehem Pike
Water Tower Road                     West                Office Center Drive
Waterford Way                        West                Brittany Drive
Water Ford Way                       South               Brittany Drive
Webster Lane                         East                Harner Drive
Webster Lane                         North               Welsh Road
Webster Lane                         South               Clinton Drive
Weldy Avenue                         Both                Orlando Avenue
Weldy Avenue                         North               Wischman Avenue
Weldy Avenue                         South               Pennsylvania Avenue
Wellsly Road                         East                Dreshertown Road
Wenner Way [Added 6-13-2006 by Ord.  Both                Scott Lane
No. 1168]
Wentz Drive                          East                Pinetown Road
West Bruce Drive                     East                Dundee Drive
West Bruce Drive                     North               Ayr Lane
West Office Center Drive             East                Office Center Drive
Westwind Way                         North               Beacon Hill Drive
Westwind Way                         North               Signal Hill Road
t_small">Westwind Way                South               Beacon Hill Drive
Whitehouse Road                      Both                Dublin Road
Whitehouse Road                      North               South Spring Hill Road
Whitehouse Road                      West                Dublin Road
Willet Drive                         North               Kane Drive
Willow Avenue                        East                Kimbal Avenue
Willow Avenue                        North               Susquehanna Road
Willow Avenue [Added 6-12-2001 by    Southwest           Woodlyn Avenue
Ord. No. 1064]
Willow Avenue                        West                Bethlehem Pike
Wischman Avenue                      Both                Twining Road
Wischman Avenue                      East                Garden Road
Woodlyn Avenue                       Both                Jill Road
Woodlyn Avenue                       East                North Hills Avenue
Woodlyn Avenue                       West                Patricia Avenue
Woodrow                              West                North Hills Avenue
Avenue/Avenue "G"
Woodside Circle                      East                Fitzwatertown Road
Wright Drive                         Both                Howe Lane
Wright Drive                         South               Bell Lane
Wright Drive                         West                Limekiln Pike
Wynnemoor Way                        West                Pinetown Road
 
§ 233-51.   Schedule X: Yield Intersections.
In accordance with the provisions of §
233-16, the following described intersections are hereby established as yield
intersections, and yield signs shall be installed as follows:
 
Yield Sign on       Direction of Travel At Intersection of
Limekiln Pike       South               Susquehanna Road
Office Center Drive West                Camphill Road
 
§ 233-52.   Schedule XI: Closing of Certain Streets to Certain Vehicles.
[Amended 7-8- 2008 by Ord. No. 1203, § 1]
In accordance with the provisions of §
233-17, with the exception of vehicles making local deliveries, it shall be
unlawful for the owner or operator of any truck, commercial vehicle, tractor,
trailer or tractor-trailer combination with a gross vehicle weight in excess of
five tons, to operate such vehicle on the following Township streets or parts
of streets thereof:
Name of Street Limits
Name of Street                                         Limits
Ayr Lane                                               Entire length
Camphill Road                                          Entire length
Cedar Road                                             From Susquehanna Road to
                                                       Bethlehem Pike
Dale Road                                              Entire length
Fort Washington Avenue                                 From Limekiln Pike to
                                                       Welsh Avenue
Hagues Mill Road [Added 7-8- 2008 by Ord. No. 1203, § From Bethlehem Pike to
1]                                                     Butler Avenue
Highland Avenue                                        From Camphill Road to
                                                       Trinity Place
Meetinghouse Road                                      From Limekiln Pike to
                                                       Butler Avenue
Montgomery Avenue                                      Entire length
North Hills Avenue                                     Entire length
Stuart Lane                                            From Bethlehem Pike to
                                                       Ambler Road
Twining Road                                           Entire length
Summit Avenue [Added 10-12- 2004 by Ord. No. 1144]     Entire length
Washington Lane                                        Entire length
 
§ 233-53.   Schedule XII: Vehicle Weight Limits.
In accordance with the provisions of §
233-18, gross vehicle weight limits are hereby established as indicated for
commercial vehicles or other tractor, trailer or tractor-trailer combinations
upon the streets, bridges or portions thereof described below, except for the
purpose of making local deliveries on said streets, bridges or portions
thereof:
Name of Street or Bridge Max. Gross Weight (pounds) Location
Name of Street or Bridge Max. Gross Weight (pounds) Location
Ambler Road              10,000                     From Bethlehem Pike to
                                                    Ellerslie Avenue
Camphill Road            10,000                     From Dreshertown Road to
                                                    Susquehanna Road
Ellerslie Avenue         10,000                     From Bethlehem Pike to
                                                    Ambler Road
Highland Avenue          10,000                     From Fort Washington Avenue
                                                    to Camphill Road
North Hills Avenue       10,000                     From Kimball Avenue to
                                                    Fitzwatertown Road
Orchard Lane             10,000                     From Bethlehem Pike to
                                                    Ambler Road
Pinetown Road            10,000                     From Commerce Drive to
                                                    Susquehanna Road
Stuart Lane              10,000                     From Bethlehem Pike to
                                                    Ambler Road
Twining Road             10,000                     From Pennsylvania Avenue to
                                                    Limekiln Pike
 
§ 233-54.   Schedule XIII: Parking Prohibited at All Times.
[Amended 2-13-2007 by Ord. No. 1180, § 1; 12-11-2007 by Ord. No. 1192, § 1; 12-
11-2007 by Ord. No. 1193, § 3; 3-11-2008 by Ord. No. 1197, § 1; 3-11-2008 by
Ord. No. 1198, § 1; 3-11-2008 by Ord. No. 1199, § 1; 11-10-2009 by Ord. No. 09-
1222, § 1; 10-11-2011 by Ord. No. 11-1247, § 1; 12-13-2011 by Ord. No. 11-1252,
§ 1; 3-13-2012 by Ord. No. 12-1255, § 1; 3-11-2014 by Ord. No. 14-1287, §§ 2,
3; 6-9- 2015 by Ord. No. 15-1303, § 1; 9-13-2016 by Ord. No. 16-1325, §§ 1, 2,
3; 9-10-2024 by Ord. No. 24-1393, § 1; 12-9-2025 by Ord. No. 25-1409, § 2]
In accordance with the provisions of §
233-21, no person shall park a vehicle at any time upon any of the following
described streets or parts thereof:
Name of Street Side Location
Name of Street                                               Side  Location
                                                                   Between
                                                                   Bannockburn
Ambler Road                                                  West  Avenue and
                                                                   Randolph
                                                                   Avenue
                                                                   From the
                                                                   north
Apel Avenue [Added                                                 curbline of
3-12-2002 by Ord. No. 1079]                                  Both  Pennsylvania
                                                                   Avenue
                                                                   extending for
                                                                   30 feet
                                                                   From 80 feet
                                                                   west of the
                                                                   centerline of
Ardross Avenue [Added 12- 13-2011 by Ord. No. 11-1252]       South Douglass
                                                                   Street west
                                                                   for the
                                                                   distance of
                                                                   60 feet
                                                                   From Douglas
Argyle Avenue [Added                                         Both  Street to 300
9-9-1997 by Ord. No. 952]                                          feet east on
                                                                   Argyle Street
                                                                   From Douglas
Argyle Avenue                                                South Street to
                                                                   Bethlehem
                                                                   Pike
                                                                   From 300 feet
                                                                   west of Cavan
Arran Way                                                    South Drive to 200
                                                                   feet east of
                                                                   Cavan Drive
                                                                   From a point
                                                                   21 feet north
                                                                   of the center
Arrowhead Trail [Added                                             line of
7-13-2004 by Ord. No.                                        East  Chippewa
1135]                                                              Ridge
                                                                   northerly for
                                                                   the distance
                                                                   of 250 feet
                                                                   From a point
                                                                   254 feet
                                                                   south of the
Arrowhead Trail [Added                                             center line
7-13-2004 by Ord. No.                                        East  of Tennis
1135]                                                              Avenue
                                                                   southerly for
                                                                   the distance
                                                                   of 105 feet
                                                                   From a point
                                                                   60 feet east
                                                                   of the center
Arrowhead Trail [Added                                             line of
7-13-2004 by Ord. No.                                        North Cherokee
1135]                                                              Circle
                                                                   easterly for
                                                                   a distance of
                                                                   90 feet
                                                                   From a point
                                                                   40 feet west
Arrowhead Trail [Added                                             of the center
7-13-2004 by Ord. No.                                        South line of
1135]                                                              Seneca Run
                                                                   westerly for
                                                                   the distance
                                                                   of 150 feet
                                                                   From a point
                                                                   105 feet west
Arrowhead Trail [Added                                             of the center
7-13-2004 by Ord. No.                                        South line of
1135]                                                              Tennis Avenue
                                                                   easterly for
                                                                   a distance of
                                                                   60 feet
                                                                   Between
Ayr Lane                                                     South Twining Road
                                                                   and Dundee
                                                                   Drive
                                                                   Between
Bannockburn Avenue                                           South Bethlehem
                                                                   Pike and
                                                                   Ambler Road
                                                                   From Spring
Bell Lane [Added                                                   Hill Drive,
11-12-1996 by Ord. No.                                       Both  west for a
923]                                                               distance of
                                                                   600 feet
                                                                   Between
                                                                   Lindenwold
Bethlehem Pike                                               East  Terrace and
                                                                   Ardross
                                                                   Avenue
                                                                   From the
                                                                   intersection
                                                                   of Bethlehem
                                                                   Pike and Loch
                                                                   Alsh Avenue,
Bethlehem Pike [Added 6-9- 2015 by Ord. No. 15-1303]         East  North for 320
                                                                   Feet, to the
                                                                   intersection
                                                                   of Bethlehem
                                                                   Pike and
                                                                   Argyle Avenue
                                                                   From a point
                                                                   75 feet north
Bethlehem Pike [Added                                              of
10-11-2005 by Ord. No.                                       West  Pennsylvania
1156]                                                              Avenue
                                                                   northward for
                                                                   a distance of
                                                                   290 feet
                                                                   From Woodland
Bethlehem Pike [Added                                              Avenue south
9-10-1996 by Ord. No. 919]                                   West  for a
                                                                   distance of
                                                                   90 feet
Commerce Drive                                               Both  Entire length
Delaware Avenue                                              Both  Entire length
                                                                   From
                                                                   Susquehanna
Dillon Road                                                  Both  Road to 200
                                                                   feet north of
                                                                   Keisel Lane
                                                                   Between Loch
Douglas Street                                               Both  Alsh Avenue
                                                                   and Argyle
                                                                   Avenue
                                                                   From Loch
                                                                   Alsh to 200
Douglas Street                                               Both  feet south on
                                                                   Douglas
                                                                   Street
                                                                   Between
                                                                   Argyle Avenue
Douglas Street                                               East  and
                                                                   Meadowbrook
                                                                   Avenue
                                                                   From Burn
Dundee Drive                                                 East  Brae Drive to
                                                                   Woodland Road
                                                                   From the
                                                                   southerly
                                                                   curbline of
Dundee Drive [Added 6-12- 2003 by Ord. No. 1110]             West  Woodland
                                                                   Road,
                                                                   southerly for
                                                                   a distance of
                                                                   70 feet
                                                                   From 860 feet
                                                                   south of Loch
Farm Lane [Added 10-11- 2011 by Ord. No. 11-1247]            East  Alsh Avenue
                                                                   South for 270
                                                                   feet
                                                                   Between Loch
Farm Lane                                                    West  Alsh Avenue
                                                                   and Melissa
                                                                   Drive
                                                                   From the
                                                                   northerly
                                                                   curbline of
                                                                   Susquehanna
Fort Washington Avenue [Added 5-13-2003 by Ord. No. 1108]    West  Road, in a
                                                                   northerly
                                                                   direction a
                                                                   distance of
                                                                   140 feet
                                                                   From
                                                                   Susquehanna
Fort Washington Avenue [Added 9-10-2024 by Ord. No. 24-1393] Both  Road to
                                                                   Highland
                                                                   Avenue
                                                                   From Highland
Fort Washington Avenue [Added 9-10-2024 by Ord. No. 24-1393] West  Avenue to
                                                                   Pennsylvania
                                                                   Avenue
                                                                   From Highland
Fort Washington Avenue [Added 3-11-2008 by Ord. No. 1199, §       Avenue South
1]                                                           East  for a
                                                                   distance of
                                                                   850 feet
                                                                   From a point
                                                                   300 feet
                                                                   north of
                                                                   Chestnut
Girard Avenue [Added 7-13- 1999 by Ord. No. 1002]            North Avenue to a
                                                                   point 400
                                                                   feet north of
                                                                   Chestnut
                                                                   Avenue
                                                                   From Fort
Hawthorne Lane [Added 10-8- 1996 by Ord. No. 920]            Both  Washington
                                                                   Avenue east
                                                                   for 30 feet
                                                                   From Fort
Hawthorne Lane [Added 2-13- 2007 by Ord. No. 1180]           North Washington
                                                                   Avenue to
                                                                   Goodman Drive
                                                                   From Fort
                                                                   Washington
                                                                   Avenue to a
                                                                   point 80 feet
Highland Avenue [Added 2-8- 2000 by Ord. No. 1023]           North west of the
                                                                   center line
                                                                   of Fort
                                                                   Washington
                                                                   Avenue
                                                                   From Route
                                                                   309 off-ramp
Highland Avenue                                              West  to Fort
                                                                   Washington
                                                                   Avenue
Honey Run Road                                               Both  Entire length
                                                                   From Tannerie
Joel Drive [Added 12-11-2007 by Ord. No. 1193; amended 3-11- Both  Run Road to
2014 by Ord. No. 14- 1287]                                         Meetinghouse
                                                                   Road
                                                                   From the
                                                                   curbline of
Joel Drive [Added 3-13-2012 by Ord. No. 12-1255]             East  Susquehanna
                                                                   Road to
                                                                   Tannery Run
                                                                   Road
                                                                   From the
                                                                   curbline of
                                                                   Susquehanna
Joel Drive [Added 3-13-2012 by Ord. No. 12-1255]             West  Road north
                                                                   for the
                                                                   distance of
                                                                   110 feet
                                                                   From
Limekiln Pike                                                East  Jarrettown
                                                                   Road north
                                                                   200 feet
                                                                   From Walnut
                                                                   Avenue North
Linden Avenue [Added 3-11- 2008 by Ord. No. 1197, § 1]      West  for a
                                                                   distance of
                                                                   230 feet
                                                                   From Douglas
                                                                   Street to
Loch Alsh Avenue                                             Both  1,000 feet
                                                                   east on Loch
                                                                   Alsh Avenue
                                                                   From Douglas
Loch Alsh Avenue                                             Both  Street to
                                                                   Bethlehem
                                                                   Pike
                                                                   From 365 feet
                                                                   west of the
                                                                   west side of
                                                                   Fort
Loch Alsh Avenue [Added 10- 8-2002 by Ord. No. 1095]         South Washington
                                                                   Avenue,
                                                                   westerly to
                                                                   the Route 309
                                                                   Expressway
                                                                   Between Lake
Loch Alsh Avenue                                             South Drive and
                                                                   Farm Lane
Loch Alsh Avenue [Added 5-14-1996 by Ord. No. 909; repealed 10-8-2002 by Ord.
No. 1095]
Maryland Drive                                               Both  Entire length
                                                                   From 200 feet
                                                                   west of
Meetinghouse Road                                            Both  Temple Drive
                                                                   to Fort
                                                                   Washington
                                                                   Avenue
                                                                   From Fort
                                                                   Washington
Meetinghouse Road                                            South Avenue to 500
                                                                   feet east on
                                                                   Meetinghouse
                                                                   From Temple
Meetinghouse Road [Added 12-11-2007 by Ord. No. 1192]        North Drive to
                                                                   Friends Lane
Monroe Lane                                                  Both  Entire length
New Jersey Drive                                             Both  Entire length
New York Drive                                               Both  Entire length
North Spring Hill Drive                                      Both  Entire length
Office Center Drive                                          Both  Entire length
Peg Street                                                   Both  Entire length
                                                                   Between
                                                                   Highland
Pinetown Road                                                Both  Avenue to 500
                                                                   feet south of
                                                                   Highland
                                                                   Avenue
                                                                   From 665 feet
                                                                   north of the
                                                                   center line
                                                                   of Delaware
Pinetown Road [Added 5-9- 2000 by Ord. No. 1031]             East  Drive to 755
                                                                   feet north of
                                                                   the center
                                                                   line of
                                                                   Delaware
                                                                   Drive
                                                                   Between New
                                                                   Jersey Drive
Pinetown Road                                                West  and 200 feet
                                                                   north of New
                                                                   Jersey Drive
                                                                   From Madison
Prospect Avenue [Added 11- 10-2009 by Ord. No. 09-1222]      North Avenue West
                                                                   to Summit
                                                                   Avenue
                                                                   From North
                                                                   Hills Avenue
Quarry Avenue [Added 9-13-2016 by Ord. No. 16-1325]          Both  to a point
                                                                   160 feet
                                                                   east.
South Spring Hill Drive                                      Both  Entire length
                                                                   From
Stuart Lane                                                  South Bethlehem
                                                                   Pike west 150
                                                                   feet
Summit Avenue [Added 3-11- 2003 by Ord. No. 1105; repealed 9-13-2016 by Ord. No.
16-1325]
                                                                   From
Summit Avenue [Amended 9-13-2016 by Ord. No. 16-1325]        East  Pennsylvania
                                                                   Avenue to
                                                                   Walnut Lane
                                                                   From the
                                                                   north side of
Summit Avenue [Added 3-11- 2003 by Ord. No. 1105]            West  Montgomery
                                                                   Avenue to a
                                                                   point 35 feet
                                                                   north
                                                                   From
                                                                   Pennsylvania
Summit Avenue [Amended 9-13-2016 by Ord. No. 16-1325]        West  Avenue to
                                                                   Montgomery
                                                                   Avenue
                                                                   Between
Susquehanna Road                                             North Dillon Road
                                                                   and Broad
                                                                   Street
                                                                   From Cedar
Susquehanna Road [Added 3- 11-2008 by Ord. No. 1198, § 1]   Both  Road East for
                                                                   a distance of
                                                                   2,600 feet
                                                                   Between
Twining Road                                                 East  Jeffrey Drive
                                                                   and 200 feet
                                                                   north
                                                                   Between
                                                                   Limekiln Pike
Twining Road                                                 East  and 200 feet
                                                                   south of
                                                                   Valley Road
                                                                   Between
Twining Road                                                 West  Limekiln Pike
                                                                   and Valley
                                                                   Road
Van Buren Walk                                               Both  Entire length
Virginia Drive                                               Both  Entire length
Water Tower Road                                             Both  Entire length
West Office Center Drive                                     Both  Entire length
                                                                   From
Willow Avenue [Added 4-8- 1997 by Ord. No. 938]              West  Bethlehem
                                                                   Pike north
                                                                   for 150 feet
                                                                   From the west
                                                                   curbline of
Wischman Avenue [Added 3- 11-2003 by Ord. No. 1104]          North Twining Road,
                                                                   westerly for
                                                                   a distance of
                                                                   60 feet
                                                                   Between
Wischman Avenue                                              South Twining Road
                                                                   and Apel
                                                                   Avenue
                                                                   From Dundee
                                                                   Drive in a
Woodland Road [Added 5-9- 2000 by Ord. No. 1032; amended 12- Both  southeasterly
11-2001 by Ord. No. 1074]                                          direction for
                                                                   a distance of
                                                                   175 feet
 
§ 233-55.   Schedule XIV: Parking Prohibited Certain Hours.
[Amended 12-11-2007 by Ord. No. 1193, §§ 1, 2; 3-11-2014 by Ord. No. 14-1287, §
1]
In accordance with the provisions of §
233-22, no person shall park a vehicle between the hours specified below of any
day, except Saturdays, Sundays and holidays, upon any of the streets or parts
thereof described below:
 
Name of Street          Side  Hours/Days              Location
                                                      From School Lane to a
Jill Road [Added 3-9-         8:30 a.m. to 4:00 p.m./ point 100 feet north of
2021 by Ord. No. 21-    West  Monday through Friday   the centerline of the
1366]                         School Days             northern driveway to
                                                      Thomas Fitzwater
                                                      Elementary School
                              7:00 a.m. to 4:00 p.m./ From Prospect Avenue to a
Madison Avenue          East  Monday to Friday        point 1,000 feet south
                                                      thereof
                                                      From a point 340 feet
Morse Drive [Added 4-                                 east of the center line
12-2005 by Ord. No.     North 7:00 a.m. to 8:00 p.m./ of Terrace Drive,
1149]                         daily                   continuing eastwardly to
                                                      and including the cul-de-
                                                      sac at the terminus
                                                      From a point 355 feet
Morse Drive [Added 4-                                 east of the center line
12-2005 by Ord. No.     South 7:00 a.m. to 8:00 p.m./ of Terrace Drive,
1149]                         daily                   continuing eastwardly to
                                                      an including the cul-de-
                                                      sac at the terminus
                                                      From Jill Road to a point
School Lane [Added 3-9-       8:30 a.m. to 4:00 p.m./ 50 feet south of the
2021 by Ord. No. 21-    West  Monday through Friday   centerline of the
1366]                         School Days             southern driveway to
                                                      Thomas Fitzwater
                                                      Elementary School
Temple Drive            Both  8:00 a.m. to 8:00 p.m./ From Lee Drive to
                              Monday to Friday        Meetinghouse Road
 
§ 233-56.   Schedule XV: Time Limit Parking.
[Amended 8-12-1997 by Ord. No. 946; 10-11-2011 by Ord. No. 11-1247, § 2; 9-13-
2016 by Ord. No. 16-1325, §§ 4, 5; 9-10-2024 by Ord. No. 24-1393, § 2]
In accordance with the provisions of §
233-23, no person shall park a vehicle or allow the same to remain parked upon
any of the streets or parts thereof described below, between the hours
specified, for longer than the time indicated below:
Name of Street Side Time Limit; Hours/Days Location
Name of Street          Side  Time Limit; Hours/Days   Location
Booth Lane [Added 2-          2 hours; 7:00 a.m. to 3: From Cedar Road to
12-2002 by Ord. No.     Both  00 p.m./ Monday through  Heather Road
1077]                         Friday
Dillon Road [Added 2-         2 hours; 7:00 a.m. to 3: From Susquehanna Road to
12-2002 by Ord. No.     Both  00 p.m./ Monday through  cul-de-sac
1077]                         Friday
                              2 hours; 7:00 a.m. to 3: From Hawthorne Lane to
Donna Drive             Both  00 p.m./ Monday through  and including the cul-
                              Friday                   de-sac
Forsythe Drive [Added         2 hours; 7:00 a.m. to 3: From Hawthorne Lane to
2-12-2002 by Ord. No.   Both  00 p.m./ Monday through  Dillon Road
1077]                         Friday
Fort Washington Avenue        2 hours; all/ Monday to  From Pennsylvania Avenue
[Added 6-11-2002 by     Both  Saturday                 northeasterly to
Ord. No. 1090]                                         Montgomery Avenue
Fort Washington Avenue [Repealed 9-10-2024 by Ord. No. 24-1393]
Goodman Drive [Added 2-       2 hours; 7:00 a.m. to 3: From Wentz Drive to cul-
12-2002 by Ord. No.     Both  00 p.m./ Monday through  de-sac
1077]                         Friday
Haddon Place [Added 2-        2 hours; 7:00 a.m. to 3: From Wallace Drive to
12-2002 by Ord. No.     Both  00 p.m./ Monday through  cul-de-sac
1077]                         Friday
                              2 hours; 7:00 a.m. to 3: From Fort Washington
Hawthorne Lane          Both  00 p.m./ Monday through  Avenue to Goodman Drive
                              Friday
Hazelwood Drive [Added        2 hours; 7:00 a.m. to 3: From Donna Drive to
2-13-2001 by Ord. No.   Both  00 p.m./ Monday through  Goodman Drive
1056]                         Friday
Heather Road [Added 2-        2 hours; 7:00 a.m. to 3: From Hoffman Road to
12-2002 by Ord. No.     Both  00 p.m./ Monday through  Hoffman Road
1077]                         Friday
                                                       From a point 80 feet
Highland Avenue [Added        30 minutes; 8:00 a.m. to west of the center line
2-8-2000 by Ord. No.    North 4:00 p.m./ Monday        of Fort Washington
1023]                         through Friday           Avenue to a point 580
                                                       feet west
Hoffman Road [Added 2-        2 hours; 7:00 a.m. to 3: From Heather Road to
12-2002 by Ord. No.     Both  00 p.m./ Monday through  Cedar Road
1077]                         Friday
                              2 hours; 7:00 a.m. to 3: From Loch Alsh Avenue to
Hoffman Road            Both  00 p.m./ Monday through  Heather Road
                              Friday
Kenyon Drive [Added 2-        2 hours; 7:00 a.m. to 3: From abutting Wallace
13-2001 by Ord. No.     Both  00 p.m./ Monday through  Drive to abutting Nash
1056]                         Friday                   Drive
                              2 hours; 7:00 a.m. to 3: From Loch Alsh Avenue to
Lake Drive              Both  00 p.m./ Monday through  Cedar Road
                              Friday
                              2 hours; 7:00 a.m. to 3: From 309 Expressway
Loch Alsh Avenue        Both  00 p.m./ Monday through  Overpass to Cedar Road
                              Friday
                                                       From 25 feet east of the
Loch Alsh Avenue [Added       2 hours; 7:00 a.m. to 3: eastern corner of the
5-11-1999 by Ord. No.   South 00 p.m./ Monday through  entrance to the Upper
997]                          Friday                   Dublin Public Library
                                                       parking lot to Fort
                                                       Washington Avenue
Melissa Drive [Added 2-       2 hours; 7:00 a.m. to 3: From Farm Lane to Van
12-2002 by Ord. No.     Both  00 p.m./ Monday through  Sant Lane
1077]                         Friday
Montgomery Avenue             2 hours; 9:00 a.m. to    From Ft. Washington
[Added 9-13-2016 by     Both  12:00 p.m./Monday        Avenue to Madison Avenue
Ord. No. 16-1325]             through Friday
Nash Drive [Added 2-13-       2 hours; 7:00 a.m. to 3: From abutting Kenyon
2001 by Ord. No. 1056]  Both  00 p.m./ Monday through  Drive to Victor Lane
                              Friday
Schiavone Drive [Added        2 hours; 7:00 a.m. to 3: From Farm Lane to
2-12-2002 by Ord. No.   Both  00 p.m./ Monday through  abutting Van Sant Lane
1077]                         Friday
Shady Place [Added 2-         2 hours; 7:00 a.m. to 3: From Melissa Drive to
12-2002 by Ord. No.     Both  00 p.m./ Monday through  cul-de-sac
1077]                         Friday
Shaw Drive [Added 2-12-       2 hours; 7:00 a.m. to 3: From Tressler Drive to
2002 by Ord. No. 1077]  Both  00 p.m./ Monday through  Forsythe Drive
                              Friday
Stevens Drive [Added 2-       2 hours; 7:00 a.m. to 3: From Victor Lane to
12-2002 by Ord. No.     Both  00 p.m./ Monday through  Highland Avenue
1077]                         Friday
Summit Avenue [Added 3-11-2003 by Ord. No. 1105; repealed 9-13-2016 by Ord. No.
16-1325]
Thelma Lane [Added 2-         2 hours; 7:00 a.m. to 3: From Melissa Drive to
12-2002 by Ord. No.     Both  00 p.m./ Monday through  Van Sant Lane
1077]                         Friday
                              2 hours; 7:00 a.m. to 3: From Fort Washington
Thomas Drive            Both  00 p.m./ Monday through  Avenue to Kenyon Drive
                              Friday
Thomas Drive [Added 2-        2 hours; 7:00 a.m. to 3: From Kenyon Drive to
13-2001 by Ord. No.     Both  00 p.m./ Monday through  Victor Lane
1056]                         Friday
                              2 hours; 7:00 a.m. to 3: From Hawthorne Lane to
Tressler Drive          Both  00 p.m./ Monday through  Shaw Drive
                              Friday
Tressler Drive [Added         2 hours; 7:00 a.m. to 3: From Shaw Drive to cul-
2-12-2002 by Ord. No.   Both  00 p.m./ Monday through  de-sac
1077]                         Friday
Van Sant Lane                 2 hours; 7:00 a.m. to 3: Abutting Schiavone Road
[Added 2-12-2002 by     Both  00 p.m./ Monday through  to Highland Avenue
Ord. No. 1077]                Friday
Victor Lane                   2 hours; 7:00 a.m. to 3: From abutting Stevens
[Added 2-13-2001 by     Both  00 p.m./ Monday through  Drive to Hazelwood Drive
Ord. No. 1056]                Friday
Wallace Drive                 2 hours; 7:00 a.m. to 3: Abutting Kenyon Drive to
[Added 2-12-2002 by     Both  00 p.m./ Monday through  Stevens Drive
Ord. No. 1077]                Friday
Windsor Place                 2 hours; 7:00 a.m. to 3: From Melissa Drive to
[Added 2-12-2002 by     Both  00 p.m./ Monday through  cul-de- sac
Ord. No. 1077]                Friday
 
§ 233-57.   Schedule XVI: Snow Emergency Routes.
In accordance with the provisions of §
233-37, the following streets or parts thereof are hereby designated as snow
emergency routes:
Name of Street Limits
Name of Street         Limits
Bethlehem Pike         From Tennis Avenue to Pennsylvania Avenue
Butler Pike            From Bethlehem Pike to Welsh Road
Camphill Road          From Susquehanna Road to Dreshertown Road
Commerce Drive         From Pennsylvania Avenue to New Jersey Drive
Delaware Drive         From Commerce Drive to Virginia Drive
Dillon Road            From Susquehanna Road to Welsh Road
Dreshertown Road       From Limekiln Pike to Springfield Township line
Dreshertown Road       From Limekiln Pike to Welsh Road
Fitzwatertown Road     From Limekiln Pike to North Hills Avenue
Fort Washington Avenue From Pennsylvania Avenue to Welsh Road
Highland Avenue        From Camphill Road to Bethlehem Pike
Jenkintown Road        From Limekiln Pike to North Hills Avenue
Kimball Avenue         From Welsh Road to North Hills Avenue
Limekiln Pike          From Welsh Road to Summit Avenue
Meetinghouse Road      From Butler Pike to Limekiln Pike
Morris Road            From Whitemarsh Township line to Whitplain Township line
Norristown Road        From Tennis Avenue to Welsh Road
North Hills Avenue     From Fitzwatertown Road to Abington Township line
North Hills Avenue     From Kimball Avenue to Fitzwatertown Road
Pennsylvania Avenue    From Bethlehem Pike to Pennsylvania Turnpike entrance
Pennsylvania Avenue    From Springfield Township line to Chelsea Avenue
Pinetown Road          From Susquehanna Road to New Jersey Drive
Stout Road             From Butler Pike to Tennis Avenue
Susquehanna Road       From Tennis Avenue to Clemens Avenue
Tennis Avenue          From Bethlehem Pike to Welsh Road
Twining Road           From Welsh Road to Valley Road
Virginia Drive         From Limekiln Pike to Delaware Avenue
Welsh Road             From Tennis Avenue to Kimball Avenue
 
§ 233-58.   Schedule XVII: Traffic and Parking Regulations on Public Property.
[Added 5-14-1996 by Ord. No. 909; amended 12-13-2011 by Ord. No. 11-1253, § 1]
In accordance with the provisions of §
233-19, the movement and parking of vehicles in the parking lots, parks,
playgrounds and other municipally owned or leased properties described below
are subject to the regulations indicated:
 
Area                                   Regulation
                                       Parking for Township employees and
Municipal Building                     visitors on Township business only in
                                       municipal building parking lot
                                       Parking for library employees and
Upper Dublin Public Library            patrons and Township business only in
                                       Upper Dublin Public Library parking lot
Upper Dublin Sports Park [Added 12-13- Parking in designated spaces only,
2011 by Ord. No. 11-1253]              violators will be towed.
 
§ 233-59.   Schedule XVIII: Stopping, Standing and Parking Prohibited.
[Added 8-13- 1996 by Ord. No. 913; amended 12-9-2025 by Ord. No. 25-1409, § 3]
 
Name of Highway                                          Side  Hours   Location
                                                               8:00    From the
                                                               a.m. to centerline
                                                               4:00    of Loch Alsh
Fort Washington Avenue                                   West  p.m.,   Avenue to a
                                                               Monday  point 620
                                                               through feet north
                                                               Friday
                                                                       From a point
                                                                       410 feet
                                                                       west of the
                                                                       center line
                                                                       of Fort
Highland Avenue [Added 12-9-2025 by Ord. No. 25-1409, §       At all  Washington
3]                                                       North times   Avenue to
                                                                       the
                                                                       intersection
                                                                       of Highland
                                                                       Avenue with
                                                                       Van Sant
                                                                       Lane
                                                               8:00
                                                               a.m. to
                                                               4:00    From Deny
Kenmare Drive                                            Both  p.m.,   Drive east
                                                               Monday  for 125 feet
                                                               through
                                                               Friday
                                                               8:00
                                                               a.m. to
                                                               4:00    From Deny
Kenmare Drive                                            Both  p.m.,   Drive west
                                                               Monday  for 125 feet
                                                               through
                                                               Friday
                                                               7:30
                                                               a.m. to From a point
                                                               9:30    195 feet
                                                               a.m.    from the
School Lane/Jill Road [Added 1-11- 2000 by Ord. No.            and 2:  center line
1017]                                                    East  30 p.m. of North
                                                               to 4:00 Hills Avenue
                                                               p.m.    north for
                                                               Monday  1,300 feet
                                                               through
                                                               Friday
 
§ 233-60. Schedule XIX: Crosswalks.
[Added 4-8-1997 by Ord. No. 936]
In accordance with the provisions of §
233-18.1, crosswalks are established as part of the streets or highways, or
portions thereof, described below:
 
Name of Highway        Limits
Fort Washington Avenue Between the intersections of Thomas Drive and Hawthorne
                       Lane
                       Between the intersection of Fort Washington Avenue and
Loch Alsh Avenue       the western property line of the lands of Upper Dublin
                       High School
 
§ 233-61.   Schedule XX: Do Not Enter Streets. 1 
[Added 10-14-2008 by Ord. No. 1207, § 1]
 
Name of Highway Hours                                     Intersection
Hawthorne Lane  7:00 a.m. to 8:00 a.m. Monday thru Friday Tressler Drive
 
1Editor’s Note: See §
233-18.3, “Do Not Enter Streets.”
ARTICLE IX Crossing Guards
§ 233-62.   Position established. [Added 8-12-2025 by Ord. No. 25-1407]
The position of school crossing guard is hereby created.
§ 233-63.   Duties. [Added 8-12-2025 by Ord. No. 25-1407]
The duties of such school crossing guard shall be to control and direct the
traffic at or near the various schools in the Township of Upper Dublin, while
the school crossing guards are in uniform, during designated school times and
at such other times as may be necessary. School crossing guards shall have
authority to direct the movements of both pedestrian and vehicular traffic so
as to best protect and safeguard the lives and well-being of the schoolchildren
as they go to and from their respective schools.
§ 233-64.   Qualifications for appointment. [Added 8-12-2025 by Ord. No. 25-
1407]
   A.   School crossing guards shall be selected from men and women not less
than 18 years of age. The number of school crossing guards to be selected and
the periods of time for which they shall be employed shall be fixed by the
Board of Commissioners from time to time by resolution.
   B.   Before any individual is appointed as a school crossing guard for any
school within the Township of Upper Dublin, the individual must complete any
consent for disclosure forms and undergo all background checks done by the
Township or its designee. The background check must include a Pennsylvania
State Police Criminal History Record Check, a Pennsylvania Child Abuse History
Clearance, and an FBI Criminal History Background Check. While employed as a
school crossing guard, each individual shall undergo an updated background
check every two years. The Township and/or Board of School Directors shall not
employ any individual as a school crossing guard if the individual has been
convicted of any crime outlined in 24 Pa. C.S. § 6344.
§ 233-65.   Compensation. [Added 8-12-2025 by Ord. No. 25-1407]
School crossing guards shall be employed on an hourly basis, and compensation
or rate of pay shall be set by the Board of Commissioners. Compensation shall
be paid by the Board of Commissioners, or jointly by the Board of Commissioners
and the Board of School Directors, in a ratio to be determined by the Boards.
If the Board of Commissioners and Board of School Directors are unable to
determine the ratio of compensation of the school crossing guards to be paid by
each Board, each Board shall pay one-half of the compensation of the school
crossing guards.
§ 233-66.   Guards not subject to civil service. [Added 8-12-2025 by Ord. No.
25-1407]
School crossing guards shall be casual, temporary or special employees and
shall not be covered by any civil service regulations or provisions.
§ 233-67.   Appointment and removal. [Added 8-12-2025 by Ord. No. 25-1407]
The Board of Commissioners may adopt a resolution allowing a Board of School
Directors to assume hiring and oversight of the school crossing guards, in
conjunction with the Chief of Police, provided that the Board of School
Directors of the school district first adopts a resolution requesting authority
from the Board of Commissioners to assume the hiring and oversight of the
school crossing guards. The Chief of Police or Board of School Directors may
remove school crossing guards.
§ 233-68.   Training; designation of locations and stations. [Added 8-12-2025
by Ord. No. 25-1407]
The Board of Commissioners may adopt a resolution requiring school crossing
guards to undergo such training as may be required and prescribed from time to
time by the Chief of Police, with such training to be done under the
supervision of the Chief of Police or such other officer as the Chief of Police
may designate. The Chief of Police shall designate the locations or stations at
which the school crossing guards will perform their duties. The Chief of Police
may change such stations or make any substitutions of locations or stations as
the Chief of Police deems advisable from time to time.
§ 233-69.   Uniforms. [Added 8-12-2025 by Ord. No. 25-1407]
The Chief of Police shall prescribe the uniforms or other sign of authority to
be worn by the school crossing guards, which shall be furnished by the Police
Department.
Chapter 240
WATERCOURSES
§
240-1.   Maintenance of property; maintaining free flow of water.
§
240-2.   Permit required.
§
240-3.   Application for permit.
§
240-4.   Approval procedure.
§
240-5.   Commencement of work.
§
240-6.   Incidents causing or threatening pollution.
§
240-7.   Fees.
§
240-8.   Violations and penalties.
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Board of Commissioners of the Township of Upper Dublin
12-9-2003 by Ord. No. 1120. Amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
 
Fees — See fee schedule.                Wells — See
                                          Ch. 244.
Stormwater management — See             Zoning — See
Ch. 206.                                  Ch. 255.
Subdivision and land development — See   
Ch. 212.
 
§ 240-1.   Maintenance of property; maintaining free flow of water.
   A.   It shall be the obligation of every property owner to maintain his
property in such manner so as to permit at all times the free flow of water
through any drain, ditch, stream, swale, stormwater management facility or
watercourse, whether natural or man-made, occupying such land, including the
removal of any trees, bushes, undergrowth, tree limbs, trash or debris which
might interfere with the free flow of water in the event of a storm. [Amended
9-14-2004 by Ord. No. 1140]
   B.   No person shall permit surface water or drainage to be directed or
redirected onto the property of another without that person's permission, nor
shall any person interfere with the natural flow of surface water or drainage
so as to block it from flowing off of the property of another.
§ 240-2.   Permit required.
[Amended 9-14-2004 by Ord. No. 1140]
It shall be unlawful for the owner of any land to stop, fill up, confine, pave
or otherwise interfere with or change the course of any drain, ditch, stream,
swale, stormwater management facility or watercourse in Upper Dublin Township
without first obtaining from the Township Engineer a permit authorizing such
work to be performed; and no drain, ditch, stream, swale, stormwater management
facility or watercourse shall be stopped, filled up, confined, paved or
otherwise interfered with or the course thereof changed except in strict
accordance with the terms and conditions of such permit and the plans and
specifications submitted therewith.
§ 240-3.   Application for permit.
[Amended 9-14-2004 by Ord. No. 1140]
   A.   The application for a permit shall be in a form prescribed by the
Township, verified by affidavit made by the owner and accompanied by plans and
specifications prepared by a registered engineer or surveyor. Upon filing the
application and plans and specifications, the Township Engineer shall notify
the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection or other agency
overseeing permits relating to watercourses and all municipalities which are
adjacent to the Township of the occurrence and contents of the filings.
   B.   The plans and specifications shall show the exact nature of the work to
be performed; the course, structure and capacity of all drains, ditches,
streams, stormwater management facilities and watercourses; the method of
drainage of the adjacent or contiguous territory; and any other necessary and
explanatory details required by the Township.
   C.   The delineation of the identified floodplain area may be revised by the
Township where natural or man-made changes have occurred and/or more detailed
studies conducted or undertaken by the United States Army Corps of Engineers, a
River Basin Commission or other qualified agency or individual documenting the
necessity for such changes. However, prior to any such changes, approval must
be obtained from the Federal Insurance Administration (FIA).
§ 240-4.   Approval procedure.
[Amended 9-14-2004 by Ord. No. 1140]
   A.   The application and plans and specifications shall be filed in
triplicate with the Township Engineer. The Township Engineer may require
alterations, changes or modifications in the plans and specifications which it
deems necessary and may refuse a permit until such alterations, changes and
modifications have been made.
   B.   If the Township Engineer shall disapprove the plans and specifications
submitted and refuse a permit, the reasons therefor will be set forth in
writing and given to the applicant, who may, within 30 days thereafter, appeal
to the Board of Commissioners. Before acting upon such appeal, the Board of
Commissioners may, in its discretion, arrange for a public hearing after giving
such notice as it deems desirable.
§ 240-5.   Commencement of work.
The Township Engineer shall be notified at least 24 hours in advance of the
commencement of the work in order that provision may be made for proper
inspection thereof. Samples of material and every reasonable facility for
ascertaining whether the work is in conformity with the provisions of this
chapter and the Subdivision and Land Development Code of the Township 1 shall
be furnished to the Township Engineer.
1. Editor's Note: See
Ch. 212, Subdivision and Land Development.
§ 240-6.   Incidents causing or threatening pollution.
If, because of an accident or other activity or incident, a substance which
would pollute the waters of the commonwealth located within the Township and
could endanger downstream users of the waters or its aquatic life or could
damage property is discharged into these waters, including but not limited to
sewers, drains, ditches or other channels of conveyance into the waters, or is
so placed that it might discharge, flow, leach, be washed or fall into them, it
shall be the responsibility of the person at the time of such incident in
charge of the substance or owning or occupying the premises, facility, vehicle
or vessel from or on which the substance is discharged or placed to forthwith
notify the Township Manager's office, such owner or occupant and the
Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection by telephone of the
location and nature of the incident and, if reasonably possible to do so, to
notify known downstream users of the waters.
§ 240-7.   Fees.
A fee, as set forth in the Township Schedule of Fees, 2  as adopted and amended
from time to time by the Board of Commissioners, shall be paid to the Township
Engineer when the application is filed; and the owner shall also pay the actual
cost of any material tests and reimburse the Township for necessary inspection
at the rate set forth in the Township Schedule of Fees for each hour or portion
thereof a Township inspector is engaged on the work.
2. Editor's Note: See fee schedule.
§ 240-8.   Violations and penalties.
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be liable, on
conviction thereof, to a fine or penalty not exceeding $600 for each and every
offense; and when any person shall have been notified by the Township Engineer
or by service of summons in a prosecution or any other way that he is
committing a violation of this chapter, each day in which the violation is
continued after such notification shall constitute a separate offense,
punishable by like fine or penalty.
Chapter 244
WELLS
§
244-1.   Definitions.
§
244-2.   Permit required.
§
244-3.   Supervision and regulation.
§
244-4.   Powers of the Department of Health.
§
244-5.   Certificate of compliance required.
§
244-6.   Conditions on permits.
§
244-7.   Report.
§
244-8.   Fees.
§
244-9.   Waste disposal.
§
244-10.   Abandoned wells.
§
244-11.   Violations and penalties.
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Board of Commissioners of the Township of Upper Dublin
5-13-1986 as Title 5,
Ch. 9, of the 1986 Code. Amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
 
Excavations — See  Sewers — See
Ch. 99.              Ch. 192.
 
§ 244-1.   Definitions.
The following words or phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the
meaning ascribed to them in this chapter, except where the context clearly
indicates a different meaning:
   CAPACITY — Except in the case of the free-flowing wells, "capacity" is
construed to mean the daily capacity of the pumps installed, and not the
contemplated draft.
   DEPARTMENT — The Department of Health of Upper Dublin Township.
   DRILLING — All acts necessary to construction of wells such as drilling,
boring, coring, washing, digging, driving or jetting. This shall not apply to
drilling of blast holes in quarries or to cored holes three and one-half (31/2)
inches or less in diameter drilled for exploration or investigation.
   PERSON — A corporation, partnership, municipal authority or association, as
well as a natural person.
   UNDERGROUND WATERS — Waters of underground streams, channels, artesian
basins and other bodies of water in and under the ground, whether percolating
or otherwise.
   WELL — Any excavation that is drilled, cored, bored, washed, driven, dug or
otherwise constructed for the location, diversion or acquisition of underground
waters or charging of water into underground strata.
   WELL DRILLER — Any water well contractor, his employee or representative in
responsible charge of drilling or otherwise constructing a well.
§ 244-2.   Permit required.
It shall be unlawful for any person to locate, drill or have drilled any well,
to install or have installed any related pumping equipment, to alter an
existing well or its pumping equipment until a permit for such location,
drilling, installation or alteration shall have been issued by the Department
of Health.
§ 244-3.   Supervision and regulation.
The supervision and regulation of the drilling of wells and the use of
underground waters is vested in the Department of Health of Upper Dublin
Township heretofore created.
§ 244-4.   Powers of the Department of Health.
The Department of Health shall have the following powers:
   A.   To obtain information on wells drilled for the purpose of compiling
data on groundwater resources.
   B.   To determine or require the determination of the effect on groundwater
resources of proposed withdrawals.
   C.   To adopt such rules and regulations, subject to the approval of the
Township Commissioners, as may be necessary to carry out the purpose of this
chapter.
   D.   To act on applications for permits to drill wells and to divert
underground water.
   E.   To inspect new and existing installations and to take or require the
taking of samples as may be deemed necessary for proper supervision of
construction and repair of wells in the township. Such samples shall not
materially increase drilling costs.
§ 244-5.   Certificate of compliance required.
No new well and its related powered pumping system shall be placed in
operation, and no new dwelling building or addition thereto which must rely on
such system for water supply shall be sold or occupied until the Department
shall have issued a certificate indicating that such well and pumping system
have been located and constructed in accordance with the terms of the permit
issued.
§ 244-6.   Conditions on permits.
Where the capacity of any new well or wells or the total capacity of old and
new wells on or for use on one (1) property is in excess of ten thousand
(10,000) gallons per day, or where close spacing of wells in an area so
dictates, in taking action on applications, the Department of Health shall have
the authority to impose such conditions and make such requirements and
limitations as may be necessary to protect the people of the township and the
applicant and may issue limited or revocable permits for such wells.
§ 244-7.   Report.
All well drillers shall, upon completion of the drilling of any well, file a
report in the form to be supplied by the Department of Health.
§ 244-8.   Fees.
Fees and charges shall be collected in accordance with the rates established in
the Township fee schedule.
§ 244-9.   Waste disposal.
No well shall be drilled, nor any existing well used for the purpose of
disposal of domestic or industrial wastes.
§ 244-10.   Abandoned wells.
The owner of any well shall, upon abandonment of any existing well or test
hole, effectively seal and fill such wells and test holes in accordance with
the rules prescribed by the Department of Health. A well not in operation for
three (3) or more years, or improperly maintained to prevent contamination, may
be deemed to have been abandoned.
§ 244-11.   Violations and penalties.
[Amended 8-9-1988 by Ord. No. 753]
   A.   Any person or persons, firm or corporation who or which shall fail to
comply with any of the provisions of this chapter or shall violate any of the
duly approved rules and regulations of the Department of Health as in this
chapter provided shall be liable, upon conviction, to a fine not more than six
hundred dollars ($600.) in the discretion of the Justice of the Peace, together
with costs of prosecution, and whenever such person or persons shall have been
notified by the Department of Health or by service of a summons in prosecution,
or in any other way, that he is committing such violation, each day thereafter
that he continues and persists in such violation shall constitute a separate
offense. 1
   B.   All prosecutions for violation of this chapter shall be by summary
proceedings brought in the name and for the use of the Township of Upper Dublin
before a Justice of the Peace in said township. All fines shall be paid to the
Treasurer of Upper Dublin Township to apply to general funds.
1 Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see
Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
Chapter 255
ZONING
ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§
255-1.   Title; when effective.
§
255-2.   Intent.
§
255-3.   Planning agency.
§
255-4.   Minimum requirements; objectives.
§
255-5.   Construal of provisions.
§
255-6.   Word usage.
§
255-7.   Definitions.
ARTICLE II
Districts
§
255-8.   Designation.
§
255-9.   Zoning Map.
§
255-10.   Interpretation of boundaries.
§
255-11.   Land for governmental functions excluded.
ARTICLE III
General Regulations
§
255-12.   General provisions.
§
255-13.   Expansion of use permitted by special exception or conditional use.
§
255-14.   Unobstructed view required.
§
255-15.   Lot, yard and bulk regulations.
§
255-16.   Reduction of lot area.
§
255-17.   Modification of front yard requirements.
§
255-18.   Access to public and private streets.
§
255-19.   Conversion requirements.
§
255-20.   Water requirements.
§
255-21.   Waste disposal.
§
255-22.   Mobile homes.
§
255-23.   Rear lots.
§
255-24.   Fencing.
§
255-24.1.   Merger of lots.
§
255-24.2.   Overlay district uses.
ARTICLE IV
Accessory Buildings, Structures and Uses
§
255-25.   General provisions.
§
255-26.   Agriculture.
§
255-27.   Dwellings.
§
255-28.   Places of worship; schools.
§
255-29.   Lot, yard and bulk requirements.
§
255-30.   Antennas.
§
255-30.1.   Cellular communications antennas.
§
255-30.2.   Portable storage units.
§
255-30.3.   Crematories.
ARTICLE V
Steep Slopes, Impervious Surfaces and Riparian Corridors
§
255-31.   Intent.
§
255-32.   Regulations pertaining to impervious surfaces.
§
255-33.   Permitted and prohibited uses and activities in riparian corridor.
§
255-34.   Regulations pertaining to steep slopes.
§
255-35.   Liability.
ARTICLE VI
Planned Residential Areas
§
255-37.   Review of plan.
ARTICLE VII
Residential Districts
§
255-38.   General.
§
255-39.   Permitted uses.
§
255-39.1.   Decks.
§
255-40.   Truck exclusions.
§
255-40.1   Storage of vehicles and equipment in street prohibited.
§
255-41.   Street repairs.
§
255-42.   Special exceptions.
§
255-42.1.   Conditional uses.
§
255-43.   A Residential District.
§
255-43.1.   A-1 and A-2 Residential Districts.
§
255-43.2.   Age Qualified Residential Community.
§
255-44.   B Residential Districts.
§
255-45.   C Residential District.
§
255-45.1.   NH Residential District.
ARTICLE VIII
MD Multi-Dwelling District
§
255-46.   Purpose.
§
255-47.   Authorization.
§
255-48.   Use regulations.
§
255-49.   Tract, yard, unit and bulk requirements.
§
255-50.   Height regulations.
§
255-50.1.   Multiple dwelling development on transitional tracts.
§
255-51.   Parking.
§
255-52.   Senior assisted living residence.
§
255-53.   Development requirements; plan.
§
255-53.1.   Age-restricted multiple dwelling units.
§
255-54.   Submission of plans.
§
255-55.   (Reserved)
§
255-56.   Fire prevention.
§
255-57.   Condominium development.
ARTICLE IX
OC Office Center District
§
255-58.   Purpose; intent.
§
255-59.   Authorization.
§
255-60.   Use regulations.
§
255-61.   Development requirements; plan.
§
255-61.1   Use and development requirements for mixed use developments.
§
255-62.   Submission of plans; review; approval.
ARTICLE X
(Reserved)
§
255-63.   (Reserved)
§
255-64.   (Reserved)
§
255-65.   (Reserved)
§
255-66.   (Reserved)
§
255-67.   (Reserved)
§
255-68.   (Reserved)
§
255-69.   (Reserved)
ARTICLE XI
RE Recreational Districts
§
255-70.   Intent.
§
255-71.   Use regulations.
§
255-72.   Accessory uses.
§
255-73.   Prohibited locations.
§
255-74.   Required area.
§
255-75.   On-site parking.
§
255-76.   Performance standards.
§
255-77.   Submission of plan; approval.
§
255-78.   Amendment of approved plans.
ARTICLE XII
AHS Apartment House Special District
§
255-79.   Purpose.
§
255-80.   Use regulations.
§
255-81.   Lot, yard and bulk regulations.
§
255-82.   Development regulations.
§
255-83.   Parking.
§
255-84.   Submittal of plans; review; approval.
§
255-85.   (Reserved)
§
255-86.   Fire-resistive construction required.
ARTICLE XIII
INST Institutional Districts
§
255-87.   Purpose and intent.
§
255-88.   Use regulations.
§
255-89.   Lot, yard and bulk requirements.
§
255-90.   Life care complexes.
§
255-90.1.   Senior assisted living residence.
§
255-91.   Application procedure.
ARTICLE XIV
CR Commercial Retail District
§
255-92.   Classification.
§
255-93.   Class L.
§
255-94.   Class I.
§
255-95.   Yard and bulk requirements.
§
255-96.   Development requirements.
§
255-96.1.   Outdoor storage.
ARTICLE XV
SC Shopping Center District
§
255-97.   Intent.
§
255-98.   Use regulations.
§
255-99.   Development requirements.
§
255-100.   Submission of plans; review; approval.
ARTICLE XVI
EC Employment Center District
§
255-101.   Intent.
§
255-102.   Uses permitted by-right.
§
255-103.   Uses permitted by conditional uses.
§
255-104.   Prohibited uses.
§
255-105.   Emissions.
§
255-106.   Noises.
§
255-107.   Odors.
§
255-108.   Glare and heat.
§
255-109.   Vibration.
§
255-110.   Radioactivity; electrical disturbances.
§
255-111.   Outdoor storage and waste disposal.
§
255-112.   Power sources.
§
255-113.   Industrial waste and sewage.
§
255-114.   Traffic control.
§
255-114.1.   Stormwater management.
§
255-115.   Lot, yard and bulk regulations.
§
255-116.   Parking.
§
255-116.1.   (Reserved)
§
255-116.2.   Standards for conditional use approval.
§
255-117.   Submittal of plans; review; approval.
ARTICLE XVII
MHD Mobile Home Development District
§
255-118.   Intent.
§
255-119.   Definitions.
§
255-120.   Use regulations.
§
255-121.   Development requirements.
§
255-122.   Lot, yard and bulk requirements.
§
255-123.   Common areas.
§
255-124.   Access and circulation.
§
255-125.   Parking.
§
255-126.   Buffers.
ARTICLE XVIII
MRD Mixed Residential District
§
255-127.   Intent.
§
255-128.   Definitions.
§
255-129.   Use regulations.
§
255-130.   Area regulations.
§
255-131.   Lot, yard and bulk requirements.
§
255-132.   Development regulations.
§
255-133.   Open space.
§
255-134.   Plans to be submitted.
ARTICLE XIX
Off-Street Parking and Loading
§
255-135.   Required spaces.
§
255-136.   Special exceptions.
§
255-137.   Reduction of facilities.
§
255-138.   Loading and unloading requirements.
§
255-139.   Driveways.
§
255-140.   Size of spaces.
§
255-141.   (Reserved)
§
255-141.1.   Handicapped-accessible parking.
ARTICLE XX
Nonconforming Uses
§
255-142.   Land.
§
255-143.   Buildings.
§
255-144.   Buildings under construction.
§
255-145.   Change of use.
§
255-146.   Discontinued use.
§
255-147.   Extension and expansion.
§
255-148.   Change or resumption.
§
255-149.   Destruction of building.
§
255-150.   Condemnation.
§
255-151.   Permit required.
ARTICLE XXI
Signs
§
255-152.   (Reserved)
§
255-152.1.   Declaration of legislative intent.
§
255-152.2.   General sign regulations for all districts.
§
255-153.   Residential districts.
§
255-153.1.   RE Recreational Districts.
§
255-153.2.   AHS Apartment House Special Districts.
§
255-153.3.   MD Multi-Dwelling Districts.
§
255-153.4.   INST Institutional Districts.
§
255-153.5.   DO Dresher Overlay Districts.
§
255-153.6.   FW Ft. Washington Village Districts.
§
255-154.   CR Commercial Retail Districts; SC Shopping Center Districts.
§
255-155.   EC Employment Center District and GFW Greater Fort Washington
District.
§
255-155.1.   M Motel - Motor Inn - Motor Lodge Districts.
§
255-155.2.   OC Office Center Districts.
§
255-156.   Nonconforming signs.
§
255-157.   (Reserved)
§
255-158.   (Reserved)
§
255-159.   (Reserved)
ARTICLE XXII
Floodplain Conservation District
§
255-160.   Intent.
§
255-161.   Overlay District.
§
255-162.   Establishment; boundaries.
§
255-163.   Boundary disputes.
§
255-164.   Permitted uses.
§
255-165.   Prohibited uses.
§
255-166.   Conditional uses.
§
255-167.   Application zoning permit, conditional use, or variance.
§
255-168.   Standards for conditional use or variance review and approval.
§
255-169.   Variances.
§
255-170.   Nonconforming structures and uses.
§
255-171.   Improvement and reconstruction of existing structures.
§
255-171.1.   Damaged existing structures.
§
255-171.2.   Special requirements for subdivisions and developments.
§
255-171.3.   Special requirements for manufactured homes.
§
255-171.4.   Special requirements for recreational vehicles.
§
255-171.5.   Design and construction standards.
§
255-171.6.   Additional permit requirements.
§
255-171.7.   Designation of the Floodplain Administrator.
§
255-171.8.   Duties and responsibilities of the Floodplain Administrator.
§
255-171.9.   Review by County Conservation District.
§
255-171.10.   Review of application by others.
§
255-171.11.   Changes.
§
255-171.12.   Placards.
§
255-171.13.   Start of construction.
§
255-171.14.   Enforcement.
§
255-171.15.   Appeals.
§
255-171.16.   Abrogation and greater restrictions.
§
255-171.17.   Warning and disclaimer of liability.
ARTICLE XXIII
Zoning Hearing Board
§
255-172.   Membership; terms; vacancies; alternates.
§
255-173.   Powers and duties.
§
255-174.   Standards for actions.
§
255-175.   Modification of orders.
§
255-176.   Rules of procedure.
§
255-177.   Meetings.
§
255-178.   Expert consultation.
§
255-179.   Hearings.
§
255-180.   Expiration of special exception or variance.
§
255-181.   Appeals.
§
255-182.   Fees.
§
255-183.   Plot or lot plan required.
§
255-184.   Burden of proof.
ARTICLE XXIV
Administration
§
255-185.   Zoning Officer.
§
255-186.   Powers and duties of Zoning Officer.
§
255-187.   Permits.
§
255-188.   Permit applications.
§
255-189.   Appeals.
§
255-190.   Fees.
ARTICLE XXV
Conditional Use by Board of Commissioners
§
255-191.   Review procedure.
§
255-192.   Conditional use application.
§
255-193.   Public hearing.
§
255-194.   Standards and criteria for approval of use.
§
255-195.   Burden of proof.
§
255-196.   Expiration of conditional use.
ARTICLE XXVI
Enforcement; Violations and Penalties
§
255-197.   Enforcement.
§
255-198.   Violations and penalties.
§
255-199.   Costs and charges.
ARTICLE XXVII
Amendments
§
255-200.   Amendment by governing body.
§
255-201.   Public hearing and notice.
§
255-202.   Revision after public hearing.
§
255-203.   Enactment of amendment.
§
255-204.   Fees.
ARTICLE XXVIII
Open Space Preservation District
§
255-205.   Legislative intent.
§
255-206.   District established.
§
255-207.   Permitted uses.
§
255-208.   Application submission.
§
255-209.   General development standards.
§
255-210.   Preservation area standards.
§
255-211.   Ownership and maintenance of common facilities and open land.
§
255-212.   Sewage and water facilities.
§
255-213.   (Reserved)
§
255-214.   (Reserved)
§
255-215.   (Reserved)
ARTICLE XXIX
DO Dresher Overlay District
§
255-216.   Declaration of legislative intent.
§
255-217.   Overlay.
§
255-218.   Uses.
§
255-219.   Use and dimensional requirements.
§
255-220.   Vehicular access.
§
255-221.   Parking.
§
255-222.   Landscaping and buffer requirements.
§
255-223.   Lighting.
§
255-224.   Refuse disposal areas.
ARTICLE XXX
EC Overlay District
§
255-225.   Declaration of legislative intent.
§
255-226.   Overlay.
§
255-227.   Uses.
§
255-228.   Use and dimensional requirements.
§
255-229.   (Reserved)
ARTICLE XXXI
MG Maple Glen Overlay District
§
255-230.   Legislative intent.
§
255-231.   Applicability.
§
255-232.   Definitions.
§
255-233.   Uses.
§
255-234.   Dimensional regulations.
§
255-235.   Design regulations.
§
255-236.   Conditional use standards.
ARTICLE XXXII
JT Jarrettown Village District
§
255-237.   Legislative intent.
§
255-238.   Applicability.
§
255-239.   Uses.
§
255-240.   Dimensional regulations.
§
255-241.   Design regulations.
§
255-242.   Development standards.
ARTICLE XXXIII
FW Ft. Washington Village District
§
255-243.   Legislative intent.
§
255-244.   District established.
§
255-245.   Conditional use development.
§
255-246.   Use regulations.
§
255-247.   Dimensional standards for development.
§
255-248.   Design regulations.
§
255-249.   Parking and loading requirements.
§
255-250.   Streetscape improvements.
§
255-251.   Landscaping and buffering.
§
255-252.   Conditional use standards.
Article XXXIV
Historic Resource Overlay District
§
255-253.   Legislative intent.
§
255-254.   Applicability.
§
255-255.   Permitted uses.
§
255-256.   Bulk, area and setback requirements.
§
255-257.   Specific requirements for conditional use approval.
§
255-258.   Historic resource impact study.
ARTICLE XXXV
Alternative Energy
§
255-259.   Intent.
§
255-260.   Definitions.
§
255-261.   Use regulations.
§
255-262.   Geothermal energy systems.
§
255-263.   Solar energy systems.
§
255-264.   Wind energy systems.
§
255-265.   Biomass energy systems.
§
255-266.   Solar energy facilities.
§
255-267.   Wind energy facilities.
ARTICLE XXXVI
(Reserved)
§
255-268.   (Reserved)
§
255-269.   (Reserved)
§
255-270.   (Reserved)
§
255-271.   (Reserved)
§
255-272.   (Reserved)
§
255-273.   (Reserved)
§
255-274.   (Reserved)
§
255-275.   (Reserved)
§
255-276.   (Reserved)
§
255-277.   (Reserved)
§
255-278.   (Reserved)
§
255-279.   (Reserved)
§
255-280.   (Reserved)
ARTICLE XXXVII
MRH Mixed Use Residential-Historic District
§
255-281.   Legislative intent.
§
255-282.   Use regulations and definitions.
§
255-283.   Senior independent living campus residence regulations.
§
255-284.   Development regulations.
§
255-285.   Building setback, spacing, buffering and screening and open space
requirements.
§
255-286.   Application and review requirements.
Article XXXVIII
GFW Greater Fort Washington District
§
255-287.   Intent.
§
255-288.   Uses permitted by right.
§
255-288.1   Prohibited uses.
§
255-289.   Outdoor storage and waste disposal.
§
255-290.   Power sources.
§
255-291.   Traffic control.
§
255-292.   Stormwater management.
§
255-293.   Lot, yard and bulk regulations.
§
255-294.   Parking.
§
255-295.   Standards for conditional use approval.
§
255-296.   Submittal of plans; review; approval.
Appendix A   Map 1.
   Zoning Map Amendments
   Zoning Map
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Board of Commissioners of the Township of Upper Dublin
5-13-1986 as Title 10,
Ch. 1, of the 1986 Code. Amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
 
Planning Agency — See             Streets and sidewalks — See
Ch. 39.                             Ch. 207.
Excavations — See                 Subdivision and land development — See
Ch. 99.                             Ch. 212.
Flood damage prevention — See     Swimming pools — See
Ch. 122.                            Ch. 218.
Junkyards — See                   Wells — See
Ch. 135.                            Ch. 244.
Parks and recreation areas — See
Ch. 168.
 
ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 255-1.   Title; when effective.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as "the Upper Dublin Township
Zoning Ordinance of 1956." This chapter shall become effective 10 days after
advertising of an informative notice of passage of this chapter.
§ 255-2.   Intent.
[Amended 1-10-1995 by Ord. No. 879]
This chapter is enacted for the purpose of promoting the health, safety, morals
and the general welfare of the Township, is designed to lessen congestion in
the roads and highways, to secure safety from fire, panic and other danger, to
provide adequate light and air, to prevent the overcrowding of land, to avoid
undue congestion of population, to facilitate the adequate provision of
transportation, water sewerage, schools , parks and other public requirements,
to conserve the value of buildings and to encourage the most appropriate use of
land throughout the Township.
§ 255-3.   Planning agency.
[Amended 1-10-1995 by Ord. No. 879]
The Board of Commissioners of the Township of Upper Dublin shall act as the
planning agency as provided in 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq. and as provided in
Chapter 39, Planning Agency.
§ 255-4.   Minimum requirements; objectives.
[Amended 1-10-1995 by Ord. No. 879]
In interpreting, implementing and applying the broad purposes and objectives
set forth in §
255-1 above, the provisions of this chapter shall be held to be the minimum
requirements for the promotion of the health, safety, morals and the general
welfare of the Township. This chapter is enacted to implement the purpose set
forth in §
255-2 above, in the respects therein stated and more particularly with a view
toward the following community development objectives:
   A.   Guiding and encouraging the future development of the Township in
accordance with comprehensive planning of land use and population, density that
represents the most beneficial and convenient relationships among the
residential, commercial, industrial and recreational areas within the Township,
having regard to their suitability for the various uses appropriate to each of
them and their potentiality for such uses , as indicated by topography and soil
conditions, existing man-made conditions and the trends in population, in the
direction and manner of the use of land in building  development and in
economic activity, considering such conditions and trends both within the
Township and with respect to the relation of the Township to surrounding areas.
   B.   Protecting the character and the social and economic stability of each
of such areas and encouraging their orderly and beneficial growth.
   C.   Protecting and conserving the value of land and buildings throughout
the Township appropriate to the various zoning districts established herein.
   D.   Bringing about through proper timing the gradual conformity of land use
to this chapter and minimizing conflicts among the uses of land and buildings .
   E.   Aiding in bringing about the most beneficial relation between land use
and the circulation of traffic throughout the Township, having particular
regard to traffic to and from the expressways and to avoidance of congestion in
the streets and the provision of safe and convenient access appropriate to the
various land uses .
   F.   Aiding in providing a guide for public policy and action in the
efficient provision of public facilities and services, in the provision of safe
and proper sanitary sewage disposal and for private enterprise in building
 development , investment and other economic activity relating to land use ;
insofar as such objectives are consistent with the purpose set forth in §
255-2 and with the aforesaid minimum requirements therefor. The provisions of
this chapter shall be interpreted, administered and applied in such a manner as
will facilitate attainment of the said objectives.
   G.   Providing for sufficient open space to guarantee adequate light and
air, recreational facilities and freedom from congestion.
   H.   Conserving our natural resources by regulating the development of land
along our stream beds.
   I.   Providing diversity of residential housing to reflect changing living
habits, at the same time maintaining ability to provide necessary municipal
services and facilities.
§ 255-5.   Construal of provisions.
It is not intended by this chapter to repeal, abrogate, annul or interfere with
any existing ordinance or enactment, or with any rule, regulation or permit
adopted or issued thereunder, except insofar as the same may be inconsistent or
in conflict with any of the provisions of this chapter, provided that where
this chapter imposes greater restriction upon the use of buildings or land or
upon the height and bulk of buildings or prescribes larger open spaces than are
required by the provisions of such ordinance, enactment, rule, regulation or
permit , then the provisions of this chapter shall control.
§ 255-6.   Word usage.
The present tense includes the future; the singular number includes the plural,
and the plural and singular; the word "building " includes the word "structure
" and shall be construed as if followed by the words "or part thereof;" the
word "occupy" includes the words "designed or intended to be occupied”; the
word “use ” includes the words “arranged, designed, or intended to be used”;
and the word “shall” is always mandatory.
§ 255-7.   Definitions.
[Amended 2-13-2007 by Ord. No. 1182, § 1; 11-13-2007 by Ord. No. 1188, § 3; 3-
11-2008 by Ord. No. 1195, § 2; 11-14-2008 by Ord. No. 1205, § 1; 6-14-2011 by
Ord. No. 11- 1241, § 2; 4-10-2012 by Ord. No. 12-1258, § 1; 5-14-2013 by Ord.
No. 13-1273, § 2; 11-26-2013 by Ord. No. 13-1277, § 1; 3-11-2014 by Ord. No.
14-1284, § 2; 8-12-2014 by Ord. No. 14-1291, § 1; 2-9-2016 by Ord. No. 16-1313;
5-14-2019 by Ord. No. 19-1351, § 1; 3-23-2021 by Ord. No. 21-1368, § 1; 7-13-
2021 by Ord. No. 21-1371, § 1; 3-11-2025 by Ord. No. 25-1400, § 1; 12-9-2025 by
Ord. No. 25-1408, § 1]
Unless otherwise expressly stated, the following words and phrases shall be
construed throughout this chapter to have the meanings indicated below:
   ACCESSORY APARTMENT — A dwelling unit added to or created within a single
family  dwelling with provision for independent cooking, living, bathroom
facilities and sleeping. [Added 6-14-2011 by Ord. No. 11-1241]
   ACCESSORY BUILDING — A building subordinate to the principal building on the
lot and used for purposes customarily incidental to those of the principal
building .
   ACCESSORY USE — A use subordinate to the principal use of land or of a
principal building or of a principal structure on a lot and customarily
incidental thereto. An accessory use may not be subordinate to another
accessory use . Where a use is accessory to a use permitted by special
exception or conditional use , then the accessory use shall be permitted only
if a like authorization is obtained. [Amended 4-10-2012 by Ord. No. 12-1258]
   ADVANCED LIFE SUPPORT — The advanced prehospital and interhospital emergency
medical care of serious illness or injury by appropriately trained health
professionals and by certified emergency medical technician paramedics. [Added
11-5-1997 by Ord. No. 956]
   AGE QUALIFIED RESIDENTIAL COMMUNITY —
      (1)   A residential community consisting of single family detached
dwellings , each of which must qualify as age restricted housing as defined in
this chapter (added 5-11-2004 by Ord. No. 1127). Such development shall contain
a community building with associated recreational amenities satisfactory to the
Board of Commissioners for the size of the development , as well as perimeter
buffering of the community from bordering roadways and adjoining residentially
zoned tracts . The community building and amenities, as well as all buffer/
setback areas and internal roadways, which shall be undedicated, to be managed
and maintained by a duly formed non-profit corporation (homeowners association
) the members of which shall be the owners of the individual housing units.
Access/usage of any community building and associated amenities to be
restricted to the owners and occupants of the individual housing units and
accompanied guests. Such use must be in full compliance with the Federal Fair
Housing Act, with the caveat that 100% of the detached dwelling units shall
qualify as age restricted housing .
      (2)   Accessory uses . Accessory uses to the Age Qualified Residential
Community shall be specifically restricted to serve only residents of the Age
Qualified Residential Community and their invited guests and shall be limited
to the following:
         (a)   A clubhouse consisting of activity rooms, craft rooms, lockers
and shower room, library, physical therapy and fitness center, lounges, and
similar facilities for members of the Age Qualified Residential Community and
invited guests.
         (b)   Recreational facilities such as a swimming pool, tennis courts,
bocce courts, and shuffle board.
         (c)   A guard station and/or mechanical entrance gate.
[Added 3-11-2014 by Ord. No. 14-1284]
   AGE-RESTRICTED HOUSING — Dwelling units restricted to occupancy by at least
one person 55 years of age or older and no regular resident under the age of
18, with the following exceptions: [Added 5-11-2004 by Ord. No. 1127]
   A.   A spouse under 55 years if married to a resident over that age.
   B.   Up to two children, or one child and one child-in-law, over 18 years of
age, residing with at least one parent over 55 years of age whose presence is
required to care for that parent.
   C.   A spouse under 55 years of age who is the surviving member of a
previously qualified household.
   D.   An employed member of the facility management staff and his/her family
, not to exceed one unit per 100 dwelling units , or portion thereof in the
project.
   E.   A live-in nurse or similar caretaker whose presence is required to care
for an occupant over 55 years of age.
   AGRICULTURE — The cultivating of the soil, including, but not by way of
limitation, nursery, horticulture and forestry, and animal husbandry.
   AMBULANCE SERVICE — An entity which regularly engages in the business or
service of providing emergency medical care and transportation of patients.
This term includes mobile advanced and basic life support services that may or
may not transport patients and excludes the transportation of patients for
nonemergency medical services. [Added 11-5-1997 by Ord. No. 956]
   AMUSEMENT GAMES — Unless otherwise expressly stated, for the purpose of this
chapter, an “amusement game” means any automatic, mechanical, electric or
electronic machine or device used or designed to be operated as a game, or for
entertainment or amusement, by the insertion of a coin, token, money or other
article, or by the payment of money to have it activated. This definition shall
not include the following:
   A.   Jukeboxes.
   B.   Rides.
   C.   Bowling alleys.
   D.   Merchandise machines.
   E.   Photographic machines.
   F.   Any game or device maintained within a residence for the sole use of
the occupants thereof and their guests.
   ANTENNA — An apparatus, external to or attached to the exterior of a
building , together with any supporting structure for sending or receiving
electromagnetic waves. Antennas may be principal or accessory structures .
[Added 10-14-1986 by Ord. No. 713]
   ANTENNA HEIGHT — The vertical distance measured from the base of the antenna
support structure at grade to the highest point of the structure . If the
support structure is on a sloped grade, then the average between the highest
and lowest grades shall be used in calculating the antenna height. [Added 8-13-
1996 by Ord. No. 915]
   ANTENNA RECEPTION WINDOW — The area which lies between a satellite dish
antenna and an orbiting satellite. [Added 10-14-1986 by Ord. No. 713]
   ANTENNA SUPPORT STRUCTURE — Any pole, telescoping mast, tower, tripod or any
other structure which supports a device used in the transmitting or receiving
of radio frequency energy. [Added 8-13-1996 by Ord. No. 915]
   AVERAGE SLOPE — The slope of land determined according to the formula:
[Added 9-14-2004 by Ord. No. 1138]
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5df02b024b4c8f2f8cc81a782b45029f5e431e28/
IMAGES/0-0-0-34.png]
      Where:
      S   is the average slope in percent.
      I   is the contour interval in feet.
      L   is the combined length in contour lines in feet.
      A   is the area in acres of the parcel being considered.
   BARN — An accessory building used primarily for the keeping of animals and/
or the storage of vehicles or materials, which such use may include a work
area. [Added 8-12-2014 by Ord. No. 14-1291]
   BASE FLOOD — The flood which has been selected to serve as the basis upon
which the floodplain management provisions of this
Chapter 255 have been prepared. For purposes of this
Chapter 255, a flood which has a 1% chance of being equaled or exceeded in any
given year. Also referred to as the one-hundred-year flood, as referenced in
the current Upper Dublin Township Flood Insurance Study prepared by the Federal
Insurance Administration, Federal Emergency Management Agency. [Added 2-9-2016
by Ord. No. 16-1313]
   BASE FLOOD ELEVATION (BFE) — The water surface elevation resulting from a
Base Flood (i.e. the one-hundred-year-flood elevation). Within the approximated
floodplain as delineated in the Flood Insurance Study (FIS) , or other areas
subject to flooding outside of the Flood Insurance Study, the Base Flood
Elevation shall be established as a point on the boundary of the Floodplain
District closest to a subject property. When available, information from other
federal, state and other acceptable sources shall be used to determine the one-
hundred-year-flood elevation, as well as a floodway area, if possible. The
elevation shown on the Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) for Zones AE, AH, A 130
that indicates the water surface elevation resulting from a flood that has a 1%
or greater chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year. The BFE is
also shown on the FIS profile, and can be determined for Zone A Floodplains.
[Added 2-9-2016 by Ord. No. 16-1313]
   BASEMENT — Any area of a building having its floor below ground level on all
sides. [Added 2-9-2016 by Ord. No. 16-1313]
   BASIC LIFE SUPPORT SERVICES — The prehospital or interhospital emergency
medical care and management of illness or injury performed by specially trained
and certified or licensed personnel. [Added 11-5-1997 by Ord. No. 956]
   BED AND BREAKFAST INN — A building used for the purpose of furnishing
temporary lodging to guests together with food service to such guests, limited
to breakfast and sometimes lunch or afternoon tea, prepared and served on-site
only to such guests, and having an owner or manager in residence on the
property. The building may contain no more than eight guest rooms. Such
temporary lodging would normally be for a few nights and may not exceed two
weeks. [Added 6- 13-2000 by Ord. No. 1034]
   BEDROOM — A private room planned and intended for sleeping, separated from
other rooms by a door, and accessible to a bathroom without crossing through
another bedroom. [Added 5-14-2019 by Ord. No. 19-1351]
   BUILDING - A combination of materials to form a permanent structure having
walls and a roof. All manufactured homes and trailers to be used for human
habitation are buildings. [Added 2-9-2016 by Ord. No. 16-1313]
   BUILDING AREA — The aggregate of the maximum horizontal cross-section areas
of all buildings or structures on a lot above the ground level, measured at the
greatest outside dimensions, excluding cornices, eaves, gutters or chimneys
projecting not more than 18 inches, bay windows not extending through more than
one story and not projecting more than five feet, steps and balconies.
   BUILDING COVERAGE — The maximum horizontal covered area of a building at or
above grade. [Added 8-12-1997 by Ord. No. 947]
   BUILDING LINE — The line which establishes the minimum depth of front yard
for the particular district as measured from the ultimate right-of-way line .
   BUILDING, PRINCIPAL — A building in which is conducted the principal use of
the lot on which it is situated.
   BUILD-TO LINE — The line which defines the placement of the building,
measured from the curb line on which the building fronts. [Added 5-14-2019 by
Ord. No. 19-1351]
   CELL SITE — A tract or parcel of land that contains a cellular communication
antenna as the principal use , its support structure , accessory building (s),
and parking, and may include other uses associated with and ancillary to
cellular communication transmission. [Added 8-13-1996 by Ord. No. 915]
   CELLULAR COMMUNICATION ANTENNA — Any assemblage of transceiving antennae
designed and used solely for the transmission and receipt of telephonic,
cellular, computer or similar signals of subscribers to the system. [Added 8-
13-1996 by Ord. No. 915]
   CLUB - A nonprofit organization or association of persons who are bona fide
members paying annual dues, and their guests, organized for social,
intellectual, recreational or athletic purposes, not involving the sale of
alcohol. [Added 6-14-2011 by Ord. No. 11-1241]
   COMMERCIAL SCHOOL — A private for profit vocational, avocational, trade,
arts, performing arts, or other skill-teaching institution or training provider
that is not a primary, secondary, or post-secondary school as defined herein.
[Added 4-16-2002 by Ord. No. 1087]
   COMMON FACILITIES — All the real property and improvements set aside for the
common use and enjoyment of the residents, including, but not limited to,
buildings , open land , private roads , parking areas, walkways, recreation
areas, landscaped areas, drainage easements and any utilities that service more
than one unit, such as sewer and water facilities. [Added 8-12-1997 by Ord. No.
947]
   COMMUNITY RESIDENTIAL PROGRAM — An establishment, sometimes referred to as a
community living arrangement or a group home, licensed by the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania, that provides a home for not more than eight handicapped
individuals, not fitting the definition of family , excluding staff who do not
reside on the property, who live and cook together as a single housekeeping
unit. This definition shall not include a facility housing persons released
from or under the jurisdiction of a government bureau of corrections or similar
institution. “Handicapped” means with respect to a person : a physical or
mental impairment which substantially limits one or more of such person ’s
major life activities; a record of having such an impairment; or being regarded
as having such an impairment; but such term does not include current, illegal
use of or addiction to a controlled substance [as defined in Section 102 of the
Controlled Substances Act (21 U.S.C. § 802)]. [Added 10-12-1993 by Ord. No.
858]1
1. Editor’s Note: The definition of “comprehensive plan” which immediately
followed this section, was deleted 1-10- 1995 by Ord. No. 879.
   CONSTRUCTION — The construction, reconstruction, renovation, repair,
extension, expansion, alteration or relocation of a building or structure,
including the placement of manufactured homes. [Added 2-9-2016 by Ord. No. 16-
1313] 
   CONTRIBUTING RESOURCE(S) — A building , structure , site or object that adds
to the historic associations, historic architectural qualities or archeological
values for which a property, neighborhood or district is significant because it
was present during the period of significance, relates to the documented
significance of the property, neighborhood or district and possesses historic
integrity and/or is capable of yielding important information about the period.
[Added 6-14-2011 by Ord. No. 11-1241]
   CULTURAL LANDSCAPE — The minimum essential setting or context in which an
identified Historic Resource retains its historic integrity; “resource” being
constituted by either individual object, site or structure or by multiple
objects, sites or structures (historic district); “setting” including both
natural (trees, streams, slopes, etc.) and man-made features (bridges and
walls, outbuildings, such as spring houses, barns , corn cribs, railroad
tracks, cemetery markers, etc.); “historic integrity” being the unimpaired
state which allows the viewer of the resource to have a better understanding of
the materials and culture of the past. [Added 6-14-2011 by Ord. No. 11-1241]
   CULTURAL STUDIO — A facility used for providing to the public instruction in
the performing arts, limited to dance, music and theater, and the fine arts,
including drawing, painting, photography and sculpture. [Added 6-13-2000 by
Ord. No. 1034]
   DAY — A period of 24 hours as a unit of time, calculated from one midnight
to the next. [Added 1-10-2022 by Ord. No. 23-1382]
   DAY CAMP — A camp for minor children conducted daily but excluding Saturdays
and Sundays. [Amended 1-10-1995 by Ord. No. 879]
   DAY CARE — An out-of-home care provided for: [Amended 10-12-1999 by Ord. No.
1010]
   A.   Children 15 years of age and younger, excluding care provided by
relations, for a part of a twenty-four-hour day. Day-care service for children
shall not include day care shed in a place of worship during religious service.
   B.   Adults who require assistance, for a part of a twenty-four-hour day, to
meet personal needs and who, because of physical or mental infirmity, cannot
themselves meet these needs. Day-care service for adults shall not include care
provided by relations or nursing care.
   DAY-CARE CENTER — A facility which is licensed by the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania and in which care is provided for seven or more children, 16 years
old or younger, at any one time.
   DEED OF DEDICATION — With respect to transferable development rights, the
legal instrument used by a landowner to transfer ownership of a cleared and
stabilized sending parcel , without its associated development credits , to
Upper Dublin Township or its designated agent. [Added 11-26-2013 by Ord. No.
13-1277]
   DEED OF DEVELOPMENT CREDITS — The legal instrument necessary to sever and
transfer development credits currently or previously appurtenant to a sending
parcel in the Transferable Development Rights Overlay District. [Added 11-26-
2013 by Ord. No. 13-1277]
   DETENTION BASIN: A stormwater management structure with a controlled release
rate which is essentially dry while not receiving stormwater. [Added 4-12-2016
by Ord. No. 16-1316]
   DEVELOPABLE ACREAGE — All land is defined as developable acreage except land
area located within existing ultimate right-of-way lines ; noncontiguous land ;
100% of floodplain , wetlands, ponds and lakes; 50% of slopes from 15% to 25%;
85% of slopes over 25%; and 50% of existing utility rights-of-way. [Added 8-12-
1997 by Ord. No. 947; amended 1-17-2006 by Ord. No. 1162]
   DEVELOPMENT — Any man-made change to improved or unimproved real estate,
including but not limited to construction, alteration, or repair of buildings
or other structures; the placement of manufactured homes, streets, paving, and
utilities; mining, dredging, filling, grading, excavation or drilling
operations; and the storage of materials and equipment. [Added 2-9-2016 by Ord.
No. 16-1313]
   DEVELOPMENT CREDITS — Within the Transferable Development Rights Overlay
District, the quantification of a landowner’s right under the Township’s zoning
and development regulations to use a parcel and the structures thereon for a
particular use and/or to develop land and structures thereon to a particular
area density , bulk or height. The terms “development credits” and “development
rights” are synonymous as used herein. [Added 11-26-2013 by Ord. No. 13-1277]
   DEVELOPMENT POTENTIAL — The maximum number of dwelling units and/or square
feet of nonresidential floor area that may be constructed on a given lot in a
specified zoning district in accordance with all the applicable laws and
regulations, including, for example: land use , zoning, stormwater and
floodplain regulations in effect on the date of the development application.
[Added 11-26-2013 by Ord. No. 13-1277]
   DWELLING — A structure designed for and occupied exclusively for residential
purposes, excluding, however, a structure used only for temporary or transient
residence such as hotels , motels, rooming houses, dormitories, institutional
homes and the like.
   A.   DWELLING UNIT — A single unit providing complete independent living
facilities for one or more persons , including permanent provisions for living,
sleeping, eating, cooking and sanitation.
   B.   SINGLE-FAMILY DETACHED DWELLING — A dwelling having only one dwelling
unit from ground to roof, independent outside access and open space on all
sides.
   C.   MULTIPLE DWELLING — A structure or series of connected structures
containing two or more dwelling units in which two or more families live
independently of each other as separate housekeeping units. “Multiple dwelling”
shall include the following:
      (1)   TWIN DWELLING — A single-family semidetached dwelling having only
one dwelling unit from ground to roof, independent outside access and any
portion of only one wall in common with an adjoining dwelling unit .
      (2)   DUPLEX DWELLING — A two-family detached dwelling having no more
than two dwelling units from ground to roof, independent access for each and
open space on all sides.
      (3)   TWIN DUPLEX DWELLING — A multifamily, semidetached dwelling having
no more than two dwelling units from ground to roof, and any portion of no more
than one wall in common with a similar adjoining dwelling , with each unit
having independent access.
      (4)   TOWNHOUSE DWELLING — A single-family attached dwelling containing
only one dwelling unit from ground to roof in a multifamily structure in which
dwelling units may share common walls but shall have independent outside
access. Such unit may be independently owned along with the tract of ground
upon which it is constructed or may be rented as in an apartment development .
In addition, appurtenant areas may or may not be owned, rented or held in some
form of community ownership.
      (5)   TOWNHOUSE STRUCTURE — A multifamily structure containing two or
more townhouse dwellings . Such dwellings may share common walls or be
otherwise connected in a series or group. A development of townhouse dwellings
shall average not more than eight units per townhouse structure or group.
      (6)   APARTMENT BUILDING — A structure containing three or more
individual dwelling units , each of which share common structural elements,
areas and access, and which is designed to be operated as a single operating
unit. The residents of such structure may be the tenants of the owner of the
structure or such structure ’s individual unit may be owned under the
condominium form of ownership.
      (7)   CONDOMINIUM — A multifamily dwelling as defined in 68 Pa.C.S.A. §
3103. [Amended 1-10-1995 by Ord. No. 879]
      (8)   STACKED TOWNHOUSE DWELLING — Two single-family attached dwellings
that are arranged vertically, typically two stories for each dwelling unit ,
with each dwelling unit  having independent outside access. Such unit may be
independently owned or may be rented as in an apartment development . In
addition, appurtenant areas may or may not be owned, rented or held in some
form of community ownership. [Added 3-11-2025 by Ord. No. 25-1400]
   EMERGENCY MEDICAL SERVICES — The services utilized in responding to the
needs of an individual for immediate medical care in order to prevent loss of
life or aggravation of physiological or psychological illness or injury,
including ambulance services and including other services provided for in the
Emergency Medical Services Act, act of July 3, 1985, P.L. 164, No. 45, as
amended, 35 P.S. § 6921 et seq. [Added 11-5-1997 by Ord. No. 956]
   EPHEMERAL STREAM — A stream or part of a stream that flows only in direct
response to precipitation; it receives little or no water from springs, melting
snow, or other sources; its channel is at all times above the water table.
[Added 12-13-2022 by Ord. No. 22-1377]
   ESTATE LOT — A large, privately owned lot comprising all or part of an area
of open land . The purpose of the estate lot is to provide surrounding
residents with visual access to open land , while keeping the land under
private ownership and maintenance. Only a small portion of the estate lot may
be developed; the remainder may be farmed or left in its natural state. Public
access to estate lots is not required. [Added 8-12-1997 by Ord. No. 947]
   EXHIBITION CENTER — A building or group of buildings used for trade,
consumer and recreational shows and expositions which cater to commercial and
leisure time interests through the exposition marketplace and not primarily
through retail sales. [Added 7-14-1992 by Ord. No. 824]
   EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION - A manufactured home park or
subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on
which manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the
installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site
grading or the pouring of concrete pads) if completed before the effective date
of this Article. [Added 2-9-2016 by Ord. No. 16-1313]
   EXISTING STRUCTURE OR EXISTING CONSTRUCTION - A structure, for which the
“start of construction” commenced before the effective date of the FIRM. [Added
2-9-2016 by Ord. No. 16-1313]
   EXPANSION TO AN EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION - The
preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing
the lots on which manufactured homes are to be affixed, including the
installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site
grading or the pouring of concrete pads. [Added 2- 9-2016 by Ord. No. 16-1313]
   FAMILY — Any number of individuals living and cooking together as a single
housekeeping unit, including not more than three unrelated individuals. The
term “unrelated individual” shall include any individual who is unrelated by
blood, marriage, or legal adoption to one or more other individuals in the
unit, but it excludes domestic servants. The term “family” shall include a
community residential program for not more than three unrelated individuals.
[Amended 1-10- 1995 by Ord. No. 879; 10-12-1993 by Ord. No. 858]
   FLOOD — A temporary, partial or complete inundation of normally dry land
areas. [Added 2- 9-2016 by Ord. No. 16-1313]
   FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM) — The official map on which the Federal
Emergency Management Agency or Federal Insurance Administration has delineated
both the areas of special flood hazards and the risk premium zones applicable
to the community. [Added 2-9-2016 by Ord. No. 16-1313]
   FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY (FIS) — The official report provided by the Federal
Insurance Administration that includes flood profiles, the Flood Insurance Rate
Map, the Flood Boundary and Floodway Map, and the water surface elevation of
the Base Flood. [Added 2-9-2016 by Ord. No. 16-1313]
   FLOODPLAIN — A relatively flat or low land area which is subject to partial
or complete inundation from an adjoining or nearby stream, river or
watercourse; and/or any area subject to the unusual and rapid accumulation of
surface waters from any source. [Added 2-9-2016 by Ord. No. 16-1313]
   FLOODPROOFING — Any combination of structural and nonstructural additions,
changes, or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate flood damage to
real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary facilities,
structures and their contents. [Added 2-9-2016 by Ord. No. 16-1313]
   FLOODWAY — The channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land
areas that must be preserved to discharge the base flood without cumulatively
increasing the water surface elevation more than one foot. [Added 2-9-2016 by
Ord. No. 16-1313]
   FLOODWAY FRINGE — That part of the floodplain adjacent to and extending from
the Floodway and subject to inundation by the 100-year flood. [Added 2-9-2016
by Ord. No. 16- 1313]
   FREEBOARD — A factor of safety usually expressed in feet above a flood level
for purposes of floodplain management. [Added 2-9-2016 by Ord. No. 16-1313]
   GARAGE, PRIVATE — A building or part of a principal building used for the
storage of motor vehicles. Detached garages shall be considered accessory
buildings ; attached garages shall be part of the principal use . [Amended 1-
10-1995 by Ord. No. 879]
   A.   GARAGE, PUBLIC — A building , other than a private or storage garage ,
one or more stories in height, used solely for the commercial storage, service
or repair of motor vehicles.
   B.   GARAGE, STORAGE — A building not a private or public garage , one story
in height, used solely for the storage of motor vehicles (other than trucks),
but not for the sale, service or repair thereof, nor for the sale of fuel,
accessories, or supplies.
   GARAGE, REPAIR — A building or structure in which a business, service or
industry involving the maintenance, repairs, servicing or painting of vehicles
is conducted or rendered. [Added 3-11- 2008 by Ord. No. 1195, § 2]
   GASOLINE SERVICE STATION — Any area of land, including structures thereon,
or any building or part thereof, that is used for the sale of gasoline or other
motor vehicle fuel or accessories and which may or may not include facilities
for lubricating, washing or otherwise servicing motor vehicles, but which shall
not include painting or body and fender repairs.
   GREEN ROOF — An engineered, multilayered roofing system sustaining the
growth of plants on a rooftop while protecting the integrity of the underlying
structure designed to provide stormwater management and other environmental
benefits. The components of a green roof consist of a waterproofing membrane,
root barrier, drainage layer, retention layer, filter fabric, growing medium
and plants. [Added 5-14-2013 by Ord. No. 13-1273]
   GREEN SPACE — The area of the lot that includes public space, as well as
open yard areas that are landscaped, as well as those portions of a lot that
include natural features such as meadows, woodlands, streams, ponds, and other
like type conserved resources. [Added 5-14-2019 by Ord. No. 19-1351]
   GROCERY STORE — As applied to the DO Dresher Overlay District, a retail
store that has more than 40% of its gross sales floor area devoted to the sale
of a variety of fresh and packaged food items. [Added 5-14-2013 by Ord. No. 13-
1273]
   GROSS FLOOR AREA — The total floor area measured to the outside of the
exterior walls of a building , exclusive of open courts. [Added 11-13-1990 by
Ord. No. 789]
   GROSS VEHICLE WEIGHT — The value specified on the federal weight
certification label by the manufacturer as the loaded weight of a single
vehicle. [Added 9-14-1993 by Ord. No. 849]
   HEIGHT OF BUILDING — A building ’s vertical measurement from the mean of the
ground surrounding the building to a point midway between the highest and
lowest points of the roof.
   HIGH WATER MARK — For ponds, lakes, and other bodies of water, the high
water mark is delineated at the highest elevation of water retained within the
water body. For wetlands, the high water mark is defined as the outer limit of
the wetland. [Added 12-13-2022 by Ord. No. 22- 1377]
   HIGHEST ADJACENT GRADE — The highest natural elevation of the ground surface
prior to construction next to the proposed walls of a structure. [Added 2-9-
2016 by Ord. No. 16-1313]
   HISTORIC RESOURCE — A building , structure , or site which is historically
or archaeologically significant, or which has significant architectural,
engineering, scientific, economic, agricultural, educational, social,
political, military, cultural or aesthetic merit, including those buildings ,
structures , and sites that are classified by Federal, State or local
government authority as historic buildings or sites. [Added 6-14-2011 by Ord.
No. 11-1241]
   HISTORIC RESOURCE HOME OCCUPATION — A home occupation which involves not
more than eight commercial visits per day. There may be one employee in
addition to the practitioner for every 500 square feet of gross floor area
devoted to the home occupation . [Added 6-14-2011 by Ord. No. 11-1241]
   HOME DAY CARE — The provision of day-care services, in a person ’s primary
place of residence, for not more than six children 16 years old or younger.
   HOME OCCUPATION — Any lawful occupation constituting, either entirely or
partly, the livelihood of a person , which is conducted in the practitioner’s
principal residence as an incidental use . Two people sharing a dwelling unit
as their principal residence shall each be permitted to practice. [Amended 7-8-
2003 by Ord. No. 1113]
   HOMEOWNERS’ ASSOCIATION — A community association combining individual
homeowner ship with shared use or ownership of common property and facilities.
The homeowner owns the lot , including the interior and exterior of the
individual home, while the association owns and maintains the common facilities
. [Added 8-12-1997 by Ord. No. 947]
   HORIZONTAL FLOODPLAIN BUFFER AREA — The area adjacent to the Floodplain
Conservation District that is up to one foot above the base flood elevation.
[Added 2-9-2016 by Ord. No. 16-1313]
   HOTEL — A building or group of buildings , detached or semidetached,
containing rooms or suites used for the purpose of furnishing for compensation
more or less temporary lodging to the public with or without meals, and having
lodging accommodations for 10 or more persons . Such building or buildings may
include additional, subordinate uses such as a business center for the use of
occupants, which may contain facilities such as a computer center,
telecommunications availability, copy production; meeting and conference rooms;
fitness center; restaurant , with or without a liquor license; retail space of
not more than 10% of the floor area, and an apartment for the manager or
caretaker. Any such use provided by the hotel primarily for the comfort or
convenience of its guests, including cooking fixtures, shall be a use
subordinate to the principal purpose of the hotel use. This use may include
extended stay accommodations for transient nonresidents. [Amended 10-13-1998 by
Ord. No. 976; 5-14-2019 by Ord. No. 19-1351]
   IMMEDIATE FAMILY — One who stands in direct lineal descent, i.e.,
grandparent, parent, child or grandchild of a person or spouse. [Added 3-12-
2002 by Ord. No. 1080]
   IMPERVIOUS SURFACE — Any material placed on or above the earth, or any
material change in the natural surface of the earth, which substantially
reduces or prevents the natural infiltration of water. Examples include but are
not limited to structures , including eaves, roofs, and roof overhangs; roads ;
parking areas (whether hard surfaced or not); driveways; sidewalks; walkways;
patios; sports courts; pools; and, the horizontal surface area of aboveground
stormwater management structures , including retention and detention basins .
Stormwater basins designed and constructed to allow for infiltration shall not
be considered as impervious surface. Patios designed and constructed with
pervious materials shall not be considered as impervious surface.  [Amended 1-
10- 1995 by Ord. No. 879; 9-14-2004 by Ord. No. 1138; 4-12-2016 by Ord. No. 16-
1316]
   IMPROVEMENT — Any man-made structure , object and/or area constituting a
physical addition to or alteration of real property. [Added 3-11-2008 by Ord.
No. 1195, § 2]
   INDOOR RECREATION — An indoor, enclosed facility such as a gymnasium or
natatorium designed to accommodate athletic and recreational activities such as
bowling, skating, swimming, court sports, weightlifting, fitness programs, and
similar uses which are operated on a commercial or membership basis primarily
for the benefit of patrons who do not reside on the same lot or premises.
[Added 4-16-2002 by Ord. No. 1087]
   INDOOR STORAGE FACILITY — An enclosed building that consists of or contains
varying sizes of individual, compartmentalized, self-contained, and controlled
access stalls or spaces, which stalls or spaces are leased or rented for the
storage of business, private, or household goods. All storage must be contained
within the building. An office related to the conduct of the self-storage
business is permitted as an accessory use. There shall be no retail business
activities other than those directly associated with the storage units
business. No habitation of humans or storage of animals shall be permitted. No
storage of explosive, toxic, radioactive or highly flammable materials shall be
permitted. [Added 3-23-2021 by Ord. No. 21-1368]
   INTERMITTENT STREAM - A stream that flows only when it receives water from
rainfall runoff or springs, or from some surface source such as melting snow.
[Added 12-13-2022 by Ord. No. 22-1377]
   JUNKYARD — A lot , land or structure or part thereof used primarily for the
collection, storage and sale of wastepaper, rags, scrap metal or discarded
materials; or for the collection, dismantling, storage and salvaging of
machinery or vehicles not in running condition and for the sale of parts
thereof. The term “junkyard” shall not include recycling centers. [Amended 1-
10- 1995 by Ord. No. 879]
   LICENSED DAY-CARE CENTER — A facility which is licensed by the Commonwealth
of Pennsylvania and in which care is provided for either seven or more
children, 15 years old or younger, at any one time, or four or more adults, at
any one time. [Added 10-12-1999 by Ord. No. 1010]
   LIGHT INDUSTRIAL USE — A use that involves shipping/transportation, a flex
building (combination of office and warehouse, but excluding self-storage
units), assembly and/or manufacturing activity with processed materials to
produce items of high value per unit weight, such as foods, beverages, personal
care products, cosmetics, drugs, clothes, shoes, furniture, arts and crafts,
and home appliances. [Added 5-14-2019 by Ord. No. 19-1351]
   LOADING SPACE — An off-street space not less than 11 feet wide, 35 feet long
and having a minimum clear height of 14 feet exclusive of access area,
accessible from a street or way, in a building or on a lot , for the temporary
use of vehicles while loading or unloading merchandise or materials.
   LOT — A designated parcel, tract or area of land established by a plat or
otherwise as permitted by law and to be used, developed or built upon as a unit
pursuant to 53 P.S. § 10107. [Amended 1-10-1995 by Ord. No. 879]
   LOT AREA — The total horizontal area of a lot lying within the lot lines .
[Amended 1-10-1995 by Ord. No. 879; 1-17-2006 by Ord. No. 1162]
   LOT LINE — A property boundary line of any lot held in single and separate
ownership, except that, in the case of any lot abutting a street , the lot line
for such portion of the lot as abuts the street shall be deemed to be the same
as the right-of-way line and shall not be the center line of the street or any
other line within the right-of-way line even though such may be the property
boundary line. [Amended 1-10-1995 by Ord. No. 879]
   LOWEST FLOOR — The lowest floor of the lowest fully enclosed area (including
basement of a building). An unfinished, flood resistant, partially enclosed
area, used solely for parking of vehicles, building access, and incidental
storage in an area other than a basement area is not considered the lowest
floor of a building provided that such space is not designed and built so that
the structure is in violation of the applicable non-elevation design
requirements. [Added 2- 9-2016 by Ord. No. 16-1313]
   MANUFACTURED HOME (also referred to as MOBILE HOME) — A structure,
transportable in one or more sections, which is built on a permanent chassis,
and is designed for occupancy as a dwelling, office, school, or other place of
assembly with or without a permanent foundation when attached to required
utilities. The term includes park trailers, travel trailers, recreational and
other similar vehicles which are placed on a site for more than 180 consecutive
days. [Added 2-9-2016 by Ord. No. 16-1313]
   MANUFACTURED HOME LOT — A parcel of land improved with the necessary utility
connections and other appurtenances necessary for the placement thereon of a
single manufactured home. [Added 2-9-2016 by Ord. No. 16-1313]
   MANUFACTURED HOME PARK — A parcel of land under single ownership which has
been planned and improved for the placement of manufactured homes for
nontransient use, consisting of two or more manufactured home lots.
Manufactured home parks shall include manufactured home subdivisions and
developments. [Added 2-9-2016 by Ord. No. 16-1313]
   MEDICAL FACILITY — A unit of or a building constructed and to be used for
the care of sick, wounded, including the study of medicine or the science and
art of the investigation, prevention, cure and alleviation of disease; such use
shall not include facilities for the housing of patients, but may include
dwelling quarters for one qualified medical attendant and his immediate family
.
   MICRO FACILITY — An antenna that is either: no more than four feet in
height, with an area of not more than 580 square inches; or if a tubular
antenna , no more than four inches in diameter and no more than six feet in
length, with an equipment facility (structures used to contain ancillary
equipment such as cabinets or shelters) capable of being mounted onto a
supporting structure . [Added 7-14-1998 by Ord. No. 974]
   MINOR REPAIR — The replacement of existing work with equivalent materials
for the purpose of routine maintenance and upkeep, but not including the
cutting away of any wall, partition or portion thereof, the removal or cutting
of any structural beam or bearing support, or the removal or change of any
required means of egress, or rearrangement of parts of a structure affecting
the exit-way requirements. Minor repairs shall not include addition to,
alteration of, replacement or relocation of any standpipe, water supply, sewer,
drainage, drain leader, gas, oil, waste, vent, or similar piping, electric
wiring or mechanical or other work affecting public health or general safety.
[Added 2-9-2016 by Ord. No. 16-1313]
   MIXED USE DEVELOPMENT — A development of different land use categories
within a single parcel. To qualify as mixed-use , no one use of a parcel may
utilize more than 80% of the building area . For purposes of calculating the
use limitation above, accessory parking shall not be included as a separate use
. Uses shall provide a variety of peak hour pedestrian and vehicular activity
times. [Added 2-13-2007 by Ord. No. 1182]
   MOTEL - A building or a group of two or more detached or semidetached
buildings containing bedroom, bathroom and closet space, without cooking
fixtures, where each unit has convenient access to on-site parking for the use
of the unit’s occupants. Such units, with the exception of an apartment for the
manager or caretaker, shall be designed, intended, and used principally for
providing sleeping accommodations for automobile transients and suitable for
occupancy at all seasons of the year. This use includes a motor inn and a motor
lodge. [Amended 5-14-2019 by Ord. No. 19-1351]
   NATURAL FEATURE — A component of a landscape existing or maintained as a
part of the natural environment and having ecological value in contributing
beneficially to air quality, erosion control, groundwater recharge, noise
abatement, visual amenities, growth of wildlife, human recreation, reduction of
climatic stress and energy costs. Such features include those which, if
disturbed, may cause hazards or stress to life, property and the natural
environment. Examples include groundwater recharge zones, springs, streams,
wetlands, woodlands, prime wildlife habitats and areas constituting high
recreational, scenic, historic, and esthetic value which exist on developed or
undeveloped land. [Added 11-14-2006 by Ord. No. 1173]
   NEIGHBORHOOD — Under Open Space Preservation District, a development
consisting of between five and 25 single-family detached dwellings surrounded
by open land . [Added 8-12-1997 by Ord. No. 947]
   NEW CONSTRUCTION — Structures for which the start of constructio commenced
on or after the effective date of this Article, and includes any subsequent
improvements thereto. Any construction started after January 3, 1979, and
before the effective date of this Article is subject to the ordinances in
effect at the time the permit or other approval was issued, provided the start
of constructio was commenced within 180 days of permit or other approval
issuance. [Added 2-9-2016 by Ord. No. 16-1313]
   NEW MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION — A manufactured home park or
subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on
which the manufactured homes are to be placed (including at a minimum, the
installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site
grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is initiated after the effective date
of this Article. [Added 2-9-2016 by Ord. No. 16-1313]
   NONCONFORMING — A building or other structure , use or lot which, by reason
of design, size or use , does not conform to the requirements of the district
or districts in which it is located.
   NONCONFORMING LOT — A lot the area or dimension of which was lawful prior to
the adoption or amendment of this chapter, but which fails to conform to the
requirements of the zoning district in which it is located by reasons of such
adoption or amendment. [Added 1-10-1995 by Ord. No. 879]
   NONCONFORMING STRUCTURE — A structure or part of a structure manifestly not
designed to comply with the applicable use or extent of use provisions in this
chapter or amendment heretofore or hereafter enacted, where such structure
lawfully existed prior to the enactment of such chapter or amendment or prior
to the application of such chapter or amendment to its location by reason of
annexation. Such “nonconforming  structures ” include but are not limited to
nonconforming  signs . [Added 1-10-1995 by Ord. No. 879]
   NONCONFORMING USE — A use , whether of land or of structure , which does not
comply with the applicable use provisions in this chapter or any amendment
heretofore or hereafter enacted, where such use was lawfully in existence prior
to the enactment of this chapter or such amendment or prior to the application
of such chapter or amendment to its location by reason of annexation. [Added 1-
10-1995 by Ord. No. 879]
   NONCONTIGUOUS LAND — Land separated by roads , or railroads, or land where
the connecting link is less than 50 feet wide. [Added 8-12-1997 by Ord. No.
947]
   ONE-HUNDRED-YEAR FLOOD — A flood that has one chance in 100 or a 1% chance
of being equaled or exceeded in any one year. For the purposes of this chapter,
Base Flood. [Amended 2-14-1995 by Ord. No. 889; 2-9-2016 by Ord. No. 16-1313]
   OPEN LAND — Under Open Space Preservation District, that portion of the
tract that is set aside for the protection of sensitive natural features ,
farmland, scenic views and other unique features. Open land may be accessible
to the residents of the development and the Township or it may contain areas of
farmland or estate lots which are not accessible to the public. [Added 8- 12-
1997 by Ord. No. 947]
   OUTDOOR RECREATION — An outdoor, unenclosed facility designed to accommodate
athletic and recreational activities such as miniature golf, public or private
golf, court sports, field sports, track sports, trail activities, and similar
uses which are operated on a commercial or membership basis primarily for the
benefit of patrons who do not reside on the same lot or premises. [Added 4-16-
2002 by Ord. No. 1087]
   PARKING, RESERVED — Required parking spaces that are shown on a recorded
development plan in dashed lines and that are not installed when the
development is initially constructed, but which must be installed if required
by the Township at some future date. [Added 3-11-2008 by Ord. No. 1195, § 2]
   PARKING SPACE — A reasonably level space, surfaced to whatever extent
necessary to permit use under all weather conditions, or surfaced and sized as
otherwise provided herein, available for the off-street parking of one four-
wheel motor vehicle, exclusive of passageways or other means of circulation or
access to a street . Outdoor parking spaces shall be paved or covered with
gravel or cinders and shall under all circumstances be considered as impervious
surface . Off- street parking shall be permitted only on areas improved as
parking spaces. [Amended 6-11-2002 by Ord. No. 1089]
   PERENNIAL STREAM - A stream that normally has water in its channel at all
times. [Added 12-13-2022 by Ord. No. 22-1377]
   PERFORMANCE STANDARDS — Measures and standards by which the suitability of a
proposed use can be measured by the extent of its external effect.
   PERMIT — A permit, in writing, issued by virtue of this chapter and/or
Chapter 73, Building Construction, of the Township and often referred to either
as a zoning permit, a use or occupancy permit or a building permit.
   PERSON — An individual, partnership, public or private association or
corporation, firm, trust, estate, municipality, governmental unit, public
utility or any other legal entity whatsoever, which is recognized by law as the
subject of rights and duties. [Added 2-9-2016 by Ord. No. 16-1313]
   PERSONAL CARE FACILITY — A commonwealth-licensed, high-density residential
facility consisting of private and semiprivate dwelling units and accessory
uses wherein staff supervision and personal assistance with dressing, bathing,
diet or medication prescribed for self- administration as well as medical
supervision are provided for the residents of the facility only but no hospital
services are provided. [Added 6-14-1994 by Ord. No. 866]
   PERSONAL USE HELIPORT — An area on private land used for landing and takeoff
of helicopters which is restricted to the exclusive use of the owner or lessee
of such land and not for the purpose of operating helicopters for hire or for a
fare.
   PORTABLE STORAGE UNIT — A transportable fully enclosed box-like container,
not an accessory building or shed, which has a maximum size of 8 feet by 8 feet
by 16 feet and which is:
   A.   Designed for the temporary outside storage of personal property,
household items, wares, building materials or merchandise.
   B.   Rented to the owner or occupant of the site where it is placed in use.
   C.   Delivered and removed by truck.
[Added 10-14-2008 by Ord. No. 1205, § 1]
   POST-FIRM STRUCTURE — A structure for which construction or substantial
improvement occurred after January 3, 1979, the initial Flood Insurance Rate
Map (FIRM) for Upper Dublin Township and, as such, would be required to be
compliant with the regulations of the National Flood Insurance Program (NFIP).
[Added 2-9-2016 by Ord. No. 16-1313]
   POST-SECONDARY SCHOOL — A public or private nonprofit school or institution
of higher learning beyond educational grade 12 offering degree, certificate, or
continuing education programs in the arts, sciences, trades, or professions.
[Added 4-16-2002 by Ord. No. 1087]
   POTENTIAL INCREMENTAL DEVELOPMENT — Within the Transferable Development
Rights Overlay District, the amount of additional building area or density that
may be added to a sending parcel beyond that already developed, as per the
Zoning Code regulations in existence on the date Article XXXVI was adopted.
[Added 11-26-2013 by Ord. No. 13-1277]
   PRE-FIRM STRUCTURE — A structure for which construction or substantial
improvement occurred on or before January 3, 1979, the initial Flood Insurance
Rate Map (FIRM) for Upper Dublin Township, and, as such would not be required
to be compliant with the regulations of the National Flood Insurance Program
(NFIP). [Added 2-9-2016 by Ord. No. 16-1313]
   PRESCHOOL — A public, private, or parochial school , not a day-care center
or primary school , offering early childhood education programs such as found
in a nursery school or kindergarten. [Added 4-16-2002 by Ord. No. 1087]
   PRESERVATION AREA — An area or areas of land and/or water set aside to
preserve open land and to protect natural features and cultural landscapes .
The preservation area shall be part of the common open space and shall be free
of paved areas and structures , other than historic sites, permanently
restricted for common enjoyment and recreational use by residents of a or the
general public. [Added 11-14-2006 by Ord. No. 1173]
   PRIMARY SCHOOL — A public, private, or parochial school teaching
kindergarten and/or one or more educational grades of 1 through 8. [Added 4-16-
2002 by Ord. No. 1087]
   PRINCIPAL RESIDENTIAL USE — A single family dwelling ; the primary
residential use on a particular lot . [Added 8-12-2014 by Ord. No. 14-1291]
   PUBLIC SPACE — The area of land which invites public use and occupancy,
including a plaza or other like-type outdoor gathering area, and trails where
applicable, as required in the GFW District, and as regulated in Chapter 212,
Article IV, §
212-35.2 of the
Design Standards: Appendix A in the Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance.
Impervious surface within required public space shall be included for
stormwater management design but shall not count for purposes of zoning
calculations. [Added 5-14-2019 by Ord. No. 19-1351]
   PUBLIC UTILITIES FACILITIES — A building or structure and its equipment used
for the transmission and exchange of telephone, radio telephone, gas power,
sewer and water facilities; provided, however, that in a residential district
these shall not include public business facilities, storage of materials,
trucks or repair facilities or housing of repair crews.
   RECEIVING PARCEL — A parcel of land in the receiving zone where the
landowner/authorized agent may attach development credits , directly or by
intermediate transfers, from a sending parcel , and on which increased density
and/or intensity is allowed by reason of the transfer of development credits .
[Added 11-26-2013 by Ord. No. 13-1277]
   RECEIVING ZONE — A designated area in the Transferable Development Rights
Overlay District, not including a sending zone , in which development credits
that were originally associated with a sending parcel may be associated with a
receiving parcel . [Added 11-26-2013 by Ord. No. 13-1277]
   RECREATIONAL VEHICLE (also referred to as a TRAILER HOUSE) — a vehicle which
is
      A.   Built on a single chassis; and
      B.   Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light-duty
truck; and
      C.   Not designed for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living
quarters for recreation, camping, travel, or seasonal use. [Added 2-9-2016 by
Ord. No. 16-1313]
   RECREATIONAL VEHICLE PARK (also referred to as a TRAILER HOUSE PARK) — Any
premises used as a parking space for more than one recreational vehicle. [Added
2-9-2016 by Ord. No. 16-1313]
   REDEVELOPMENT AREA — A census tract or group of census tracts eligible for a
revitalization program and identified in an adopted revitalization plan. [Added
2-9-2016 by Ord. No. 16-1313]
   REGULATORY FLOOD ELEVATION — The regulatory flood elevation is the elevation
to which development is regulated for purposes of elevation and/or dry
floodproofing. It is equal to the base flood elevation or estimated flood
height as determined using simplified methods plus a freeboard safety factor of
two feet. [Added 2-9-2016 by Ord. No. 16-1313]
   REPETITIVE LOSS — Flood related damages sustained by a structure on two
separate occasions during a 10-year period for which the cost of repairs at the
time of each such flood event, on average, equals or exceeds 25% of the market
value of the structure before the damages occurred. [Added 2-9-2016 by Ord. No.
16-1313]
   RESIDENTIAL CONVERSION — The conversion of a single-family dwelling into a
dwelling for a greater number of families . [Added 6-13-2000 by Ord. No. 1034]
   RESTAURANT — A building or an area within a building with four or more
indoor tables (more than 12 chairs), used primarily for the purpose of
furnishing to the public food to be consumed on the premises, but not including
a restaurant with drive-in services, a restaurant used primarily for take-out
services or a restaurant opened before 6:30 a.m. or after 11:00 p.m. on a
single day. [Added 6-13-2000 by Ord. No. 1034]
   RETENTION BASIN: A stormwater management structure with a controlled release
rate and which maintains a constant water level while not receiving stormwater.
[Added 4-12-2016 by Ord. No. 16-1316]
   RIGHT-OF-WAY — Land used or intended for use as a street , alley or
crosswalk. [Added 1-10- 1995 by Ord. No. 879]
   RIGHT-OF-WAY LINE — The legal boundary of a street , road , highway or alley
, whether publicly or privately held. [Added 1-17-2006 by Ord. No. 1162]
   RIPARIAN CORRIDOR — A vegetated or natural area directly adjacent to (or
surrounding) a water body, including ponds, lakes and wetlands, that serves a
variety of functions important to the health and welfare of humans and the
environment, including filtering sediment before it enters a water body;
protecting streambanks from erosion ; providing a storage area for floodwaters;
providing food and habitat for fish and wildlife; providing shade to regulate
water temperature; and, preserving open space and aesthetic surroundings. A
riparian corridor  is determined by a horizontal measurement extending 50 feet
from the top of bank or high-water mark of the water body, whichever distance
is greater. [Added 12-13-2022 by Ord. No. 22- 1377]
   ROADSIDE STANDS — A temporary structure not exceeding 10 feet in height and
100 square feet in area.
   SANITARY SEWERS — The sanitary sewer system and appurtenant facilities
constructed and laid out in accordance with the regulations of and under the
supervision of the Township. [Amended 1-10-1995 by Ord. No. 879]
   SATELLITE DISH ANTENNA — A device incorporating a reflective surface that is
solid, open mesh or bar configured and is in the shape of a shallow dish, cone,
horn or cornucopia. Such device shall be used to transmit and/or receive radio
or electromagnetic waves between terrestrially and/or orbitally based uses .
This definition is meant to include but not be limited to what are commonly
referred to as satellite earth stations, TRVOs and microwave antennas . [Added
10-14-1986 by Ord. No. 713]
   SCHOOL — Any public, parochial or private place of instruction, including
institutions of higher learning, having regular sessions, with regularly
employed instructors and which teaches those academic subjects that are
fundamental and essential in general education and which provide kindergarten,
elementary, secondary stages of education or a vocational school, under the
supervision of a state or lawfully constituted ecclesiastical governing body
and with standards of instruction meeting the requirements of the Commonwealth
of Pennsylvania, but excluding any privately operated schools of trade,
vocation, advocations and business.
   SECONDARY SCHOOL — A public, private, or parochial school teaching
educational grade 9 and/or one or more educational grades of 10 through 12.
[Added 4-16-2002 by Ord. No. 1087]
   SENDING PARCEL — A parcel of land in the sending zone from which the
landowner may sever development credits , and after which those development
credits that are severed and transferred may only be used for certain limited
activities. [Added 11-26-2013 by Ord. No. 13-1277]
   SENDING ZONE — A designated area in the Transferable Development Rights
Overlay District in which development credits associated with a sender parcel
may be severed from the sending parcel and separately transferred for use in a
designated receiving zone . [Added 11-26-2013 by Ord. No. 13-1277]
   SENIOR ASSISTED LIVING RESIDENCE — An institutional home providing residence
for persons age 62 and over, regulated by the Commonwealth as an assisted
living residence or a personal care home, as defined in the Pennsylvania Code,
which consists of private residential units and accessory uses, provides
supportive social residential services such as meals, housekeeping, medication
management, dressing and grooming assistance, security and twenty-four-hour
monitoring, an emergency call system, wellness promotion, exercise programs,
local transportation, laundry services and social and recreational programs,
together with accessory uses customarily incidental to senior assisted living
residences. A senior assisted living residence does not provide in-house
skilled nursing home services or hospital services. [Added 9-12-1995 by Ord.
No. 895; Amended 8-11-2020 by Ord. No. 20-1361, § 1]
   SERVICE RETAIL — A business focused on the sale of intangible personal
services directly to customers, including the sale of goods incidental to and
related to such services. [Added 5-14-2019 by Ord. No. 19-1351]
   SETBACK LINE — A line establishing the minimum distance (setback) of a
building or structure to a property boundary line. Where the boundary line
abuts a street , the setback line shall be measured to the ultimate right-of-
way line , or, where no ultimate right-of-way line has been established, then
to the right-of-way line . [Added 1-10-1995 by Ord. No. 879; amended 1-17-2006
by Ord. No. 1162]
   SIGN — A structure , building wall or other outdoor surface or any device
used for visual communication which is used for the purpose of bringing the
subject thereof to the attention of the public or to display, identify and
publicize the name and product or service of any person , exclusive of
supporting members that bear no message. [Amended 7-10-2001 by Ord. No. 1066]
   SIGN AREA [Added 7-10-2001 by Ord. No. 1066] —
   A.   The “area of a sign ” shall mean the area of all lettering, wording and
accompanying designs, logos and symbols, together with the background on which
they are displayed (whether such background is open or closed), but excluding
any supporting framework and bracing which are solely incidental to the display
itself, provided that the same do not contain any lettering, wording or
symbols.
   B.   Where the sign consists of individual letters, designs or symbols
attached to a building , awning, wall or window, the area shall be that of the
smallest rectangle which encompasses all of the letters, designs and symbols.
   C.   Where a sign consists of a double-face with sign faces parallel with
each other and facing in opposite directions, only one side shall be considered
in the calculation of area.
   SIGN HEIGHT — The distance from the highest portion of the sign to the mean
grade at the base of the sign . [Added 7-10-2001 by Ord. No. 1066]
   SIGN SETBACK AREA — The area parallel to a paved street and within a
distance of six feet from its nearest edge or within the area between the edge
of the paved street and the opposite edge of an adjacent sidewalk or within the
required sight triangle at an intersecting street . [Added 7-10-2001 by Ord.
No. 1066]
   SIGN TYPES [Added 7-10-2001 by Ord. No. 1066] —
      ANIMATED SIGN — A sign with action or motion, flashing or color changes
requiring electrical energy, but not including window displayed computer
monitors or wind-actuated elements such as flags, banners or novelty items. An
animated sign shall not include a sign displaying alternating time and
temperature messages at intervals of no less than two seconds nor shall it
include a “message board” displaying a message or visual impression which
remains unchanged for no less than ten seconds. However, it shall include signs
the content of which changes more rapidly than provided herein.
      AWNING SIGN — A sign painted on, printed on or attached flat against the
surface of an awning.
      BUSINESS SIGN — An on-premise sign which advertises or otherwise directs
attention to a business, commodity, service, industry or other activity which
is sold, offered or conducted, other than incidentally, on the premises upon
which the sign is located, or to which it is affixed.
      DIRECTORY SIGN — A sign on which the names and location of the occupants
or the use of a building are given, including office building and church
directories.
      FREESTANDING SIGN — A self-supporting sign resting on or supported by
means of poles or standards, either on the ground or on the roof of a building
.
      IDENTIFICATION SIGN — A sign whose copy is limited to the name of a
building , institution or person and/or to the activity or occupation being
identified.
      INCIDENTAL SIGN — A directional sign of a public service nature which
contains no advertising.
      MARQUEE SIGN — A sign attached to or supported by a marquee structure .
      MONUMENT SIGN — A freestanding sign resting on the ground supported by or
incorporated within a continuous foundation or structural base.
      OBSCENE SIGN — A sign or symbol which displays or contains obscene
matter. The matter shall be considered obscene if the average person , applying
contemporary community standards, would find the sign or symbol, taken as a
whole, appeals to prurient interest; the sign or symbol depicts or describes,
in a patently offensive way, sexual conduct specifically defined by applicable
state law; and the sign or symbol, taken as a whole, lacks serious literary,
artistic, political or scientific value.
      OFF-PREMISES SIGN — A sign  structure advertising an establishment,
merchandise, service or entertainment which is sold, produced, manufactured or
furnished at a place other than on the property on which said sign is located;
a sign which advertises or otherwise directs attention to an activity not on
the same lot where the sign is located, e.g., billboards.
      ON-PREMISES SIGN — A sign that advertises or otherwise directs attention
to an activity on the same lot where the sign is located.
      PAINTED WALL SIGN — A sign that is applied with paint or similar
substances on the face of a wall.
      PARALLEL WALL SIGN — A sign mounted parallel to a vertical building
surface.
      PERSONAL EXPRESSION SIGN — A sign which displays an individual's
political, religious or personal belief.
      PROJECTING SIGN — A sign mounted to a building surface other than a
parallel sign or a roof sign .
      REVOLVING SIGN — A sign which revolves 180° or more.
      ROOF SIGN — A sign erected upon or above a roof or parapet wall of a
building and which is wholly or partially supported by that building .
      SNIPE SIGN — A permanent or temporary sign or poster affixed to a tree,
fence, utility pole or upon rocks or natural features .
      TEMPORARY SIGN — A sign which advertises community or civic projects,
construction projects, real estate for sale or lease or other special events on
a temporary basis. The following types of signs shall be considered temporary
signs :
         BANNER SIGN — A temporary sign intended to be hung either with or
without frames, possessing characters, letters, illustrations or ornamentation
applied to paper, plastic or fabric of any kind. National flags, flags of
political subdivisions and symbolic or decorative flags of any institution,
residential use or business shall not be considered banners for the purpose of
this chapter.
         CONSTRUCTION SIGN — Any sign giving the name or names of principal
contractors, subcontractors, architects and lending institutions responsible
for construction on the site where the sign is placed.
         DEVELOPMENT SIGN — An on-premises sign on a building or lot which
announces the nature, purpose or name of the prospective building /enterprise.
         DIRECTIONAL SUBDIVISION SIGN — An on-premises or off-premises
directional sign advertising to the public the name of the subdivision project
and the nature of the product offered.
         POLITICAL SIGN — A temporary sign used in connection with a local,
county, state or national election or referendum.
         PORTABLE SIGN — Any sign not permanently attached to the ground or
other permanent structure or a sign designed to be transported, including, but
not limited to, signs designed to be transported by means of wheels; signs
converted to A- or T-frames; menu and sandwich board signs ; balloons used as
signs ; umbrellas used for advertising; and signs attached to or painted on
vehicles parked and visible from the public right-of-way unless said vehicle is
used in the normal day-to-day operations of the business. Portable signs shall
not be illuminated unless conditional use approval is granted by the Board of
Commissioners.
         REAL ESTATE SIGN — A temporary sign which relates to the sale, lease
or rent of the property on which the sign is placed. Open house signs for
property that is for sale shall be considered real estate signs .
         SPECIAL EVENT SIGN — On-premises window signs , banners or
commemorative flags which advertise a grand opening or other special event.
         STREET BANNER SIGN — Any banner sign that is stretched across and hung
over a public right-of-way .
         WINDOW SIGN — Any sign affixed to or visible through a window and
intended to be viewed from the outside.
      TRAILER SIGN — Any sign that is erected upon a structure having wheels or
rollers facilitating movement from one location to another.
      VEHICULAR SIGN — Any vehicle to which a sign is affixed in such a manner
that the carrying of the sign is no longer incidental to the vehicle's purpose
but becomes a primary purpose in itself. An example is an empty tractor trailer
with advertising painted on its side, left for an extended period of time in
front of the business premises that is advertised on the trailer.
   SPECIAL EXCEPTION — Permission or approval granted by the Zoning Hearing
Board in accordance with §
255-173 thereof, in situations where provision therefor is made by the terms of
this chapter.
   SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA (SFHA) — An area in the floodplain subject to a 1%
or greater chance of flooding in any given year. It is shown on the Flood
Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) as Zone A, AO, A1-A30, AE, A99, or AH. [Added 2-9-
2016 by Ord. No. 16-1313]
   SPECIAL FLOODPLAIN AREA — An area identified as Zone AE in the Flood
Insurance Study, where 100-year flood elevations have been provided, but no
floodway has been delineated. [Added 2-9-2016 by Ord. No. 16-1313]
   START OF CONSTRUCTION — Includes substantial improvement and other proposed
new development and means the date the permit was issued, provided the actual
start of construction, repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition,
placement, or other improvement was within 180 days from the date of the permit
and shall be completed within 12 months after the date of issuance of the
permit unless a time extension is granted, in writing, by the Floodplain
Administrator. The actual start means either the first placement of permanent
construction of a structure on a site, such as the pouring of a slab or
footings, the installation of piles, the construction of columns, or any work
beyond the stage of excavation; or the placement of a manufactured home on a
lot. Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as
clearing, grading, and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets
and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings,
piers, or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include
the installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or
sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure. For a
substantial improvement, the actual start of construction means the first
alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building,
whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building.
[Added 2-9-2016 by Ord. No. 16-1313]
   STEALTH — Any wireless communications facility which is designed to be
unobtrusive, including, but not limited to, architecturally screened and or
landscaped antenna arrays and equipment facilities, and support structures
designed to look other than like a support structure , such as a light pole, a
power pole, a component of a building or a tree. [Added 7-14-1998 by Ord. No.
974]
   STORAGE AREA or STRUCTURE — A space or place where goods, materials,
vehicles and/or equipment is placed and kept for more than 24 consecutive
hours. [Added 3-11-2008 by Ord. No. 1195, § 2]
   STREAM — A natural watercourse . [Added 12-13-2022 by Ord. No. 22-1377]
   STREET — Includes street, avenue, boulevard, road , highway, freeway,
parkway, lane, alley , viaduct and any other ways used or intended to be used
by vehicular traffic or pedestrians, whether public or private, pursuant to 53
P.S. § 10107, and shown on the Official Street Map. The various classifications
of streets shall be as follows:
      (1)   ALLEY— An unnamed private easement less than 18 feet in width that
is permanently reserved and primarily designed to serve as a secondary access
to the rear or side of properties whose principal frontage is on some other
right of way .
      (2)   INTERNAL STREET — A street privately owned and maintained and not
intended to be dedicated to the Township that is used as the principal means of
access to abutting lots within a residential development consisting of mobile
homes or multiple dwellings .
      (3)   MINOR STREETS — Local routes serving as a means of vehicular travel
primarily to give access to abutting properties and not intended to carry
through traffic.
      (4)   TERTIARY STREETS — Routes serving as a means of vehicular travel
connecting local neighborhoods and minor streets to secondary streets ,
providing access to abutting properties and not intended to carry through
traffic except to the nearest primary or secondary road .
      (5)   SECONDARY STREETS — Feeder or collector routes serving as means of
vehicular travel linking local communities, connecting neighborhoods to primary
streets and designed to distribute traffic from tertiary and minor streets .
      (6)   PRIMARY STREETS — Through routes serving as a means of vehicular
travel linking local regions with each other and with points of access to
freeways, carrying a heavy flow of traffic but with controlled access from
intersecting streets and abutting properties.
      (7)   FREEWAY STREETS — Regional routes serving as a means of vehicular
travel connecting major population centers and carrying high volumes of traffic
for considerable distances at maximum safe speed, including limited access
highways.
[Added 11-13-2007 by Ord. No. 1188]
   STREET LINE — The dividing line between a lot and the right-of-way line of a
public or private street . [Amended 1-10-1995 by Ord. No. 879; 1-17-2006 by
Ord. No. 1162]
   STREET OR ROAD — Includes street, avenue, boulevard, road, highway, freeway,
parkway, lane, alley , viaduct and any other ways used or intended to be used
by vehicular traffic or pedestrians, whether public or private, pursuant to 53
P.S. § 10107. [Amended 1-10-1995 by Ord. No. 879]
   STREETSCAPE — The space between buildings along a street, including the
street, curbs, sidewalks, crosswalks, street trees, street lights, and (where
permitted) on-street parking. [Added 5-14-2019 by Ord. No. 19-1351]
   STRUCTURAL ALTERATION — Any change in or addition to the supporting or
structural members of a building , such as the bearing walls, partitions,
columns, beams, girders or enclosing porches or any change which would convert
an existing building into a different structure or adapt it to a different use
or which, in the case of a nonconforming use , would prolong the life of such
use .
   STRUCTURE — A walled and roofed building, including a gas or liquid storage
tank that is principally above ground, as well as a manufactured home. [Amended
1-10-1995 by Ord. No. 879; 9-14-2004 by Ord. No. 1138; 2-9-2016 by Ord. No. 16-
1313]
   SUBDIVISION — The division or re-division of a lot, tract, or parcel of land
by any means into two or more lots, tracts, parcels or other divisions of land
including changes in existing lot lines for the purpose, whether immediate or
future, of lease, partition by the court for distribution to heirs, or
devisees, transfer of ownership or building or lot development, provided,
however, that the subdivision by lease of land for agricultural purposes into
parcels of more than ten acres, not involving any new street or easement of
access or any residential dwelling, shall be exempted. [Added 2-9-2016 by Ord.
No. 16-1313]
   SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE — Damage from any cause sustained by a structure whereby
the cost of restoring the structure to its before-damaged condition would equal
or exceed 50% or more of the market value of the structure before the damage
occurred. [Added 2-9-2016 by Ord. No. 16-1313]
   SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT — Any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or
other improvement  of a structure , the cost of which equals or exceeds 50% of
the market value of the structure  before the “start of construction ” of the
improvement . This term includes structures  which have incurred “substantial
damage ” (or repetitive loss ) regardless of the actual repair work performed.
The term does not, however include any project for improvement  of a structure
to correct existing violations  of state or local health, sanitary, or safety
code specifications which have been identified by the local code enforcement
official and which are the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions.
[Added 2-9-2016 by Ord. No. 16-1313]
   SWALE — A slight depression, sometimes filled with water, in the midst of
generally level land, whether natural or manmade. [Added 12-13-2022 by Ord. No.
22-1377]
   TOP OF BANK — The point along a streambank where an abrupt change in slope
is evident, and where the stream is able to overflow the banks and enter the
adjacent floodplain . [Added 12-13-2022 by Ord. No. 22-1377]
   TOPSOIL — The natural surface layer of soil, usually darker than subsurface
layers, to a depth of at least six inches within an undisturbed area of soils.
[Added 1-10-1995 by Ord. No. 879]
   TRACT — A lot or group of contiguous lots not separated by any street ,
which is occupied or is to be occupied by more than one structure and may be
further subdivided into lots for residential development , together with any
accessory uses , building or structures customarily incidental to such
dwellings , and any lot or open space arranged or designed to be used in
connection with such dwellings , such lots or open space and the area and
dimensions of such tract being not less than the minimum required by this
chapter. [Amended 11-13-2007 by Ord. No. 1188]
   TRANSFER OF DEVELOPMENT CREDITS — The procedure prescribed by this Chapter
whereby development credits may be severed from a sending parcel and utilized
for additional development on a receiving parcel , held for later use or
extinguished; and the procedure whereby owners of development credits ,
currently or previously appurtenant to a sending parcel , convey some or all of
those credits to another party, including landowners/assignees of receiving
parcels . The terms “development credits” and “development rights” are
synonymous as used herein. [Added 11-26-2013 by Ord. No. 13-1277]
   TRANSFEREE or BUYER or GRANTEE — With respect to transferable development
rights, the person or legal entity who purchases or otherwise receives
development credits and who may apply the development credits to a receiving
parcel , hold them, or subsequently sell or otherwise transfer the development
credits . [Added 11-26-2013 by Ord. No. 13-1277]
   TRANSFEROR or SELLER or GRANTOR — With respect to transferable development
rights, the owner of development credits and/or the owner of a sending parcel
who severs and then sells, grants or otherwise transfers the development
credits associated with the sending parcel to another person or entity. [Added
11-26-2013 by Ord. No. 13-1277]
   ULTIMATE RIGHT-OF-WAY — A strip of land occupied or intended to be occupied
by a street , trail, railroad, electric transmission line, gas pipeline, water
main, sanitary or storm sewer or for any other special use . [Added 1-10-1995
by Ord. No. 879]
   ULTIMATE RIGHT-OF-WAY LINE — The intended future boundary of a street , road
, highway or alley , whether publicly or privately held. [Added 1-17-2006 by
Ord. No. 1162]
   UNIFORM CONSTRUCTION CODE (UCC) — The statewide building code adopted by the
Pennsylvania General Assembly in 1999 applicable to new construction in all
municipalities whether administered by the municipality, a third party or the
Department of Labor and Industry, and applicable to residential and commercial
buildings . Applicable to residential and commercial buildings, the UCC adopted
the International Residential Code (IRC) and the International Building Code
(IBC), by reference, as the construction standard applicable to Commonwealth
floodplain construction. [Added 2-9-2016 by Ord. No. 16-1313]
   USE — The purpose for which either land or building is occupied, arranged,
designed or intended or for which either land or building is or may have been
acquired or occupied.
   A.   PRINCIPAL USE — The principal or dominant use to which land or a lot is
devoted. Only one principal use shall be permitted on a single lot . [Amended
1-10-1995 by Ord. No. 879]
   B.   ACCESSORY USE — See the definition of “accessory use .”
   VARIANCE — Relief granted pursuant to the provisions of 53 P.S. §§ 10601 et
seq. and 10901 et seq. [Amended 1-10-1995 by Ord. No. 879]
   VEHICLE DEALER STORAGE LOT — A paved and striped area used for the storage
and display of new and/or visibly designated, manufacturer certified, pre-owned
automobiles for sale that is located on a lot  adjacent to an existing
automobile sales and service agency within the Township, and for the storage of
said vehicles which are awaiting customer pick-up. [Added 12-9-2025 by Ord. No.
25-1408, § 1]
   VIOLATION — The failure of a structure or other development to be fully
compliant with the Township’s flood plain management regulations. A structure
or other development without the elevation certificate, other certifications,
or other evidence of compliance required in 44 CFR §60.3(b)(5), (c)(4), (c)
(10), (d)(3), (e)(2) , (e)(4), or (e)(5) is presumed to be in violation until
such time as that documentation is provided. [Added 2-9-2016 by Ord. No. 16-
1313]
   WATERCOURSE — A channel or conveyance of surface water, such as a stream or
creek, having defined bed and banks, whether natural or artificial, with
perennial or intermittent flow. [Added 7-14-1998 by Ord. No. 973; amended 12-
13-2022 by Ord. No. 22-1377]
   WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS FACILITY — Any facility for the transmission and/or
reception of Wireless Communication Services, which may or may not consist of
an Antenna Array or Micro Facility , connection cables, an equipment facility
and a support structure or attachment structure to achieve the necessary
elevation. [Added 7-14-1998 by Ord. No. 974]
   YARD — An open, unoccupied space on the same lot with a building or other
structure or use , open and unobstructed from the ground to the sky.
   A.   REQUIRED FRONT YARD — A yard extending the full width of the lot along
the front lot line and extending in depth from that point to the required
building  setback line . [Amended 1-10-1995 by Ord. No. 879]
   B.   REQUIRED REAR YARD — A yard extending the full width of the lot along
the rear lot line and extending in depth from the rear lot line to the required
building  setback line . [Amended 1-10-1995 by Ord. No. 879]
   C.   REQUIRED SIDE YARD — A yard extending from a required front yard
 setback line to the required rear yard  setback line and extending in width
from the lot line to the required building  setback line . [Amended 1-10-1995
by Ord. No. 879]
   YIELD MAP — A plan prepared in accordance and compliance with the underlying
zoning and subdivision regulations. This plan documents and quantifies the
maximum permitted density on the tract . [Added 11-14-2006 by Ord. No. 1173]
ARTICLE II
Districts
§ 255-8.   Designation.
[Amended 9-13-2011 by Ord. No. 11-1244, §1; 5-14-2019 by Ord. No. 19-1351, §2]
For the purpose of this chapter, the Township is hereby divided into districts,
which shall be designated as follows:
   A   Residential District
   A-1   Residential District
   A-2   Residential District
   B   Residential District
   C   Residential District
   SC   Shopping Center District
   CR   Commercial Retail Districts, Class L and Class I
   INST   Institutional District
   NH   North Hills Residential District [Added 9-13-2011 by Ord. No. 11-1244]
   EC   Employment Center District 3
   MD   Multi-Dwelling District
   AHS   Apartment House Special District
   OC   Office Center District
   RE   Recreational District
   MHD   Mobile Home Development District
   MRD   Mixed Residential District
   •   Floodplain Conservation District [Added 5-14-2019 by Ord. No. 19-1351]
   •   Open Space Preservation District [Added 5-14-2019 by Ord. No. 19-1351]
   DO   Dresher Overlay District [Added 5-14-2019 by Ord. No. 19-1351]
   EC   Employment Center Overlay District [Added 5-14-2019 by Ord. No. 19-
1351]
   MG   Maple Glen Overlay District [Added 5-14-2019 by Ord. No. 19-1351]
   JT   Jarrettown Village Overlay District [Added 5-14-2019 by Ord. No. 19-
1351]
   FW   Fort Washington Village Overlay District [Added 5-14-2019 by Ord. No.
19-1351]
   •   Historic Resource Overlay District [Added 5-14-2019 by Ord. No. 19-1351]
   MRH   Mixed Use Residential-Historical District [Added 5-14-2019 by Ord. No.
19-1351]
   GFW   Greater Fort Washington District [Added 5-14-2019 by Ord. No. 19-1351]
3. Editor's Note: The name of this district was changed from LIM Limited
Industrial pursuant to the provisions of Ord. No. 972, adopted 7-14-1998.
§ 255-9.   Zoning Map.
[Amended 3-14-1995 by Ord. No. 892; 4-16-2002 by Ord. No. 1086]
The boundaries of said districts shall be as shown upon the map attached to and
made a part of this chapter, which shall be designated the Zoning Map. The
Zoning Map is further described as that graphic representation of the zoning
districts adopted by ordinances of the Board of Commissioners of Upper Dublin
Township prepared by Metz Engineers dated March 8, 2002, as the same may be
amended from time to time. Said map and all notation, references and other
things shown thereon shall be made a part of this chapter, as if the matters
and things shown by said map were fully described herein. In the event of any
inaccuracy or discrepancy between the depiction of zoning districts shown on
the Zoning Map and the descriptions of such zoning districts as set forth in
the individual ordinances adopted by the Board of Commissioners, the
descriptions set forth in the ordinances shall prevail.
§ 255-10.   Interpretation of boundaries.
   A.   Where uncertainty exists with respect to the boundaries of the various
districts, as shown on the Zoning Map, the following rules shall apply:
      (1)   The district boundaries are roads unless otherwise shown.
      (2)   Where the district boundaries are not shown to be roads , the
boundaries shall be construed to be property lines or dimensions from streets
or roads .
   B.   Whenever federal- or state-owned property or property owned by any
federal or state agency or any political subdivision thereof is included in one
or more zoning districts, it shall be subject to the provisions of this chapter
only insofar as permitted by the Constitution and laws of the United States of
America and of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
§ 255-11.   Land for governmental functions excluded.
The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to land and buildings owned and
used for the performance of the governmental functions of the Township.
ARTICLE III
General Regulations
§ 255-12.   General provisions.
For the purposes of this chapter, the following regulations shall govern each
district.
§ 255-13.   Expansion of use permitted by special exception or conditional use.
4
[Added 8-8-2000 by Ord. No. 1042]
Any use permitted in any zoning district by special exception or conditional
use can only be expanded in like manner.
4. Editor's Note: Former — 255-13, Lots of record, was repealed 1-7-1997 by
Ord. No. 927.
§ 255-14.   Unobstructed view required. 5
On any lot , no wall, fence or other structure shall be erected, altered or
maintained and no hedge, tree, shrub or other growth shall be planted or
maintained within the right-of-way which shall interfere with a free and
unobstructed view down and across lands located at or near the intersection of
any two roads or a road and railroad and railway or at any curve in any road ,
as may be necessary to assure a full and unobstructed view in all directions at
such crossings or curves and to so prevent the use of such lands for any
purpose or in any manner which may interfere with or obstruct the vision of
persons traveling upon such highways.
5. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see
Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. L
§ 255-15.   Lot, yard and bulk regulations. [Amended 7-9-2024 by Ord. No. 24-
1391, § 1]
   A.   The regulations as to minimum lot size, width of the lot at the
building line , front yards , side yards , rear yards , heights and building
coverage shall be maintained in accordance with the requirements of each
residential zoning district, except for the following:
      (1)   In A Districts which are served by neither sanitary sewers nor a
public water supply, lots shall have the following minimum and maximum
regulations:
Regulation Requirement
Regulation                           Requirement
Area (minimum)                       45,000 square feet
Width at building line (minimum)     150 feet
Front yard (minimum)                 60 feet
Side yard , each (minimum)           30 feet
Rear yard (minimum) Height (maximum) 60 feet
Principal building                   35 feet
Accessory building                   20 feet and not exceeding 1 story
Building coverage (maximum)          15% of the total lot area
 
      (2)   In A Districts which are served by either sanitary sewers or a
public water supply, but not both, lots shall have the following minimum and
maximum regulations:
Regulation Requirement
Regulation                           Requirement
Area (minimum)                       35,000 square feet
Width at building line (minimum)     130 feet
Front yard (minimum)                 60 feet
Side yard , each (minimum)           25 feet
Rear yard (minimum) Height (maximum) 60 feet
Principal building                   35 feet
Accessory building                   20 feet
Building coverage (maximum)          15% of the total lot area
 
      (3)   In A Districts which are served by both sanitary sewers and a
public water supply, lots shall have the following minimum and maximum
regulations:
Regulation Requirement
Regulation                           Requirement
Area (minimum)                       26,000 square feet
Width at building line (minimum)     120 feet
Front yard (minimum)                 50 feet
Side yard , each (minimum)           25 feet
Rear yard (minimum) Height (maximum) 50 feet
Principal building                   35 feet
Accessory building                   20 feet
Building coverage (maximum)          15% of the total lot area
 
      (4)   In A Districts which are served by a public water supply and, when
approved by the Township as a condition of an approval of a subdivision plan,
sanitary sewers , installed and capped for future use , lots shall have the
following minimum and maximum regulations:
Regulation Requirement
Regulation                           Requirement
Area (minimum)                       30,000 square feet
Width at building line (minimum)     125 feet
Front yard (minimum)                 50 feet
Side yard , each (minimum)           25 feet
Rear yard (minimum) Height (maximum) 50 feet
Principal building                   35 feet
Accessory building                   20 feet
Building coverage (minimum)          15% of the total lot area
 
      (5)   In A Districts in which a residential development plan is proposed
in accordance with §
255-36 of this chapter, lots shall have the following minimum and maximum
regulations:
         (a)   With a public water supply and when approved by the Township as
a condition of an approval of a subdivision plan of sanitary sewers installed
and capped for future use , as follows:
Regulation Requirement
Regulation                           Requirement
Area (minimum)                       26,000 square feet
Width at building line (minimum)     120 feet
Front yard (minimum)                 50 feet
Side yard , each (minimum)           25 feet
Rear yard (minimum) Height (maximum) 50 feet
Principal building                   35 feet
Accessory building                   20 feet
Building coverage (maximum)          15% of the total lot area
 
         (b)   With sanitary sewers and a public water supply, as follows:
Regulation Requirement
Regulation                           Requirement
Area (minimum)                       22,000 square feet
Width at building line (minimum)     110 feet
Front yard (minimum)                 50 feet
Side yard , each (minimum)           25 feet
Rear yard (minimum) Height (maximum) 50 feet
Principal building                   35 feet
Accessory building                   20 feet and not exceeding 1 story
 
   B.   (Reserved). [Amended 7-9-2024 by Ord. No. 24-1391]
   C.   In all districts where lots cannot be served by public sewers, each
application for a zoning or building  permit shall be accompanied by an on-site
sewer permit issued by the authority having jurisdiction. [Amended 1-10-1995 by
Ord. No. 879]
§ 255-16.   Reduction of lot area.
No lot shall be so reduced that the area of the lot or the dimensions of the
required open spaces shall be less than herein prescribed.
§ 255-17.   Modification of front yard requirements.
   A.   Where an unimproved lot of record is situated on the same street
frontage with two improved lots or one unimproved lot , the front yard
requirement for that district shall be modified so that the front yard shall be
an average of the existing and required front yard .
   B.   In case of a corner lot , in residential districts, there shall be two
front yards (those abutting streets ), one side and one rear yard , all of
which meet the requirements for the district in which the lot is located.
[Amended 1-10-1995 by Ord. No. 879]
§ 255-18.   Access to public and private streets.
[Added 11-14-1989 by Ord. No. 772; amended 1-10-1995 by Ord. No. 879; 11-14-
2006 by Ord. No. 1174]
   A.   Each and every lot upon which a building is proposed to be erected in
the Township shall abut a street which has been improved to Township Standards
for a public street , unless otherwise provided herein.
   B.   Upon application for a conditional use pursuant to the conditional use
standards outlined in this chapter, the Board of Commissioners may permit the
building of a dwelling house on a lot adjacent to a private street which has
not been improved to the standards of a public street , provided the following
conditions are met:
      (1)   The minimum lot size is 1.5 times larger than that which would
otherwise be required by this chapter and the dwelling is served by public
sewer and water.
      (2)   The minimum lot size is at least one acre if the dwelling is not
served by public sewer and/or water.
      (3)   No more than five dwelling houses may be served by the private
street .
      (4)   The private street shall be improved to the standards referenced in
Chapter 212 for a driveway, or to such other standards as the Board of
Commissioners has otherwise approved
      (5)   If and when the private street must be improved to the standards of
a public street , all lots served by the private street and which have been
improved following the grant of conditional use , shall contribute to the cost
thereof in equal shares with the other benefited lots on the street .
§ 255-19.   Conversion requirements.
The Zoning Hearing Board may allow as a special exception the conversion of a
single-family dwelling into a dwelling for a greater number of families ,
subject to the following requirements:
   A.   A petition in favor of such exception is filed with the Zoning Hearing
Board signed by the owners of 60% or more of the frontage on the same street
within 1,000 feet of the designated lot .
   B.   Each dwelling unit shall not have less than 500 square feet of floor
area.
   C.   The lot area per family is not reduced thereby to an amount less than
75% of that required by this chapter for the district in which the designated
lot is located.
   D.   The yard and building area requirements for the district in which the
building is located shall not be reduced.
   E.   There is no external alteration of the building except as may be
necessary for reasons of safety. Fire escapes and outside stairways shall,
where practicable, be located to the rear of the building .
   F.   The Zoning Hearing Board shall specify the maximum number of families
permitted to occupy such buildings and may prescribe such further conditions
and restrictions as the Board may consider appropriate.
   G.   The off-street parking requirements of this chapter are met.
   H.   The conversion shall be authorized only for a large dwelling with
relatively little economic usefulness as a conforming use .
§ 255-20.   Water requirements.
   A.   In general:
      (1)   All water requirements shall be stated in application.
      (2)   No permit for construction , building or use of building and/or
land shall be issued until proof, satisfactory to Township, of the availability
and the supply of water is furnished.
      (3)   No well may be dug or drilled except following permit issued by the
Township in accordance with the applicable ordinances and rules and regulations
of the Township.
      (4)   Where available, all portable water services shall be supplied by
water distribution companies operating and supervised as municipal or public
utilities by virtue of the laws of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania and the
ordinances of the Township.
   B.   Commercial and industrial districts. In addition to the requirements of
Subsection A hereinabove, all uses permitted in commercial and industrial
districts shall be subject to the following:
      (1)   Water shall be supplied by a water distribution company operating
and supervised as a municipal or a public utility by virtue of the laws of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania and the ordinances of the Township; provided,
however, that when a water distribution company is not available to serve a
specific property, an exception may be granted by the Township, provided that
all other requirements of the Township shall be met; and
      (2)   Where surface or ground water sources are existing and available or
can be developed on the premises without impairment of similar service on
adjacent or nearby properties or on public water recirculation, a permit may be
granted by the Board of Commissioners upon the recommendation of the Board of
Health and the Township Engineer.
§ 255-21.   Waste disposal.
Whenever the disposal of waste materials is required under ordinances, rules
and regulations of the Township, it shall be accomplished by a system or
systems for waste disposal approved by the Township. 6
6. Editor's Note: Original Sec. 4.13, junkyards, which immediately followed
this section, was deleted 1-10-1995 by Ord. No. 879.
§ 255-22.   Mobile homes.
   A.   No trailer house or mobile home shall be constructed, placed or
maintained on any lot within the Township unless:
      (1)   It is an approved trailer park; or
      (2)   It meets all the requirements of a single-family dwelling as
provided in
Chapter 73, Building Construction, of the Township. Such prohibition shall not
be construed to prohibit a seasonable or temporary parking of a trailer house
or mobile home in a residential district, provided that the following
requirements are met:
         (a)   The trailer house or mobile home remains movable and is not
attached to the ground.
         (b)   The trailer house or mobile home is not connected to a service
utility, including electric, water or sewers.
         (c)   The trailer house is not used for residential use or occupancy.
         (d)   The trailer house or mobile home is owned by the owner or lessee
of lot upon which the same is parked.
         (e)   A permit is secured from the Building Inspector prior to
parking.
         (f)   No more than one trailer house or mobile home is parked at one
time on the same lot .
         (g)   The location and length of parking shall be approved, in
writing, by the Building Inspector.
   B.   No permit shall be valid for a period in excess of one calendar year
and may be revoked by the Building Inspector, at any time, at his discretion,
for any violation of this and any ordinance of the Township.
§ 255-23.   Rear lots.
[Amended 11-14-1989 by Ord. No. 772; 5-11-2004 by Ord. No. 1127; 11-14-2006 by
Ord. No. 1174]
No zoning permit shall be issued to construct a structure on any lot unless the
width of the lot from the street line to the building line is no less than the
minimum required width at the building line . The Board of Commissioners may
grant conditional use pursuant to the provisions of Article XXV to construct a
structure on a lot which does not meet these width requirements (a rear lot ),
provided the following conditions are met:
   A.   There is a direct access from the street to the building line through
an open space on the same lot .
   B.   Such open space shall be at least 25 feet wide at the street line and
shall extend at no less than that width from the street line to the building
line .
   C.   Such open space shall be capable of accommodating pedestrian and
vehicular traffic by means of an all-weather paved travel lane.
   D.   The minimum lot width shall be measured parallel to the street at the
point of the proposed building closest to the street and shall extend the full
depth of the building , plus an additional 25 feet.
   E.   Such open space shall be capable of accommodating the construction and
use of public utilities, including storm and sanitary sewage facilities.
   F.   The interior of the lot not abutting the street shall be required to
connect to sanitary sewer lines when constructed in the street , and the owner
shall agree in writing to be subject, following construction , to an assessment
for the cost of the sanitary sewer as assessed by the proper authority on the
same basis as the lots abutting the aforesaid open space on the street but
limited to a frontage not in excess of the width of a lot as defined for a lot
in the zoning district in which the open space is located.
   G.   The interior lot shall be at least 10% larger than the size required in
the zoning district and, in determining compliance with the requirements of
this chapter, the lot area of the open space between the street line and the
point on a line drawn radial thereto where the minimum lot width is reached
shall not be included, except with respect to those requirements relating to
impervious surface .
   H.   A rear lot may not be approved by subdivision unless a conforming lot
could otherwise be created. Every application for conditional use to approve a
rear lot shall be accompanied by a yield plan sealed by a registered civil
engineer showing subdivision of the parcel into conforming lots .
   I.   The Board of Commissioners shall designate which yard will be the front
yard of a rear lot .
   J.   The applicant must submit credible evidence satisfactory to the Board
of Commissioners that the creation of the rear lot furthers the land use goals
and requirements of this chapter and of
Chapter 212 of the Upper Dublin Code.
§ 255-24.   Fencing.
[Amended 9-10-1996 by Ord. No. 916; 4-10-2012 by Ord. No. 12-1256, § 1]
   A.   No fence or wall (except a retaining wall or a wall of a building
permitted under this chapter) over six feet in height shall be erected within
any of the required side or rear yard setbacks nor over four feet in height
(measured from the sidewalk grade) within the required front yard setback,
including any area of overlap with a side or rear yard setback, except as noted
below. The front yard setback shall be measured from all street frontages
abutting the property, for purposes of this section.
      (1)   A solid fence up to six feet in height may be erected on corner
lots in residential zoning districts (as described in Article VII of this
chapter) within the required front yard setback abutting an arterial or primary
street , as specified on Upper Dublin Township’s Engineering and Construction
Standards, Improvements Procedures, provided:
         (a)   That the yard area which would be visually screened by such
fence when viewed from the arterial or primary street actually serves as the
existing dwelling ’s back yard .
         (b)   The fence is constructed of materials having the appearance of
wood, brick or stone.
         (c)   The fence is set back from the right of way by at least one
foot.
         (d)   Sufficient backdrop landscaping is provided, such as evergreens
and deciduous trees with lower canopies visible above the fence, to visually
soften views of the fence from the public right of way .
         (e)   The arterial or primary street is not identified as a scenic
road corridor on the 2005 Open Space and Environmental Resource Protection
Plan, as amended.
[Amended 4-10-2012 by Ord. No. 12-1256]
   B.   All fences shall be erected with the finished side of the fence facing
adjacent properties. The finished side shall be considered the side without the
structural supporting members.
   C.   All fences or walls erected within the front yard setback shall be
provided with an operable gate with a minimum width of 36 inches to provide
access to the area between such fence or wall and the cartway of the abutting
street . The property owner is responsible for maintaining this area. There
shall be a minimum of one operable gate for each street frontage and at least
one operable gate for every 500 feet of fencing along a street .
§ 255-24.1.   Merger of lots.
[Added 2-14-2023 by Ord. No. 23-1384]
Where two or more adjacent lots , one or more of which is nonconforming , are
owned by the same owner, and the ownership of the lots is concurrent, such lots
shall be combined to create conforming lots , or to lessen the non-conformity
if it is not possible to create all conforming lots . The sale, conveyance, or
assignment of a non-conforming lot which is deemed to have been merged by this
provision is prohibited and a violation of the Zoning Ordinance.
§ 255-24.2.   Overlay district uses.
[Added 6-14-2011 by Ord. No. 11-1241, § 3]
Where a proposed use is permitted in an overlay district by conditional use ,
and is also permitted in the underlying district by special exception ,
conditional use application to the Board of Commissioners shall be made in
accordance with the applicable provisions in lieu of a special exception
application to the Zoning Hearing Board.
ARTICLE IV
Accessory Buildings, Structures and Uses
[Amended 10-14-1986 by Ord. No. 713]
§ 255-25.   General provisions.
Accessory uses authorized in this chapter shall include, but not by way of
limitation, the uses in this article.
§ 255-26.   Agriculture.
Uses accessory to agriculture shall include:
   A.   Greenhouses.
   B.   Barns .
   C.   The keeping, breeding and management of livestock and poultry, but in
such quantities and to such extent as are customarily incidental to the
principal use , provided that the principal use is conducted on acreage of five
or more acres.
   D.   Preparation of products produced on the premises for use and the
disposal thereof for marketing; provided, however, that roadside stands for
sale of products produced on the same lot on which the stand for the sale of
the products is located shall be permitted upon the following conditions:
      (1)   An annual permit is secured from Zoning Officer.
      (2)   The location shall not be within the boundaries of any street
 right-of-way . [Amended 1-10-1995 by Ord. No. 879]
      (3)   The location shall not be nearer than 50 feet from any
intersection.
      (4)   Parking for stopping vehicles shall be provided off the paved
portion of the street of a sufficient width so as not to interfere with the
safety of persons stopping or using the street ; parking nearer than 30 feet
from an intersection shall not be permitted.
      (5)   The stand shall be of temporary construction and must be removed by
December 1 and not erected before May 1; no permit shall be issued before May 1
or after December 1 of any year.
§ 255-27.   Dwellings. 
[Amended 10-14-2008 by Ord. No. 1204, § 1; 8-11-2009 by Ord. No. 09- 1215, § 1;
4-13-2010 by Ord. No. 10-1229, § 1; 1-8-2013 by Ord. No. 13-1264, § 1; 8-12-
2014 by Ord. No. 14-1291, § 2]
The following uses shall be accessory to dwellings :
   A.   A private garage , private stable, barn or private parking space ,
provided that no motor vehicle parked thereon shall be other than those
permitted in a private garage as defined in §
255-7; and provided that as to a private stable or barn :
      (1)   No animals shall be housed therein unless the structure is located
on a lot at least five acres in area and at least 100 feet from any boundary
line and at least 150 feet from any dwelling .
      (2)   The minimum lot area shall be one acre.
      (3)   The maximum height shall be 35 feet to the peak of the roof.
      (4)   The maximum building coverage shall be 1,200 square feet.
      (5)   If the building coverage exceeds 600 square feet, the building
shall be set back a minimum of 25 feet from the side and rear property lines.
[Amended 8-12-2014 by Ord. No. 14-1291]
   A.1   The keeping of chickens on a lot in the A, B, C or NH zoning district
only, and only for the personal use of the resident(s) of the lot on which the
chickens are kept, and provided:
      (1)   The lot has a minimum area of one acre (43,560 sq.ft.).
      (2)   On lots between one-half acre (21,780 sq.ft.) and one acre,
chickens may be kept upon the grant of a special exception by the Zoning
Hearing Board provided the following conditions are met:
         (a)   The required shelter and pen must be located a minimum distance
of 100 feet from any residential structure on an adjoining property.
         (b)   Subsections (3) through (9) below are complied with.
         (c)   The applicant shall meet the general standards for special
exception approval contained in §
255-174.
      (3)   The lot is developed with a single detached building occupied as a
single-family residence.
      (4)   On lots less than three acres in size, not more than six chickens
are permitted. On lots greater than three acres not more than 12 chickens are
permitted.
      (5)   The keeping of roosters is prohibited.
      (6)   Chickens shall not be slaughtered on the property.
      (7)   A shelter and pen (fenced in area) shall be provided in compliance
with the standards set forth below, The chickens shall be confined to the
shelter and pen area at all times.
         (a)   The shelter must have a solid roof and at least three enclosed
sides. There shall be a minimum area of three square feet of shelter area and
10 square feet of pen area for each fowl. The shelter shall not exceed 100
square feet in size.
         (b)   The shelter and pen may not be located in a front yard area.
         (c)   The shelter and pen shall be set back a minimum of 25 feet from
the principal residence and a minimum of 40 feet from the side and rear
property lines.
         (d)   The shelter and pen shall be screened from view from adjacent
properties with a fence or shrubbery having a minimum height of 4 feet.
      (8)   The property owner shall obtain a Zoning Permit prior to keeping
chickens on the lot .
      (9)   The shelter and pen must be maintained in a clean and sanitary
condition meeting the following minimum standards:
         (a)   All feed provided for the chickens must be stored in a rodent-
and insect-proof container or receptacle.
         (b)   An insect-proof container shall be provided for the storage of
manure. The container shall be maintained and emptied sufficiently often and in
such manner as to prevent a nuisance. No manure shall be allowed to accumulate
except in such container.
         (c)   The shelter and pen shall be devoid of all rodents and insects
and free from objectionable odors at and beyond the property line.
[Added 1-8-2013 by Ord. No. 13-1264]
   B.   A swimming pool for use of family and guests only.
   C.   Private greenhouses.
   D.   The renting of rooms within the dwellings in which the lessor resides
for not more than two nontransient persons , with or without the provisions of
table board for such persons .
   E.   The following when authorized as a special exception :
      (1)   Dwelling unit either within a single family detached dwelling or a
building accessory thereto for household employees, caretakers, caregivers, or
members of the owner’s immediate family , provided the following conditions are
met:
         (a)   The property may not otherwise be used for any of the following
accessory uses : the renting of rooms, home day care , professional office, or
minor home occupation .
         (b)   The owner shall record a covenant to run with the land
restricting the use of such unit to these purposes.
         (c)   The off-street parking requirements of this chapter are met for
both dwelling units .
         (d)   The floor area of the accessory building can be no more than 40%
of the floor area of the principal dwelling , or 1,200 square feet, whichever
is less.
         (e)   The maximum building height, measured to the peak of the roof,
for a detached accessory building containing an accessory dwelling unit shall
not exceed 13 feet for a one-story building and 22 feet for a two-story
building . The height of an accessory dwelling unit attached to a principal
dwelling shall not exceed the existing height of the principal dwelling .
         (f)   A detached accessory building containing an accessory dwelling
unit must meet the building setback requirements for the principal dwelling on
the lot .
[Amended 4-13-2010 by Ord. No. 10-1229; 8-12-2014 by Ord. No. 14-1291]
   F.   Home day-care facilities are permitted in a single-family detached
dwelling in which the caregiver resides, upon determination of the Township
Zoning Officer that the following criteria are met:
      (1)   The caregiver shall be registered or licensed by the Commonwealth
of Pennsylvania to provide child care services in the dwelling .
      (2)   There shall be no structural change to the exterior of the single-
family detached to accommodate the day-care  use .
      (3)   There shall be a minimum of 40 square feet of floor space per
child, inclusive of space occupied by furniture and equipment but exclusive of
closets, halls, bathrooms, kitchens and related areas, which shall be on the
first floor of the single family detached dwelling .
      (4)   A minimum of 100 square feet of outdoor play space per child shall
be available on the same lot . Such play space shall be in the rear yard of the
lot only and shall be enclosed by a fence or yard .
      (5)   A driveway shall be required in order to allow off-street pickup
and drop-off of children.
   G.   Antennas and satellite dish antennas accessory to permitted uses .
   H.   Professional office. [Added 9-14-1993 by Ord. No. 854]
      (1)   A professional office which does not qualify as a “minor home
occupation ” is permitted in a single-family dwelling , or in a building
accessory thereto, if authorized as a special exception by the Zoning Hearing
Board prior to August 1, 2003, subject to the following: [Amended 6-11-2002 by
Ord. No. 1089; 9-23-2003 by Ord. No. 1115]
         (a)   The professional office will be used only by a practitioner
licensed by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania as a doctor, lawyer, dentist,
psychologist, psychiatrist, engineer, architect, accountant or a rabbi, priest
or minister affiliated with a local religious institution.
         (b)   The profession will be conducted, managed and operated primarily
by a resident of the dwelling .
         (c)   No more than a total of four individuals will work or assist in
the office; no more than two of these individuals will be nonresidents of the
dwelling .
         (d)   The office will be located in the dwelling or in a building
accessory thereto.
         (e)   The gross office space will not exceed 600 square feet.
         (f)   Only one sign will be displayed on the subject premises for the
office, and that sign will not be larger than six inches by 18 inches bearing
the name and occupation, in words only, of the practitioner.
         (g)   Parking shall be provided as required by Article XIX of this
chapter.
         (h)   The required parking spaces will be paved with an all-weather
material as required by the Township Code; however, the Zoning Hearing Board
may determine that a certain number of the required spaces may be held in
reserve and remain unpaved until one or all of the reserved required spaces
become necessary at some time in the future, with such determination to be left
to the discretion of the property owner.
         (i)   The additional requirements for the professional office parking
will be provided in the side or rear yard only. The setback of the parking area
and the approaches thereto will be no closer to an adjacent lot than an
accessory building in the same zoning district may be located pursuant to this
chapter.
         (j)   All driveways will be constructed to permit the turning of
vehicles on the lot so as to avoid the necessity of backing into the street .
         (k)   Any increased water runoff from the subject property caused by
construction to the professional office or the additional parking therefor will
be fully recharged on the subject property.
         (l)   Landscaped plantings sufficient to screen the parking area from
adjacent lots will be provided and maintained. A plan of such landscaping shall
accompany the zoning application.
      (2)   This provision is not intended to restrict individuals from
conducting an occupation in their homes on a full- or part-time basis if such
activity does not generate vehicular traffic to the home and if nonresidents do
not work or assist with the occupation in the dwelling .
   I.   No-impact home occupation , subject to the following requirements:
[Added 7-8-2003 by Ord. No. 1113]
      (1)   No person except a resident practitioner shall work on the premises
in connection with the use .
      (2)   The home occupation shall be conducted entirely within a building .
All such activities shall occupy no more than 500 square feet of floor area.
      (3)   No commercial traffic visits shall be permitted, except for
incidental delivery vehicles.
      (4)   No goods shall be publicly displayed on the premises. No inventory,
except samples or handicrafts and artwork produced on the premises, shall be
maintained on the premises.
      (5)   There shall be no outside storage of materials or equipment.
      (6)   The existence of the use must not be visible from the exterior of
the property.
      (7)   No sign may be displayed associated with the business.
      (8)   Before instituting the use , a certificate of occupancy authorizing
the home occupation must be obtained.
   J.   Minor home occupation . A “minor home occupation ” is a home occupation
which involves no more than one commercial visit per hour and a maximum of four
commercial visits to the premises per day, with all visits falling between the
hours of 9:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m. One minor home occupation is permitted per
dwelling , subject to the following requirements: [Added 9-23-2003 by Ord. No.
1115; amended 8-11-2009 by Ord. No. 09-1215]
      (1)   The use shall be located in the principal residence of the
practitioner. No person except a resident practitioner and one other person
shall work on the premises in connection with the use . [Amended 8-11-2009 by
Ord. No. 09-1215]
      (2)   The use shall be conducted within a building . All such activities
shall occupy no more than 500 square feet of floor area.
      (3)   Parking shall be provided as required by Article XIX of this
chapter. If paving is added to create an additional parking space on the lot ,
then landscape plantings sufficient to screen the additional parking area from
adjacent lots , as provided for in §
212-32.F(2)(d), shall be installed and maintained. Construction of any needed
additional parking shall receive grading permits if and as required by
Chapters 99 and
206. [Amended 8-11-2009 by Ord. No. 09-1215]
      (4)   No goods shall be publicly displayed on the premises. No inventory,
except samples or handicrafts and artwork produced on the premises, shall be
maintained on the premises.
      (5)   There shall be no outside storage of materials or equipment, except
that one business vehicle employed in the home occupation may be maintained on
the property if it is parked off of the street and behind the required front
yard setback.
      (6)   The existence of the use must not be visible from the exterior of
the property, except that a single, nonilluminated sign no more than 84 square
inches in area on either side may be erected to display only the name or names
of the practitioner(s) and the address.
      (7)   Before instituting the use , a certificate of occupancy authorizing
the home occupation must be obtained.
      (8)   In all residence districts, no minor home occupation shall be
located within 500 feet of a professional office or any other minor home
occupation , measured by the shortest distance between the lot on which the
proposed use will be located and the lot or lots which contain the existing use
. The requirement of this subsection shall not be imposed if the applicant
establishes, upon application to the Zoning Hearing Board for a special
exception , either that the proposed use is located in a neighborhood which is
not primarily residential in character or that the proposed use will not have a
substantial tendency to commercialize the neighborhood .
   K.   Home day care for animals is permitted on a property by conditional use
if accessory to a single family detached dwelling in which the caregiver
resides, upon determination by the Zoning Officer that the following criteria
are met:
      (1)   For the purposes of this section, “animals” shall refer only to
dogs and cats.
      (2)   The lot area of the subject property shall be at least three acres.
      (3)   On lots of three acres, no more than four animals, including
resident animals, shall be kept on the property at one time. For every
additional acre of lot area , one additional animal may be kept.
      (4)   The hours of operation shall be limited to weekdays between 7:00
a.m. and 8:00 p.m. Outdoor hours for animals shall be 8:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m.
      (5)   There shall be no structural change to the exterior of the dwelling
or any accessory building on the property to accommodate the day care  use .
      (6)   The outdoor area for the animals shall be limited to the rear yard
of the property and must be completely enclosed by a six-foot tall fence. The
fence must be strong enough to prevent the animals from leaving the property.
The outdoor area shall be set back a minimum of 20 feet from the side and rear
property lines.
      (7)   A driveway shall be provided to allow off-street pickup and drop-
off of animals.
      (8)   Animal waste must be removed from the yard at least once daily to
control odors and the owner must arrange for the waste to be collected from the
property at least twice weekly.
      (9)   Operators shall be subject to the Township Code controls on animal
noise (§ 158- 12.C(6)) and odors (§
158-11).
      (10)   The property owner shall be required to keep records of animal
licenses and vaccinations for all animals in their care. Dog owners must show
proof of current licensing and vaccination for rabies and bordatella (“kennel
cough”).
      (11)   The owner is required to obtain a certificate of occupancy
annually for the animal day care business.
 [Added 10-14-2008 by Ord. No. 1204, § 1]
§ 255-28.   Places of worship; schools.
[Amended 3-11-2008 by Ord. No. 1195, § 3]
The following uses shall be accessory to a church, chapel or other place of
worship and public and private schools :
   A.   Licensed day-care center .
   B.   Storage area and/or repair garage for buses that are used by a public
school district to transport children to public and/or private schools , but
only on a lot used for a public school which is 25 acres or larger. Any
improvement for this use must be set back a minimum of 100 feet from any
property line adjacent to residentially used property. [Added 3-11-2008 by Ord.
No. 1195, § 3]
§ 255-29.   Lot, yard and bulk requirements. 
[Amended 8-12-2014 by Ord. No. 14-1291, § 3]
Accessory buildings , structures , and uses may be erected or conducted in a
side or rear yard , but not a front yard , must be completely detached from the
principal building , structure or use , and must meet all of the following
criteria:
   A.   Height. Unless otherwise specifically permitted or prohibited by any
other law or regulation, accessory buildings and structures shall not be
greater in height, measured from grade, than the lesser of 22 feet or the
height of the principal building or structure measured from grade to the peak
of the principal building roof.
   B.   Size. An accessory building or structure , other than a barn may not
exceed 600 square feet in building coverage .
   C.   Principal building setback. Accessory buildings , structures , and uses
shall be situated no closer than 10 feet from the principal building ,
structure , or use unless a greater building setback is specifically required
by any other law or regulation.
   D.   Lot line setback. Accessory buildings , structures , and uses shall be
located no closer to any side or rear property line than the greater distance
of 10 feet or other applicable specific accessory building , structure , or use
setback requirement. In B, C and NH Residential Districts, accessory buildings
or structures may be set back no closer than four feet to any side and rear
property line, provided they are of fire-resistant construction and no other
applicable specific accessory building , structure , or use setback requirement
applies. Utility boxes, to include other outdoor storage containers not
exceeding 200 cubic feet, are exempt from setback requirements.
   E.   Easement setback. Accessory buildings , structures , and uses shall not
encroach upon any easement, right of way , or sight distance triangle area
unless specifically authorized to do so by the instrument, law or regulation
creating the easement, right of way , or sight distance triangle.
   F.   Building coverage and impervious surface . The horizontal area of
accessory buildings and structures shall be included as building coverage and
impervious surface .
      (1)   On a lot with a principal residential use , the total building
coverage of accessory buildings and structures , may not exceed 50% of the
allowable building coverage in the underlying zoning district.
§ 255-30.   Antennas.
   A.   In all nonresidential zoning districts, roof-mounted accessory antennas
of any type may be erected on the roof of the principal or accessory building
to a maximum height of 35 feet above maximum height of the building on which it
is located, provided that the following criteria are met:
      (1)   Satellite dish antennas and microwave relay antennas shall not be
visible between ground level and 10 feet above ground level from any street
adjoining the lot .
      (2)   Satellite dish antennas shall not exceed 12 feet in diameter.
Microwave relay antennas shall not exceed four feet in diameter.
      (3)   Satellite dish antennas , microwave relay antennas and their
accompanying support structures shall be neutral in color and, to the extent
possible, compatible with the appearance and character of the neighborhood .
      (4)   All installations shall require a building  permit .
      (5)   All applications must include certification by a registered
engineer that the proposed installation complies with all applicable BOCA Basic
Building Code standards. 11 Furthermore, written documentation of such
compliance, including load distributions within the building's support
structure , shall be furnished.
      (6)   No advertising shall be affixed to any part of the antenna or
supporting structure .
   B.   In any zoning district, a permanent, extendable, retractable or
telescoping ground-mounted tower, mast or support and accompanying antenna that
is accessory to a permitted or special use may be erected to a maximum height
of 65 feet above mean ground level as measured at the base of the structure ,
provided that said antenna (s) may only be located in a side or rear yard . The
antenna tower must be set back from all applicable side and rear yard setbacks
one foot for every two feet of antenna height . For example, a forty-foot
antenna must be set back 20 feet from the setback line and a sixty-foot antenna
must be set back 30 feet. In addition, the following criteria shall also apply:
      (1)   No advertising shall be affixed to any part of the antenna or
supporting structure .
      (2)   Ground-mounted extendable, retractable or telescoping antennas may
be located at the side or rear yard setback and may be erected in excess of 65
feet as a special exception , provided that the following criteria are met:
         (a)   Installation shall require a building  permit .
         (b)   All applications must include certification by a registered
engineer that the proposed installation complies with all applicable BOCA Code
standards.
   C.   In all nonresidential zoning districts, ground-mounted satellite dish
antennas may be erected to a maximum height of 15 feet above mean ground level
as measured from the base of the structure , provided that the following
criteria are met:
      (1)   All installations must comply with all accessory use  yard ,
height, bulk and setback requirements specified within the district.
      (2)   If the subject parcel abuts a residence district, all such antennas
shall be placed a minimum of 20 feet from any lot line and effectively screened
from the adjoining residential property.
      (3)   Installation shall require a building  permit .
      (4)   All installations shall be located to prevent obstruction of the
antenna's reception window from potential permitted development on adjoining
properties.
      (5)   All applications must include certification by a registered
engineer that the proposed installation complies with all applicable BOCA Basic
Building Code standards. 12
      (6)   No advertising shall be affixed to the satellite dish antenna or
supporting structure .
   D.   In any residence district, roof-mounted accessory antennas (except
satellite dish antennas ) may be erected on the roof of the principal or
accessory building to a maximum height of 25 feet above the maximum height of
the building on which it is located.
   E.   In any residence district, roof-mounted satellite dish antennas may be
erected as a special exception only when the following criteria are met:
      (1)   Demonstration by the applicant that compliance with the applicable
yard , setback and height restrictions would result in the obstruction of the
antenna's reception window; and furthermore, that such obstruction involves
factors beyond the applicant's control.
      (2)   Installation shall require a building  permit .
      (3)   The height of the proposed installation does not exceed the maximum
height restriction imposed upon primary and accessory uses within the district.
      (4)   All applications must include certification by a registered
engineer that the proposed installation complies with all applicable BOCA Basic
Building Code standards. Furthermore, written documentation of such compliance,
including load distributions within the building's support structure , shall be
furnished.
      (5)   Only one satellite dish antenna shall be permitted per lot .
      (6)   Satellite dish antennas shall not exceed 12 feet in diameter.
      (7)   Satellite dish antennas shall be neutral in color and, to the
extent possible, compatible with the appearance and character of the
neighborhood .
      (8)   No advertising shall be affixed to the satellite dish antenna or
supporting structures .
      (9)   Those criteria relating to all special exceptions listed in § 255-
166C of this chapter shall apply.
   F.   In any residence district, one accessory ground-mounted satellite dish
antenna may be erected to a maximum height of 12 feet above mean ground level
as measured at the base of the structure , provided that the following criteria
are met:
      (1)   All installations must comply with all accessory use  yard ,
height, bulk and setback requirements specified within the district.
      (2)   All installations shall be located to prevent obstruction of the
antenna's reception window from potential permitted development on adjoining
properties.
      (3)   The satellite dish antenna shall be neutral in color and, to the
extent possible, compatible with character and appearance with the surrounding
neighborhood .
      (4)   All installations must include screening treatments located along
the antenna's nonreception window axes and low-level ornamental landscape
treatments along the reception window axes of the antenna's base. Such
treatments should completely enclose the antenna .
      (5)   Installation shall require a building  permit .
      (6)   All applications must include certification by a registered
engineer that the proposed installation complies with all applicable BOCA Basic
Building Code standards. 13
      (7)   No advertising shall be affixed to the satellite dish antenna or
supporting structure .
11. Editor's Note: See
Ch. 73, Building Construction.
12. Editor's Note: See
Ch. 73, Building Construction.
13. Editor's Note: See
Ch. 73, Building Construction.
§ 255-30.1.   Cellular communications antennas.
[Added 8-13-1996 by Ord. No. 915]
In recognition of the quasi-public nature of cellular communications systems,
the following special regulations shall apply:
   A.   Purposes. Purposes shall be as follows:
      (1)   To accommodate the need for cellular communications antennas while
regulating their location and number in the Township.
      (2)   To minimize adverse visual effects of cellular communications
antennas and antenna support structures through proper design, sitting and
vegetative screening.
      (3)   To avoid potential damage to adjacent properties from antenna
support structure failure and falling ice, through engineering and proper
sitting of antenna support structures .
      (4)   To encourage the joint use of any new antenna support structures to
reduce the number of such structures needed in the future.
   B.   Use regulations. [Amended 7-14-1998 by Ord. No. 972; 7-14-1998 by Ord.
No. 974]
      (1)   A wireless communications facility is permitted by conditional use
in any zoning district, except in a residential zoning district or within 500
feet thereof.
      (2)   A wireless communications facility is permitted on property owned
and used by Upper Dublin Township for municipal purposes in any zoning
district. [Amended 8-10-1999 by Ord. No. 1003]
      (3)   In addition to the notice requirements for a conditional use
hearing provided in Article XXV, the Board of Commissioners shall also mail a
notice of the conditional use hearing, at the applicant's expense, to all
property owners within 500 feet of the proposed antenna  structure , provided
that failure to receive notice required by this subsection shall not invalidate
any action taken by the Board.
      (4)   All other uses ancillary to a wireless communications facility
(including a business office, maintenance depot, vehicle storage, etc.) are
prohibited from the site of a wireless communications facility , unless
otherwise permitted in the zoning district in which the facility is located.
      (5)   Any wireless communications facility to be erected in a right-of-
way shall be a micro facility , shall be mounted on a utility pole not more
than 40 feet in height, and may not be erected if the site of the facility is
within 500 feet of a residential zoning district.
      (6)   All wireless communications facilities shall be of stealth design.
The applicant shall submit its proposal for such design at the time the
application for the facility is filed with the Township. The design shall be
approved by the Board of Commissioners in the grant of the conditional use .
   C.   Standards of approval of conditional use . [Amended 7-14-1998 by Ord.
No. 974]
      (1)   The wireless communications company is required to demonstrate,
using technological evidence, the area the antenna is trying to cover and why
it cannot be placed at a different height or a different location or provide
coverage to a different area.
      (2)   If the wireless communications company proposes to build a tower
(as opposed to mounting the antenna on an existing structure ), it is required
to demonstrate that it contacted the owners of tall structures within a one-
fourth mile radius of the site proposed, asked for permission to install the
antenna on those structures and was denied for reasons other than economic
ones. This would include smokestacks, water towers, tall buildings , antenna
support structures of other wireless communications companies, other
communications towers (fire, police, etc.) and other tall structures . The
Board of Commissioners may deny an application to construct a new tower if the
applicant has not made a good faith effort to mount the antenna on an existing
structure .
      (3)   The applicant shall submit certification from a Pennsylvania
registered professional engineer that a proposed antennae support structure has
been designed and will be constructed in accordance with the current structural
standards for steel antenna towers and antenna supporting structures ,
published by the Electrical Industrial Association/Telecommunications Industry
Association and applicable requirements of the Upper Dublin Township Building
Code. 14
   D.   Standards of approval of all wireless communications antennas .
[Amended 7-14-1998 by Ord. No. 974]
      (1)   Antenna height . Communications antennas attached to an existing
building or structure shall be permitted to exceed the height limitations of
the applicable zoning district or the highest elevation of the building or
structure , whichever height is less, by no more than 20 feet. [Amended 8-8-
2000 by Ord. No. 1040]
      (2)   Setbacks from base of antenna support structure . If a new antenna
support structure is constructed (as opposed to mounting the antenna on an
existing structure ), the minimum distances between the base of the support
structure or any guy wire anchors and any property line or right-of-way line
shall be the largest of the following:
         (a)   Thirty percent of antenna height (measured from ground level).
         (b)   The minimum front yard setback in the underlying zoning
district.
         (c)   Forty feet.
      (3)   Antenna support structure and operating safety.
         (a)   The applicant shall demonstrate that the proposed antenna and
support structure are safe and the surrounding areas will not be negatively
affected by support structure failure, falling ice or other debris,
electromagnetic fields or radio frequency interference. All support structures
shall be fitted with anti-climbing devices, as approved by the manufacturers.
This condition is provided recognizing the fact that the Telecommunications Act
of 1996 gives sole jurisdiction to the Federal Communications Commission (FCC)
in the field of radio frequency emissions regulations, and that the Township is
not permitted thereunder to condition or deny approval of a wireless
communications facility which meets or exceeds the FCC standards for radio
frequency impact on the basis of that impact.
         (b)   Any applicant proposing communications antennas to be mounted on
a building or other structure shall submit evidence from a Pennsylvania
registered professional engineer certifying that the proposed installation will
not exceed the structural capacity of the building or other structure ,
considering wind and other loads associated with the antenna location.
         (c)   Any applicant proposing communications antennas to be mounted on
a building or other structure shall submit detailed construction and elevation
drawings indicating how the antennas will be mounted on the structure for
review by the Township for compliance with the Upper Dublin Township Building
Code 15 and other applicable law.
         (d)   Wireless communications facilities shall comply with all
applicable standards established by the Federal Communications Commission
governing human exposure to electromagnetic radiation. Testing to assure
compliance shall be performed annually by the Township, at the applicant's
expense, or, at the Township's election, shall be performed by the applicant
and the results provided to the Township upon receipt. The applicant shall
provide the Township, upon receipt, with copies of whatever reports are
generated concerning electromagnetic radiation from the applicant's facilities
in the Township.
         (e)   Communications antennas shall not cause radio frequency
interference with other communications facilities located in the Township.
      (4)   Fencing. A fence shall be required around a wireless communications
facility unless it is within a right-of-way or is waived by the Board of
Commissioners. The fence shall be eight feet in height, exclusive of barbed
wire protection. In all other respects, the fence shall conform to the
provisions of §
255-24.
      (5)   Landscaping. The following landscaping shall be required to screen
as much of the support structure as possible, the fence surrounding the support
structure and any other ground level features (such as a building ) and in
general to soften the appearance of the wireless communications facility . The
Township may permit any combination of existing vegetation, topography, walls,
decorative fences or other features instead of landscaping, if they achieve the
same degree of screening as the required landscaping. If the antenna is mounted
on an existing structure , and other equipment is housed inside an existing
structure , landscaping shall not be required.
         (a)   An evergreen screen shall be required to surround the site. The
screen can be either a hedge (planted three feet on center maximum) or a row of
evergreen trees (planted 10 feet on center maximum). The evergreen screen shall
be a minimum height of six feet at planting, and shall grow to a minimum of 15
feet at maturity.
         (b)   In addition, existing vegetation on and round the site shall be
preserved to the greatest extent possible.
      (6)   In order to reduce the number of antenna support structures in the
community in the future, the proposed support structure shall be required to
accommodate other users, including other wireless communications companies, and
local police, fire and ambulance companies.
      (7)   The wireless communications company must demonstrate that it is
licensed by the Federal Communications Commission to operate an Antenna Support
Structure , if applicable, and the wireless communications facility for which
application is sought and must provide the Township annually with documentation
that it continues to be so licensed. The wireless communications company shall
submit, upon application, a copy of its current Federal Communication
Commission License, the name, address and emergency telephone number for the
operator of the communications support structure and a certificate of insurance
evidencing general liability coverage in the minimum amount of $1,000,000 per
occurrence and property damage coverage in the minimum amount of $1,000,000 per
occurrence covering the specific wireless communications facility for which the
application is filed.
      (8)   Parking shall be provided as required by Article XIX of this
chapter. [Amended 6-11-2002 by Ord. No. 1089]
      (9)   Antenna support structures under 200 feet in height should be
painted silver or have a galvanized finish retained, in order to reduce the
visual impact. Support structures may be painted green up to the height of
nearby trees. Support structures 200 feet in height or taller shall meet all
Federal Aviation Administration regulations. No antenna support structure may
be artificially lighted except when required by the FAA.
      (10)   The applicant shall be required to remove the antenna support
structure and ancillary facilities within 60 days of discontinuance of use .
      (11)   A full site plan shall be required for all wireless communications
facilities showing the antenna , antenna support structure , building ,
fencing, buffering, access, landscaping and all other requirements of
Chapter 212.
      (12)   Any applicant proposing to mount a wireless communications
facility on a building or other structure shall submit evidence of agreements
and/or easements necessary to provide access to the building or structure on
which the antennas are to be mounted so that installation and maintenance of
facility can be accomplished.
      (13)   Antenna size.
         (a)   Omni-directional or whip communications antennas shall not
exceed 20 feet in height and seven inches in diameter.
         (b)   Directional or panel communications antennas shall not exceed
five feet in height and three feet in width.
      (14)   Building -mounted communications antennas shall not be located on
any single-family dwelling or two-family dwelling .
14. Editor's Note: See
Ch. 73, Building Construction.
15. Editor's Note: See
Ch. 73, Building Construction.
§ 255-30.2.   Portable storage units.
[Added 10-14-2008 by Ord. No. 1205, § 2]
Portable storage units for temporary storage on properties used for residential
purposes in the A, A-1, A-2, B and C Residence Districts are permitted as a
temporary accessory use subject to the following provisions:
   A.   No more than two portable storage units shall be permitted on a
property at any time.
   B.   A portable storage unit (s) may be placed on a lot for up to 14 days if
used in conjunction with the movement of household goods.
   C.   A portable storage unit may be placed on a lot for up to 90 days with
the issuance of a Zoning Permit by the Code Enforcement Department. However, if
the container is being used in conjunction with a project for which a permit
has been issued for the property where it is placed, the container may remain
on the property until the completion of the project.
   D.   It shall be prohibited to use a portable storage unit for more than 90
days within a 12-month period, except as permitted above.
   E.   Except for portable storage unit (s) placed on a lot for 14 days or
less, no such unit may display advertising except for the name, address and
telephone number of the vendor, and that information must be contained within a
space no larger than eight square feet.
   F.   Portable storage units may not be used to store hazardous substances as
defined in
Chapter 117 of the Upper Dublin Code.
   G.   Portable storage units must be delivered and maintained in good
condition, free of evidence of deterioration, weathering, discoloration, rust,
ripping, tearing or having holes or breaks.
   H.   Portable storage units must be locked when not in active use .
   I.   Required setbacks
      (1)   The unit shall be set back a minimum of six feet from a side or
rear property line.
      (2)   On properties having driveways, the unit must be located at least
10 feet from the sidewalk (if present) or edge of the street .
      (3)   On properties without driveways, the unit may be located in the
street after issuance of a permit by the Public Works Department.
§ 255-30.3.   Crematories. 
[Added 4-10-2012 by Ord. No. 12-1258, § 2]
A crematory is permitted in any zoning district, except a residential zoning
district or within 500 feet thereof, as an accessory use to a permitted,
principal use .
ARTICLE V
Steep Slopes, Impervious Surfaces and Riparian Corridors
[Added 8-11-1987 by Ord. No. 736; amended 9-14-2004 by Ord. No. 1138]
§ 255-31.   Intent.
[Amended 12-13-2022 by Ord. No. 22-1377]
In the interest of the public health, safety and welfare, the provisions of
this chapter and this article in particular are intended:
   A.   To minimize stormwater runoff, street flooding, streambank and soil
erosion caused by inappropriate development of steep slope land areas and/or
the conversion of undeveloped, porous surfaces to impervious ground cover.
   B.   To protect the Township from development which may cause flooding and a
subsequent expenditure for public works and disaster relief affecting the
economic well-being of the Township and its residents.
   C.   To protect residents from property damage and personal injury due to
runoff, flooding, erosion and landslides attributable to nearby development ,
particularly on steeply sloping land.
   D.   To relate the intensity of development to the ability of the natural
and man-made environment to support it, including the steepness of terrain, in
order to minimize grading, the removal of vegetation, the construction of
nonabsorbent surfaces, runoff and erosion and to help ensure the utilization of
land in accordance with its natural capabilities to support development .
   E.   To restrict the impact of erosion and sedimentation and the alteration
of natural drainage patterns which may aggravate flooding both in the immediate
area and in downstream areas.
   F.   To maximize groundwater recharge and maintain the base flow of streams
and watercourses , thereby ensuring both the quantity and quality of
groundwater and surface waters.
   G.   Improve surface water quality by reducing the amount of nutrients,
sediment, organic matter, pesticides, and other harmful substances that reach
watercourses , wetlands, subsurface, and surface water bodies by using
scientifically proven processes including filtration, deposition, absorption,
adsorption, plant uptake, and denitrification, and by improving infiltration,
encouraging sheet flow, and stabilizing concentrated flows.
   H.   Improve and maintain the safety, reliability, and adequacy of the water
supply for domestic, agricultural, commercial, industrial, and recreational
uses along with sustaining diverse populations of aquatic flora and fauna.
   I.   Preserve and protect areas that intercept surface water runoff,
wastewater, subsurface flow, and/or deep groundwater flows from upland sources
and function to remove or buffer the effects of associated nutrients, sediment,
organic matter, pesticides, or other pollutants prior to entry into surface
waters, as well as provide wildlife habitat, moderate water temperature in
surface waters, attenuate flood flow, and provide opportunities for passive
recreation
   J.   Work with floodplain , steep slope , and other requirements that
regulate environmentally sensitive areas to minimize hazards to life, property,
and riparian features.
   K.   Recognize that natural features contribute to the welfare and quality
of life of the Township residents.
   L.   Conserve natural, scenic, and recreation areas within and adjacent to
riparian areas for the community's benefit.
§ 255-32.   Regulations pertaining to impervious surfaces.
[Amended 3-11-2008 by Ord. No. 1195, § 4; 9-11-2012 by Ord. No. 12-1259, §§
1–3; 7-9-2024 by Ord. No. 24-1391, § 2]
   A.   The limitations of this chapter pertaining to impervious surfaces shall
be strictly adhered to except as set forth herein.
      (1)   (Reserved). [Amended 9-11-2012 by Ord. No. 12-1259]
      (2)   (Reserved). [Amended 9-11-2012 by Ord. No. 12-1259; 7-9-2024 by
Ord. No. 24-1391]
      (3)   A lot which has a minimum net lot area of 25 acres or more, is in a
residential zoning district, is used for a public school purpose and contains
an elementary, middle and/or high school  building (s), may exceed the
impervious surface limitations set forth in this chapter, by no more than 20%
of the lot area provided the following standards are met:
         (a)   For applications proposing improvements that result in up to 10%
more impervious surfaces on the development site than what is currently
permitted in the underlying zoning district, (i.e., the 25% limit is increased
to up to 35%) stormwater management facilities shall be designed to release no
more than 90% of the pre-development rate of run off for all regulated storm
events, (i.e., the 1, 2, 10, 25, 50, 100 flood event.)
         (b)   For applications proposing improvements that result in between
10% and 20% more impervious surfaces on the development site than what is
currently permitted in the underlying zoning district, (i.e., the 25% limit is
increased to between 35% and 45%) stormwater management facilities shall be
designed to release no more than 75% of the predevelopment rate of run off for
all regulated storm events, (i.e., the 1, 2, 10, 25, 50, 100 flood event.)
[Added 3-11-2008 by Ord. No. 1195, § 4; amended 9-11-2012 by Ord. No. 12-1259]
   B.   Common driveways; impervious surface allocation. For the purpose of
determining the amount of impervious surface on a lot served by a common
driveway, the total impervious surface of that common driveway shall be
allocated evenly among the lots served, unless it is otherwise allocated in a
recorded covenant approved by the Township and binding on the properties
affected, in which case such recorded allocation shall control.
   C.   Where no impervious surface limitations are imposed within an overlay
district, such limitations shall be the same as those applicable in the
underlying district.
§ 255-33.   Permitted and prohibited uses and activities in riparian corridor.
[Added 12-13-2022 by Ord. No. 22-1377]
   A.   Technical terminology used in this article shall be interpreted to the
meanings used by recognized sources and experts in the fields of forestry, wood
land or meadow management, streambank protection, wetlands management, erosion
and sedimentation control, or other relevant fields.
   B.   No land disturbance shall be permitted within any riparian corridor
except as permitted below:
      (1)   Open space uses such as wildlife sanctuaries, nature preserves,
forest preserves, fishing areas, passive areas for public or private parklands,
and reforestation.
      (2)   Customary agricultural practices in accordance with a soil
conservation plan approved by the Montgomery County Conservation District and a
nutrient management plan in accordance with state requirements, if applicable.
      (3)   Regulated activities permitted by the Pennsylvania Department of
Environmental Protection and the Township for stream or wetland crossing or
other encroachment (i.e., farm vehicle and livestock, recreational trails,
roads, and driveways sewer or waterlines, and utility transmission lines),
provided that any disturbance is offset by riparian corridor improvements as
approved by the Township.
      (4)   Vegetation management in accordance with a stream bank
stabilization plan or an approved landscape or open space management plan.
      (5)   Naturalized stormwater management facilities, provided the entire
facility is located a minimum of 50 feet from the defined top of bank, high
water mark, or wetland limit, and situated outside the 100-year floodplain .
      (6)   The following passive and active recreational areas, provided they
are designed in a manner that they will not permit concentrated flow of
stormwater runoff:
         (a)   Camps.
         (b)   Campgrounds.
         (c)   Picnic areas.
         (d)   Golf courses.
         (e)   Ballfields.
         (f)   Playgrounds and courts.
         (g)   Trails and paths.
   C.   Prohibited uses. Any use or activity not authorized under Subsection A.
above shall be prohibited within the riparian corridor . The following
activities and facilities are specifically prohibited:
      (1)   Clear-cutting of trees and other vegetation.
      (2)   Selective cutting of trees and/or the clearing of other vegetation,
except where such clearing is necessary to prepare land for a use permitted
under Subsection A. above or where removal is necessary as a means to eliminate
dead, diseased or hazardous trees. Removal is subject to revegetation by native
plants that are most suited to the riparian corridor .
      (3)   Storage of any hazardous or noxious materials.
      (4)   Use of fertilizers, pesticides, herbicides, and/or other chemicals
in excess of prescribed industry standards or the recommendations of the
Montgomery County Conservation District and the Township.
      (5)   Roads or driveways, except as permitted as corridor crossings by
the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection and the Township under
§ 255-33.B.(3).
      (6)   Parking lots.
      (7)   Any type of permanent structure, including fences, with the
exception of split-rail fences.
      (8)   Subsurface sewage disposal areas.
      (9)   Sod farming
      (10)   Stormwater basins, including berms and outfall facilities.
   D.   Nonconforming buildings, structures, and uses shall be regulated under
the provisions of Article XX - Nonconforming Uses.
   E.   Vegetation of riparian area. In cases where a subdivision and/or land
development is proposed, planting or replanting of the riparian corridor shall
be required where there is little or no existing streamside vegetation. Native
vegetation approved by the Township must be used in replanting efforts. Three
layers of vegetation are required when replanting the riparian corridor . These
layers include herbaceous plants that serve as ground cover, understory shrubs,
and trees that form an overhead canopy. The vegetation plan shall be prepared
by a qualified professional such as a landscape architect or engineer and shall
comply with the following minimum requirements:
      (1)   Ground cover . Ground cover consisting of a native seed mix
extending a minimum of 25 feet in width from the edge of the stream bank must
be provided along the portion(s) of the stream corridor where little or no
riparian vegetation exists. Appropriate ground cover includes native herbs and
forbs, exclusive of noxious weeds or invasive plants as defined by the
Pennsylvania Department of Agriculture. This twenty-five-foot-wide planted area
shall be designated on the plan as a no mow zone and shall be left as natural
cover except in accordance with the maintenance instructions stated on the
plan.
      (2)   Trees and shrubs. These planting layers include trees that form an
overhead canopy and understory shrubs. Overstory trees are deciduous or
evergreen trees that include oak, hickory, maple gum, beech, sycamore, hemlock,
pine and fir. Evergreen and deciduous shrubs should consist of elderberry,
viburnum, azalea, rhododendron, holly, laurel and alders. These plants shall be
planted in an informal manner and at a rate of at least one overstory tree and
three shrubs for every 20 linear feet of stream or waterway.
      (3)   Exceptions. These planting requirements shall not apply to existing
farm fields located within the riparian buffer if farming operations are to be
continued and the required nutrient management plan is met.
§ 255-34.   Regulations pertaining to steep slopes.
The following regulations shall apply on all land having a slope of 10% or more
as delineated on a plan which meets the requirements of a preliminary plan as
specified in
Chapter 212, Subdivision and Land Development:
   A.   Every lot hereafter created by subdivision having an average slope of
at least 10%, but not more than 15%, shall have the minimum lot area increased
by a factor of 1.3 and shall not have impervious surfaces exceeding 30% of the
lot area as increased.
   B.   Every lot hereafter created by subdivision having an average slope of
at least 15%, but not more than 25%, shall have the minimum lot area increased
by a factor of 1.5 and shall not have impervious surfaces exceeding 20% of the
lot area as increased.
   C.   Every lot hereafter created by subdivision having an average slope of
at least 25% shall have the minimum lot area increased by a factor of two and
shall not have impervious surfaces exceeding 10% of the lot area as increased.
   D.   All freestanding structures , buildings and substantial improvements
(with the exception of driveways and utilities when no other location is
feasible) are prohibited on slopes of 35% or greater and are prohibited on
slopes where the soil type is classified as “stony land, steep,” by that
document entitled “Soil Survey Montgomery County Pennsylvania,” prepared by the
United States Department of Agriculture, Soil Conservation Service, dated April
1967, copies of which are on file in the office of the Township Manager, Upper
Dublin Township Building, 801 Loch Alsh Avenue, Fort Washington, Pennsylvania.
§ 255-35.   Liability.
Neither the approval of any proposed subdivision by any officer, employee or
agency of the Township of Upper Dublin nor the grant of any subdivision
approval by the Board of Commissioners of the Township of Upper Dublin shall
constitute a representation, guaranty or warranty of any kind by the Township
of Upper Dublin or by any of its officers, employees, agencies or members of
its agencies of the safety or practicality of the proposed subdivision and use
, and such approval or grant of approval shall create no liability on the part
of the Township of Upper Dublin or its officers, employees, agencies or members
of its agencies.
ARTICLE VI
Planned Residential Areas
[Amended 1-10-1995 by Ord. No. 879]
§ 255-36.   Intent.
In accordance with the declaration of legislative intent as set forth in
Article I, §
255-2 of this chapter, it is recognized that those purposes may be accomplished
to the best advantage of the Township through the planned arrangement of
residential subdivisions wherein actual provision is made for recreational or
park areas. In order to accomplish this purpose, the Board of Commissioners may
approve a reduction in lot area requirements within a specified area under
consideration for residential development if it is determined that the
reduction will be appropriate for the particular land in question and will be
beneficial to the public health, safety, morals and general welfare.
§ 255-37.   Review of plan.
In order to accomplish the objective of this article, the owner of any tract of
land, either individually or with the owner of an adjoining tract , which shall
have an aggregate area of 25 acres or more may submit a proposed plan to the
Township for review by the Board of Commissioners in accordance with the
appropriate provisions of
Chapter 212, Subdivision and Land Development. The plan shall include specific
evidence and facts showing consideration and be subject to, inter alia, the
following conditions:
   A.   The amount by which the square foot area of the individual lots is
reduced shall not exceed 10% of the district requirement.
   B.   The width of lots at building line , front yards , side yards and rear
yards shall comply with the minimum requirements for the district.
   C.   All lots shall be served by public water and sewer.
   D.   The total number of lots shall be no greater than would be the case if
the subject land were to be developed in accordance with the prior requirements
for the zoning district.
   E.   The area to be dedicated for public use shall be at least equal in
square foot area to the total area by which the lots were reduced below the
minimum requirements of the district, but shall in no case be less than two and
one-half (2 ½) acres.
   F.   The area to be dedicated for public use shall be so located and be of
such shape as to be acceptable to the Board of Commissioners.
ARTICLE VII
Residential Districts
§ 255-38.   General.
The following regulations shall govern a designated residential district.
§ 255-39.   Permitted uses.
[Amended 8-11-2009 by Ord. No. 09-1216, § 1; 9-13-2011 by Ord. No. 11-1244, §
2]
   A.   A building may be erected, altered or used and a lot or premises may be
used for any one use permitted in this section. Permitted uses on each lot in A
and B Residential Districts shall be as follows: [Amended 10-12-1993 by Ord.
No. 858; 1-10-1995 by Ord. No. 879; 8-8-2000 by Ord. No. 1041; 8-11-2009 by
Ord. No. 09-1216]
      (1)   Single-family detached dwelling , including age-restricted housing
. [Amended 5-11-2004 by Ord. No. 1127]
      (2)   Agriculture , except commercial greenhouses or establishments for
sale of farm or agricultural products other than uses accessory to agriculture
as provided in Article IV hereinabove.
      (3)   Public schools .
      (4)   Community residential program , when authorized as a special
exception , subject to the following: [Amended 8-11-2009 by Ord. No. 09-1216]
         (a)   [Reserved]. [Amended 8-11-2009 by Ord. No. 09-1216]
         (b)   In residential districts which have more than a single set of
area and width regulations, community residential programs shall meet the area
and width regulations for single-family dwellings .
         (c)   Each community residential program must make application to and
obtain from the Code Enforcement Department a use and occupancy permit , which
shall be issued after an inspection by the Township to ensure that the building
(s) meet(s) the standards of the International Property Maintenance Code
currently adopted by the Township. 16  This requirement is applicable
regardless of whether the residents of the community residential program are
lessees or owners of the community residential program .  [Amended 8-11-2009 by
Ord. No. 09-1216]
         (d)   Off-street, on-site parking must be provided and will include at
least two spaces for the community residential program and at least one
additional space for every staff member working on the premises. Parking must
be provided in the side or rear yard only. The setback of the parking area and
the approaches thereto will be no closer to an adjacent lot than an accessory
building in the same zoning district may be located pursuant to this chapter.
All driveways must be constructed to permit the turning of vehicles on the lot
so as to avoid the necessity of backing into the street .
         (e)   It is the intent of this subsection to make reasonable
accommodations in the rules, policies and practices within this Township to
afford all handicapped persons equal opportunity to use and enjoy a dwelling in
satisfaction of the requirements of the Fair Housing Act (42 U.S.C. § 3601, et
seq.), as amended. No provision of this article shall require that a dwelling
be made available to an individual whose tenancy would constitute a direct
threat to the health or safety of other individuals or whose tenancy would
result in substantial physical damage to the property of others.
      (5)   Any one of the following uses when authorized as a special
exception :
         (a)   Church, chapel or other place of worship, including an adjunct
residential dwelling .
         (b)   A swim and recreational club , provided that it is owned and
operated by its members as a nonprofit association or corporation and the
membership is limited to the geographical community within which it is located,
which limit shall be defined by the Zoning Hearing Board as a condition to the
grant of an exception hereunder.
         (c)   Public utility facilities, provided that the exterior
architectural design shall be of a residential character, and provided that the
property shall at no time be used for the storage of equipment or vehicles or
that it be used for other commercial purposes.
         (d)   Day camp
      (6)   Any of the aforesaid uses granted by way of special exception shall
be subject to such reasonable conditions as may be determined by the Zoning
Hearing Board, after hearing, among which conditions shall include the
following: reasonable setbacks as to front, side and rear yards ; percentage of
lot occupancy; adequate off-street parking on approved surfaces; provided,
however, that no condition shall be granted which is less restrictive as to
height of structure , percentage of lot usage, setbacks and off-street parking
than those required within the zoning district in which the property is
located.
      (7)   No special exception that may be granted hereunder by the Zoning
Hearing Board shall be contrary to the ordinances of the Township.
      (8)   Townhouse structures as a conditional use in the B Residential
District, subject to the provisions of §
255-42.1 and Article XXV. [Added 1-17-2006 by Ord. No. 1162]
   B.   Permitted uses on each lot in C Residential Districts shall be as
follows:
      (1)   Any use permitted in A and B Residential Districts, except
townhouse structures . [Amended 1-17-2006 by Ord. No. 1162]
      (2)   Duplex dwelling and twin dwelling , when approved by Zoning Hearing
Board as a special exception , provided that the area of the lot shall be at
least 6,000 square feet for each dwelling unit . The units may also be age-
restricted. [Amended 12-14-1999 by Ord. No. 1015; 8-8-2000 by Ord. No. 1041; 5-
11-2004 by Ord. No. 1127]
   C.   Permitted uses on each lot in NH Residential districts shall be as
follows:
      (1)   Any use permitted in A and B Residential districts, except
townhouse structures .
      (2)   Twin dwellings .
   (4)   Multi-family Option, in compliance with the requirements of § 255-
45.1.D. [Added 5-10-2016 by Ord. No. 16-1319]
16. Editor’s Note: See
Ch. 180, Property Maintenance.
§ 255-39.1.   Decks.
[Added 1-8-1991 by Ord. No. 799; amended 1-10-1995 by Ord. No. 879; 2-13-1996
by Ord. No. 904; amended 4-12-2016 by Ord. No. 16-1316]
Decks and patios may extend into the required rear and side yard setbacks of a
single-family dwelling , single-family patio dwelling , twin dwelling ,
attached patio dwelling , townhouse structure , duplex dwelling , twin duplex
dwelling and multiplex dwelling , provided that they are not enclosed either on
the sides, by a roof or underneath the deck. The deck perimeter shall not
exceed 20 feet to the rear or 10 feet to the side, and in no case shall it be
closer than 10 feet to a property line. Decks and patios adjacent to interior
party walls are not limited by side yard setbacks. Decks not exceeding 200
square feet are not considered as impervious surface , provided they are
constructed above a pervious area, with spaces between each plank to allow
rainwater to pass through.
§ 255-40.   Truck exclusions.
[Amended 9-14-1993 by Ord. No. 849; amended 1-10-2023 by Ord. No. 23-1381]
   A.   It shall be unlawful for the owner or operator of any tractor-trailer,
construction vehicle, commercial motor vehicle, or motor carrier vehicle (as
defined by the PA Vehicle Code) having a gross vehicle weight of 9,000 pounds
or more to park such vehicle at any time on any street within a residential
district or on property within a residential district in the Township of Upper
Dublin, except when making deliveries or improvements to the property on such
street.
   B.   One tractor-trailer, construction vehicle, commercial vehicle or motor
carrier vehicle having a gross vehicle weight of 9,000 pounds or less may be
parked or stored on any property within a residential district at any time,
provided the tractor-trailer, construction vehicle, commercial vehicle or motor
carrier vehicle is parked or stored in an enclosed structure or on a paved
driveway .
   C.   This section shall not apply to police, fire or other emergency
vehicles.
   D.   This section shall not apply to the following vehicles, when otherwise
legally parked:
      (1)   Vehicles owned by the township.
      (2)   Vehicles owned by utility companies when utility work is underway
nearby.
      (3)   Construction vehicles when the vehicle is connected with an active
work site that is permitted by the township or PennDOT.
   E.   Enforcement. The Police Department will initially investigate reported
violations of this section. If there are no safety issues that need to be
addressed immediately, the Police Department will report the relevant
information about the violation to the Zoning Officer for enforcement in
accordance with §
255-197.
§ 255-40.1.   Storage of vehicles and equipment in street prohibited.
[Added 1-10-2023 by Ord. No. 23-1382]
   A.   Definitions.
   Recreational vehicle — Any boat, boat trailer, house coach, house trailer,
mobile home, truck camper (mounted on a truck or dismounted), travel trailer,
folding tent camper, recreational cargo trailer or other motor vehicle adapted
for vacation, residential or recreational use.
   B.   No person shall store a recreational vehicle equal to or greater than
20 feet in overall length upon any street in a residential district in the
Township of Upper Dublin. For purposes of this section, storage shall mean to
park a vehicle on the street on more than five days in any 30-day period. One
recreational vehicle may be parked or stored on any property in a residential
district at any time, provided the recreational vehicle is parked or stored in
an enclosed structure or on a paved driveway .
   C.   Enforcement. The Police Department will initially investigate reported
violations of this section. If there are no safety issues that need to be
addressed immediately, the Police Department will report the relevant
information about the violation to the Zoning Officer for enforcement in
accordance with §
255-197.
§ 255-41.   Street repairs.
[Amended 9-14-1993 by Ord. No. 849]
No repairs or body and fender work may be done within the limits of any street
in a residential zone except for those designated as emergency repairs.
§ 255-42.   Special exceptions.
   A.   Any of the uses authorized as special exceptions in §
255-39 above shall be granted by the Zoning Hearing Board pursuant to the
procedures set forth in Article XXIII and subject to proof by the applicant for
such use that such use shall not be detrimental to the health and welfare of
the public.
   B.   No use authorized as a special exception shall be granted unless the
applicant shall show that the proposed use complies with the following:
      (1)   Church, chapel or place of worship.
         (a)   Lot area : not less than 80,000 square feet, with a width of not
less than 200 feet at the building line .
         (b)   Building area : not more than 20% of the area of the lot .
         (c)   Yards .
            [1]   Front yard : not less than 100 feet in depth.
            [2]   Side yard : not less than 25 feet in width on each side.
            [3]   Rear yard : not less than 50 feet in depth.
         (d)   Parking. Parking places shall be provided as required by Article
XIX of this chapter, and provided further that not more than 33% of the
required parking area shall be located in the front yard area.
      (2)   Swim and recreational club .
         (a)   Lot area : not less than 80,000 square feet with a width of not
less than 200 feet at the building line .
         (b)   Building area : not more than 20% of the area of the lot . For
the purposes of this section, a swimming pool, handball, racquet or squash
court shall be considered a building .
         (c)   Yards .
            [1]   Front yard : not less than 100 feet in depth.
            [2]   Side yard : not less than 25 feet in width on each side.
            [3]   Rear yard : not less than 50 feet.
         (d)   Parking: as required by Article XIX, §
255-135C(8) of this chapter.
      (3)   Day camp .
         (a)   The lot shall be not less than five acres.
         (b)   No structure shall be erected within 50 feet of the outside lot
boundaries or of a public street .
         (c)   No day camp activity shall be engaged in before 10:00 a.m. and
after 5:00 p.m. of each weekday (prevailing time) and on Saturdays and Sundays.
         (d)   The use of a lot shall be limited to children between the ages
of six and 16.
         (e)   The number of campers shall be limited to 10 per acre, with a
maximum of 100 campers for each day camp .
         (f)   Each day camp shall be supervised by a minimum of qualified
adult supervisors (in addition to administrative personnel), as follows:
            [1]   For each eight or fewer campers, eight or under years of age:
one supervisor.
            [2]   For each 10 or fewer campers, 10 or over years of age: one
supervisor.
         (g)   Trash and refuse must be stored in approved containers and
removed daily from the lot .
         (h)   An adequate centralized sanitary waste facility shall be
provided, based upon plans and construction approved by the Board of Health of
the Township.
         (i)   Adequate facilities shall be provided to control noise,
eliminate physical hazards and make provision for activities during inclement
weather periods. Excessive levels of noise are determined in accordance with §
158-12 of this Code. [Amended 5-13-1997 by Ord. No. 943]
         (j)   A permit can be issued and continued only to an adult natural
person or persons , which permit cannot be transferred without the consent of
the Zoning Hearing Board. No permit shall attach to the title of the lot .
         (k)   Each day camp shall be inspected at least annually by the Board
of Health of the Township.
         (l)   Each day camp  shall pay the Township, payable on or before May
15 of each year, an inspection fee as set forth in the Township fee schedule.
[Amended 1-10-1995 by Ord. No. 879]
         (m)   The Zoning Hearing Board reserves unto itself the right and
privilege to review the application and the issuance of the permit and
(following a hearing held in accordance with §
255-179 of Article XXIII) to revoke said permit for any substantial violation
of the conditions of the permit .
         (n)   Adequate provision shall be made for vehicular traffic by means
of an all-weather paved driveway and on-lot parking areas; no parking shall be
permitted within 25 feet of a boundary line, with the provision of at least one
parking area for each 10 campers.
         (o)   Any other conditions deemed necessary by the Zoning Hearing
Board.
§ 255-42.1.   Conditional uses.
[Added 1-17-2006 by Ord. No. 1162]
No conditional use for a townhouse structure shall be granted unless the
applicant shows that the proposed use complies with the following:
   A.   Tract area : a minimum of five acres together with access onto a
primary road and a tract width on such road of not less than 200 feet.
   B.   Density : the maximum density shall be 3.1 units/acre of lot area .
   C.   Common open space: no less than 50% of the tract area , excluding
street rights-of-way.
      (1)   All dwelling units shall have access to common open space without
the obstruction of intervening lots , structures , fences or other impediments
to pedestrians.
      (2)   A covenant providing for the use and maintenance of the open space
in a form approved by the Township Solicitor shall be recorded with the final
plan. The covenant shall require joint maintenance by an association of unit
owners and permit joint use of the open space.
      (3)   Stormwater management facilities may be included in the common open
space.
   D.   Perimeter setback: Structures shall be situated so as to maintain a
minimum setback line from an ultimate right-of-way line of 50 feet and from any
lot line of 75 feet.
   E.   Building separation: Individual structures must have sufficient
separation to meet applicable fire protection codes. In no case may this
distance be less than 30 feet.
   F.   Building length or depth: The greatest dimension in length or depth of
a new structure containing three or more dwelling units shall not exceed 120
feet. No more than six units shall be allowed in a new structure .
§ 255-43.   A Residential District.
[Amended 3-11-2008 by Ord. No. 1195, § 5]
In an A Residential District, the following regulations shall apply:
   A.   A building may be erected, altered or used and a lot or premises may be
used for any uses permitted in §
255-39.
   B.   Lot , yard and bulk requirements. 17 [Amended 9-14-2004 by Ord. No.
1138]
Regulation Requirement
Regulation                                 Requirement
Lot area (minimum)                         26,000 square feet
Width at building line (minimum)           120 feet
Front yard (minimum)                       50 feet
Side yard , each (minimum)                 25 feet
Rear yard (minimum) Height (maximum)       50 feet
Principal building height (maximum)        35 feet. Except that the roof over areas within a public school building used
[Amended 3-11-2008 by Ord. No. 1195, § 5] for athletic events and theater productions may exceed 35 feet in height
                                           provided: [Amended 3-11-2008 by Ord. No. 1195, § 5]
                                           I. The peak of the roof over that portion of the building used for athletic
                                           events and/or theatre productions may not exceed 60 feet in height at any
                                           point. [Added 3-11-2008 by Ord. No. 1195, § 5]
                                           ii. The area of the building under a roof that exceeds 35 feet in height may
                                           comprise no more than 20% of that structure’s building coverage. [Added 3-11-
                                           2008 by Ord. No. 1195, § 5]
                                           iii. No portion of a roof exceeding 35 feet in height may be closer than 75
                                           feet to a property or street line .
                                           [Added 3-11-2008 by Ord. No. 1195, § 5]
Accessory building                         20 feet
Building coverage (maximum)                15% of the total lot area
Impervious surface (maximum)               25% of the total lot area, except as provided in §
                                           255-32.A(3) [Amended 3-11-2008 by Ord. No. 1195, § 5]
 
   C.   Open Space Preservation District overlay option. All parcels located in
the A Residential District may be developed in accordance with the provisions
of Article XXVIII of this chapter providing for an Open Space Preservation
District. [Added 8-12-1997 by Ord. No. 947]
   D.   Calculation of site capacity. Development in the A Residential District
shall be regulated by a calculation of site capacity according to the
developable acreage concept. The applicant shall determine the developable
acreage using the following method and submit sufficient evidence in the form
of plans and data to verify the calculations: [Added 8-12-1997 by Ord. No. 947]
      (1)   Developable acreage calculations.
         (a)   From the gross acreage of the site, subtract the following:
            [1]   Existing road  ultimate right-of-way .
            [2]   Noncontiguous land .
            [3]   Floodplain land: 100%.
            [4]   Wetlands: 100%.
            [5]   Ponds or lakes: 100%.
            [6]   Slopes from 15% to 25%: 50%.
            [7]   Slopes over 25%: 85%.
            [8]   Existing utility rights-of-way: 50%.
         (b)   The balance constitutes the total developable acreage .
         (c)   In the calculations above, the following shall apply:
            [1]   Land separated by roads or railroads or land where the
connecting link is less than 50 feet wide is noncontiguous land .
            [2]   The calculated 100-year floodplain shall be used where
available, otherwise alluvial soils shall be used.
            [3]   Where two or more categories overlap, the overlapping acreage
shall be counted only once using the most restrictive classification.
            [4]   Utility corridors owned in fee simple by the utility shall
not be counted towards the applicant’s land area.
      (2)   Density calculation. To determine the number of units permitted on
a given site, multiply the developable acreage by 1.68 dwelling units per
developable acre .
17 Editor’s Note: Former Sec. 6.03, Exceptions, which immediately followed this
section, was deleted 1-10-1995 by Ord. No. 879.
§ 255-43.1.   A-1 and A-2 Residential Districts.
[Added 12-14-1999 by Ord. No. 1014; amended 9-14-2004 by Ord. No. 1138]
   A.   In an A-1 Residential District, the following regulations shall apply:
      (1)   With a public water supply and sanitary sewers installed and capped
for future use , as approved by the Township as a condition of approval of a
subdivision plan, as follows:
Regulation Requirement
Regulation                       Requirement
Lot area (minimum)               26,000 square feet
Width at building line (minimum) 120 feet
Front yard (minimum)             50 feet
Side yard , each (minimum)       25 feet
Rear yard (minimum)              50 feet
Height (maximum)                 35 feet
Principal building
Accessory building               20 feet
Building coverage (maximum)      15% of the total lot area
Impervious surface (maximum)     25% of the total lot area
 
      (2)   With sanitary sewers and a public water supply, as follows:
Regulation Requirement
Regulation                       Requirement
Lot area (minimum)               22,000 square feet
Width at building line (minimum) 110 feet
Front yard (minimum)             50 feet
Side yard , each (minimum)       25 feet
Rear yard (minimum)              50 feet
Height (maximum)                 35 feet
Principal building
Accessory building               20 feet and not exceeding one story
Building coverage (maximum)      15% of the total lot area
Impervious surface (maximum)     25% of the total lot area
 
   B.   In an A-2 Residential District, a residential development plan is
required in accordance with Article VI, Planned Residential Areas, of this
chapter. Public water and sanitary sewers are required. The following
regulations shall apply:
Regulation Requirement
Regulation                       Requirement
                                 15,000 square feet, however, at least 40% of
Lot area (minimum)               the lots in the development must be 18,000
                                 square feet or larger
Width at building line (minimum) 100 feet
Front yard (minimum)             40 feet
                                 An aggregate of 40 feet, minimum of 15 feet
                                 for either side. A side yard may be further
Side yard , each (minimum)       reduced to 10 feet, provided that the adjacent
                                 lot is not already 10 feet on the side facing
                                 thereto.
Rear yard (minimum)              40 feet
Height (maximum)                 35 feet
Principal building
Accessory building               20 feet and not exceeding one story
Building coverage (maximum)      15% of total lot area
 
§ 255-43.2.   Age Qualified Residential Community. 
[Added 3-11-2014 by Ord. No. 14-1284, §§ 1, 3]
In an A Residential District, in addition to the provisions at §
255-43 above, Age Qualified Residential Community shall be a permitted use and
the following regulations shall apply to that use :
   A.   Any Age Qualified Residential Community shall require a minimum
developable acreage , calculated pursuant to §
255-43D of 35 acres.
   B.   Lot , yard and bulk requirements.
Regulation Requirement
Regulation                                                    Requirement
Lot area (minimum)                                            6,000 square feet
Width at minimum setback line (minimum)                       65 feet
Width at actual building  setback line (minimum)             70 feet
Front yard (minimum)                                          20 feet
Side yard (minimum)                                           10 feet
Distance between dwellings –side to side                    20 feet
Rear yard (minimum)                                           15 feet
Principal building height (maximum)                           27 feet*
Accessory building                                            Not permitted
Lot  building coverage (maximum)                             50%
Lot  impervious surface (maximum)                            60%
Minimum setback of individual residential lot lines from
adjoining residentially zoned property, measured from any lot 50 feet
line within Age Qualified Residential Community
Minimum setback of individual residential lot lines within
Age Qualified Residential Community from ultimate right-of-   75 feet
way line of abutting public roadways
 
* Height of building . The building ’s vertical measurement from the first
floor ground elevation (not basement ) to a point midway between the highest
and lowest points of the roof.
   C.   Density . The maximum permitted density shall be 2.9 units per
developable acre . (Total number of lots to be rounded up if fraction greater
than 0.75 or down if 0.75 or less.)
   D.   Open Space. A minimum of 20% of the developable acreage shall be
retained as open space for use of the residents to include recreation, leisure
activities, resource protection, stormwater management facilities and minimum
setback areas from abutting properties or abutting ultimate road  right-of-way
. Open space areas having a dimension less than 30 feet in width or containing
an individual area less than 20,000 square feet shall not be counted toward
this minimum 20% requirement.
   E.   The required setback areas on the perimeter of the site shall be
utilized for a combination of landscape buffering, earthen berm buffering and
stormwater management to effect a suitable screening of the Age Qualified
Residential Community from abutting public road rights-of-way and to provide
appropriate buffering between the Community and adjoining residential
properties.
   F.   Perpetual use guarantee:
      (1)   A property which has been developed to the special standards
allowed for the Age Qualified Residential Community  use shall not, at any time
in the future, change from age-restricted use unless all of the standards for
the other use are complied with.
      (2)   An applicant for an Age Qualified Residential Community  use shall
provide at the time of final plan approval proof of deed restrictions or other
documentation satisfactory to the Township Solicitor that limits the
residential use of the property to one where the residents are restricted by
age in compliance with the Federal Fair Housing Act.
      (3)   Any homeowners association associated with an Age Qualified
Residential Community  use shall include in their bylaws provisions to restrict
and enforce the restriction of residents by age in compliance with the Federal
Fair Housing Act and the provisions of applicable Township regulations. Such
provisions may not be amended unless approved by the Township.
      (4)   Should the homeowners association fail to enforce the age
restrictions, the Township reserves the right to do so by any lawful means,
including the imposition of fines on the violating residents and/or the
homeowners association .
   G.   Special design considerations–Age Qualified Residential Community . The
following design criteria shall be applicable to an Age Qualified Residential
Community , and shall supersede any conflicting provisions in other Township
ordinances, including the Township Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance [
Chapter 212]:
      (1)   Front yard setback. Not more than two adjacent lots shall provide
the same front yard setback for each dwelling unit . There shall be a minimum
difference in front yard setback of five feet for compliance with this
requirement. Front yard setback on the undedicated internal roadways shall be
measured from face of curb if no sidewalk and back of sidewalk where sidewalk
provided.
      (2)   Corner lots . Each corner lot shall have one front yard , two side
yards and one rear yard . The internal road parallel to the front of the
dwelling unit shall determine the front yard .
      (3)   Internal pedestrian circulation. Sidewalk shall be provided on one
side of all internal roadways, unless provision is made for a comprehensive
internal trail system designed to standards acceptable to the Township. Any
provision for trail in lieu of sidewalk to be approved in the discretion of the
Board of Commissioners.
      (4)   Internal road cartway. Cartway width for all internal roadways
shall be a minimum of 26 feet from face of curb to face of curb. All internal
roadways shall be undedicated and shall be the maintenance responsibility of
the homeowners associations .
      (5)   Public pedestrian improvements . An Age Qualified Residential
Community shall provide sidewalk in accordance with Township design criteria
along the perimeter of the development site bordering any public roadway. A
macadam trail may be substituted in the discretion of the Board of
Commissioners, at a width and along such perimeter areas as shall be determined
by the Board in furtherance of Township open space considerations and trail
plans. Any such sidewalk and/or trail shall be within dedicated right-of-way or
within an easement area established for the benefit of public usage.
      (6)   Private road system. All internal roadways are to be privately
owned and maintained by the homeowners association for the Community. Access to
and from bordering public roadways shall be established in a manner to prevent
thru-public traffic. The Board of Commissioners may approve of a single point
of access from an adjoining public roadway provided an acceptable emergency
access to and from an abutting public roadway is provided. The primary access
shall be designed in boulevard configuration with 20-foot wide cartways
separated by an eight-foot center island, same extending to an appropriate
point within the interior roadway system as determined in the discretion of the
Board of Commissioners.
      (7)   Trash removal. As all internal roadways are to be privately owned,
the homeowners association shall have responsibility to provide for trash
removal for the dwelling units and clubhouse amenity within the Community.
§ 255-44.   B Residential Districts.
[Amended 9-14-2004 by Ord. No. 1138]
In a B Residential District the following regulations shall apply:
   A.   Lot , yard and bulk requirements.
Regulation Requirement
Regulation                           Requirement
Lot area (minimum)                   12,000 square feet
Width at building line (minimum)     80 feet
Front yard (minimum)                 35 feet
Side yard (minimum)                  10 feet each, aggregate of 25 feet
Rear yard (minimum) Height (maximum) 30 feet
Principal building                   35 feet
Accessory building                   20 feet
Building coverage (maximum)          20% of total lot area
Impervious surface (maximum)         30% of total lot area
 
   B.   Lot , yard and bulk requirements for townhouse dwellings /structures
authorized as a conditional use pursuant to §§
255-39A(8) and 255-42.1. [Added 1-17-2006 by Ord. No. 1162]
      (1)   The applicant may but shall not be required to construct
residential units on individual lots . Where units are constructed on
individual lots the following standards apply:
         (a)   Lot area (minimum): 5,000 square feet.
         (b)    Front yard (minimum): 35 feet.
         (c)    Side yard for end unit in a townhouse structure (minimum): 25
feet.
         (d)   Rear yard (minimum): 30 feet.
      (2)   Principal building height (maximum): 35 feet.
      (3)   Accessory building height (maximum): 20 feet.
      (4)   Building coverage (maximum): 20% of total lot area .
      (5)   Impervious surface (maximum): 30% of total lot area .
§ 255-45.   C Residential District.
[Amended 1-10-1995 by Ord. No. 879; 9-14-2004 by Ord. No. 1138; 9-13-2011 by
Ord. No. 11-1244, § 3]
In a C Residential District, the following regulations shall apply:
   A.   A building may be erected, altered or used and a lot or premises may be
used for any one use permitted in §
255-39B.
   B.   Lot , yard and bulk requirements.
Regulation Requirement
Regulation                          Requirement
Lot area (minimum)                  9,000 square feet
Width at building line (minimum)    60 feet
Front yard (minimum)                30 feet
Side yard , each (minimum)          10 feet
Rear yard (minimum)                 25 feet
Principal building height (maximum) 35 feet
Accessory building height (maximum) 20 feet
Building coverage (maximum)         20% of total lot area
Impervious surface (maximum)        30% of total lot area
 
[Amended 9-13-2011 by Ord. No. 11-1244]
§ 255-45.1.   NH Residential District. 
[Added 9-13-2011 by Ord. No. 11-1244, § 4]
In a NH Residential District, the following regulations shall apply:
   A.   A building may be erected, altered or used and a lot or premises may be
used for any one use permitted in §
255-39C.
   B.   Lot , yard and bulk requirements–single-family dwelling .
Regulation Requirement
Regulation                          Requirement
Lot area (minimum)                  5,500 square feet
Width at building line (minimum)    50 feet
Front yard (minimum)                30 feet
Side yard , each (minimum)          10 feet
Rear yard (minimum)                 25 feet
Principal building height (maximum) 35 feet
Accessory building height (maximum) 20 feet
Building coverage (maximum)         20% of total lot area
Impervious surface (maximum)        35% of total lot area
 
   C.   Lot , yard and bulk requirements–for each unit of a twin and/or duplex
dwelling .
Regulation Requirement
Regulation                          Requirement
Lot area (minimum)                  3,300 square feet
Width at building line (minimum)    30 feet
Front yard (minimum)                30 feet
Side yard , each (minimum)          10 feet
Rear yard (minimum))                25 feet
Principal building height (maximum) 35 feet
Accessory building height (maximum) 20 feet
Building coverage (maximum)         20% of total lot area
Impervious surface (maximum)        35% of total lot area
 
   D.   Lot, yard, bulk, and general requirements - Multi-family Option. [Added
5-10-2016 by Ord. No. 16-1319]
      (1)   General Requirements.
         (a)   A Multi-family Option shall be permitted on a minimum tract area
of three acres. Tract area may include adjacent lots separated by a public or
private street .
         (b)   A Multi-family Option shall consist of a mixture of at least two
of the following: twin dwellings , duplex dwellings , and townhouse dwellings .
      (2)   Lot , yard and bulk requirements.
Regulation Minimum Requirement
Regulation                          Minimum Requirement
Tract area                          3 acres
Tract width                         No minimum required
Front yard setback                  5 feet*
Side yard setback                   8 feet*
Rear yard setback                   10 feet*
Principal Building height (maximum) 35 feet
Building coverage (maximum)         40%
Tract Impervious Coverage (maximum) 60%
 
* In the case of a tract abutting streets on three sides, there shall be three
front yards (abutting the streets ) and one side yard .
      (3)   Density . The maximum density shall be 18 units/acre. Density shall
be calculated based on the total tract area .
      (4)   Parking.
         (a)   A minimum of 1.5 parking spaces per unit shall be provided.
         (b)   The parking requirement may be met through a combination of
driveways, garages, parking lots, and on-street parking within the development
.
      (5)   Administrative and Maintenance Office.
         (a)   An Administrative and Maintenance Office building shall be
permitted as an accessory use .
         (b)   Only one Administrative and Maintenance Office building shall be
permitted per Multi-family Option use .
         (c)   An Administrative and Maintenance Office building shall meet the
setback and building height requirements set forth in §
255-45.1.D.(2). The maximum building footprint of an Administrative and
Maintenance Office shall be 3000 square feet.
      (6)   Design requirements.
         (a)   General Standards.
            (i)   All buildings shall be served by public water and sewer
service.
            (ii)   All utility lines shall be placed underground, to the extent
permitted by the utility supplier, from the edge of the right-of-way to the
place of service.
         (b)   Building design. The following provisions apply to additions to
existing buildings and to new construction .
            (i)   The walls and fenestration of the buildings shall be
architecturally compatible with the style, materials, colors, and details of
the building .
            (ii)   The mass of a building or buildings shall be mitigated in a
variety of ways, including the use of projecting and recessed elements such as
porches, windows, and roof dormers, to reduce their apparent overall bulk and
volume, to enhance visual quality, and to contribute to human-scaled
development . Breaks in the facades and rooflines shall occur no less
frequently than every 100 feet.
         (c)   Roof design.
            (i)   The roof shall be designed with either overhanging eaves,
bargeboards, or cornices on all sides; or other architectural elements
appropriate to the neighborhood .
            (ii)   Roof material shall include fiberglass architectural
shingles that resemble slate or wood, natural slate, shakes, shingle (either
wood or asphalt composition), and metal formed to resemble “standing seams.”
            (iii)   Flat roofs shall be prohibited from the main massing of
one-story buildings .
            (iv)   Flat roofs may be used on buildings of two or more stories.
In these instances, all visibly exposed walls shall have parapet walls or
articulated cornices that project horizontally from the vertical building wall
plane.
         (d)   Pedestrian accessibility standards.
            (i)   All buildings must be placed to encourage continuous
uninterrupted pedestrian accessways that link doorways.
            (ii)   Sidewalks with a minimum width of five feet shall be
constructed along all street frontages and across major access driveways.
            (iii)   Pedestrian crosswalks across public streets shall be
designed with curb bump-outs to facilitate non-vehicular movement.
            (iv)   Crosswalks across public streets and major access driveways
shall utilize material, color, or texture differentiated from the cartway, as
well as signage and other pavement markings to alert drivers to pedestrians.
         (e)   Streetscape  improvements .
            (i)   All new developments and renovations shall incorporate
streetscape  improvements , including sidewalks.
            (ii)   Site lighting (which excludes street lighting) shall be
installed along all pedestrian facilities, including sidewalks, internal
walkways, stairways, etc. Site lighting shall be designed to shield the source
of illumination and to prevent glare on adjacent residential properties. The
illumination level of site lighting shall be no more than 0.3 footcandles
measured either vertically or horizontally at a height of five feet above grade
from adjacent residential properties.
ARTICLE VIII
MD Multi-Dwelling District
§ 255-46.   Purpose.
[Amended 1-10-1995 by Ord. No. 879; 5-11-2004 by Ord. No. 1127]
The purpose of the MD Multi-Dwelling District is to provide for construction
and maintenance of a variety of multiple dwelling housing types and to allow
for choice among them while providing reasonable standards for the regulation
of the density of population. This district is also intended to provide
incentives for age-restricted developments by establishing regulations to
permit development tailored to the needs of residents 55 years of age or older,
recognizing their special needs and relatively reduced impacts on surrounding
land uses .
§ 255-47.   Authorization.
The Board of Township Commissioners may authorize as an amendment to the Zoning
Map the designation of an area as Multi-Dwelling District for the location of
an integrated multi-dwelling development or developments , subject to the
regulations of this and any pertinent article.
§ 255-48.   Use regulations.
[Amended 6-8-1999 by Ord. No. 1001; 5-11-2004 by Ord. No. 1127]
Within the MD Multi-Dwelling District, one or more buildings may be erected or
used and a lot may be used or occupied for any of the following purposes:
   A.   Any uses permitted in a residential district of this chapter, including
a multiple dwelling .
   B.   Senior assisted-living residence , subject to the provisions of §
255-90.1.
   C.   Age-restricted multiple dwelling , by conditional use , subject to the
provisions set forth in this article.
§ 255-49.   Tract, yard, unit and bulk requirements.
   A.   Tract area . No use permitted in this district shall be constructed or
maintained on a tract less than three acres in size. [Amended 5-11-2004 by Ord.
No. 1127]
   B.   Dwelling units per acre. The maximum number of dwelling units per acre
of tract shall be: [Amended 5-11-2004 by Ord. No. 1127]
      (1)   Multiple dwellings : no more than eight units per acre.
      (2)   Senior assisted-living residences : as provided in §
255-90.1.
      (3)   Age-restricted multiple dwelling  developments , no more than 10
units per acre.
   C.   Building coverage : not more than 15% of the tract area . [Amended 5-
11-2004 by Ord. No. 1127]
   D.   Setbacks and yards . (1) Tract area .
         (a)   Setback from street . There shall be a setback on each street on
which a tract abuts of not less than 75 feet from the ultimate right-of-way of
such street .
         (b)   Setback from tract property line. There shall be a setback from
each property line of not less than 50 feet in depth. This distance may be
reduced to 40 feet if the property line is adjacent to a railroad right-of-way
and/or a limited access highway. [Amended 5-11-2004 by Ord. No. 1127]
         (c)   Minimum distance required between buildings . A minimum distance
of not less than 30 feet shall be required between buildings of up to 35 feet
in height. This separation distance shall be increased to 40 feet if one or
both of the buildings are taller than 35 feet. [Amended 5-11-2004 by Ord. No.
1127]
      (2)   Lot area .
         (a)   Front yard . There shall be a front yard on each street or
common parking area on which a lot abuts of not less than 30 feet.
         (b)   Side yard . There shall be one side yard on each side of any
such building containing twin, duplex or twin duplex dwellings which shall not
be less than 20 feet in width.
         (c)   Rear yard . There shall be a rear yard on each lot which shall
not be less than 20 feet in depth.
   E.   Each apartment, townhouse or condominium  dwelling unit shall contain
at least the following square feet of floor space:
      (1)   One-bedroom unit: 750 square feet.
      (2)   Two-bedroom unit: 900 square feet.
      (3)   Three-bedroom unit: 1,050 square feet.
   F.   Each other multi-dwelling unit shall contain at least 900 square feet.
   G.   Impervious surface coverage. A maximum impervious surface coverage of
40% of the total tract and/or lot area shall be permitted. [Added 6-8-1999 by
Ord. No. 1001; Amended 5-11-2004 by Ord. No. 1127]
§ 255-50.   Height regulations.
[Amended 5-11-2004 by Ord. No. 1127]
   A.   Except as provided herein, no building shall exceed 35 feet in height.
   B.   Age-restricted multiple dwellings may exceed 35 feet in height by up to
12 feet, provided all of the following conditions are met:
      (1)   The site topography is such that the building's first floor
elevation is 10 feet or more below the mean elevation of the adjacent public
right-of-way closest to the frontage of the building . [Amended 9-13-2005 by
Ord. No. 1155]
         (a)   For the purposes of measuring building height, if the basement
level is used for garage parking it shall not be included in the building
height calculation, provided its exterior facade complies with the
architectural guidelines set forth in §
255-53.1D and the view of this facade from a public right-of-way is screened.
Materials used on this facade must be in addition to the 35% calculation
required in §
255-53.1.D(1)(g).
      (2)   For each foot (or portion thereof) of additional height above 35
feet, the front, side and rear yard setback requirements shall increase one
foot, except if the line from which the setback is measured is adjacent to a RR
row or limited access highway.
§ 255-50.1.   Multiple dwelling development on transitional tracts. 
[Added 5-14-2013 by Ord. No. 13-1274, § 1]
   A.   A transitional tract in the MD Multi-Dwelling District is a tract four
acres or less in size which has one or more of its property lines in common
with property zoned for and improved with single-family detached dwellings .
Transitional tracts shall be subject to the following additional regulations
when developed with a multiple dwelling :
      (1)   Only townhouse dwellings shall be permitted.
      (2)   Tract area .
         (a)   Setback from street . There shall be a setback on each street on
which a tract abuts of not less than 50 feet from the ultimate right-of-way of
such street . From private roads and driveways the minimum setback shall be 20
feet from the face of the curb or nearest side of sidewalk. The minimum setback
from the entrance driveway of a MD transition development shall be 35 feet from
the face of the curb.
         (b)   Setback from tract property line. There shall be a building
setback from each property line in common with property zoned in the MD Multi-
Dwelling District of not less than 25 feet. There shall be a minimum setback of
40 feet from the tract boundary when the property line is not in common with
another MD Multi- Dwelling District. Interior roadways are to be set back a
minimum of 40 feet from the tract boundary.
      (3)   Lot area setbacks (minimum).
         (a)   Front yard   20 feet
         (b)   Side yard   10 feet
         (c)   Rear yard   20 feet when abutting another yard area; 35 feet
when abutting a driveway
      (4)   Building length or depth. No fewer than three and no more than
eight townhouses shall be allowed in a row. Not more than one eight-unit
building shall be allowed per tract . Adjacent townhouse units are to be offset
a minimum of four feet.
      (5)   There shall be a minimum of 25 feet of spacing between buildings ,
provided the facing walls are constructed of fire-resistant material, such as
stucco. Otherwise, the required minimum spacing is 30 feet.
      (6)   Street frontage locations. Vehicular access shall be provided by a
private road which must be designed to facilitate connection with a private
road on an adjacent tract if zoned in the MD Multi-Dwelling District.
      (7)   Developments shall provide shared access, access easements, cross
easements, and driveway interconnections with adjoining lots .
      (8)   Access easements and maintenance agreements or other suitable legal
mechanisms shall be provided, acceptable to the Board of Commissioners in
consultation with the Township Solicitor.
      (9)   When it is not yet appropriate to construct driveway
interconnections, access easements shall be set aside for future use .
      (10)   Building coverage : not more than 20% of the tract area .
      (11)   Impervious coverage: not more than 50% of the tract and/or lot
area .
   B.   Design standards.
      (1)   Architectural features, such as gables, dormers, shed roofs and
porticos, shall be utilized on all dwelling units . Flat roofs are prohibited.
      (2)   Entry and garage doors shall be insulated, with raised panels and
sidelights or glass inserts.
      (3)   Windows shall have integrated, detailed mullions and shutters with
hardware when these types of architectural features are employed.
      (4)   The roof shall be designed with either overhangs, eaves,
bargeboards or cornices on all sides.
      (5)   Roof material may include natural slate, shakes, shingle (either
wood or asphalt composition), or fiberglass architectural shingles that
represent slate or wood.
      (6)   Building materials. Exterior walls shall be high quality and
include a combination of materials including, for example: architectural or
real stone, stucco or brick and wood or vinyl siding. If vinyl siding is used,
it may not occupy more than 15% of the front facade of any residential dwelling
unit .
      (7)   The following building materials are prohibited: exterior
insulation and finishing systems (EIFS), aluminum siding, aluminum shutters, T-
111 or other similar plywood siding. Metal buildings are also prohibited.
      (8)   No building shall exceed 35 feet in height.
      (9)   A minimum of 50% of the dwelling units shall include a front door
accessing onto an unenclosed front porch with a minimum depth of six feet and a
minimum floor area of 63 square feet. These porches shall be covered by a
permanent roof and shall not be enclosed in the future. These requirements
shall be documented on the plans and recorded with the final plan in a
declaration of easements, covenants and restrictions and/or in another legal
form acceptable to the Township Solicitor.
   C.   Street lighting standards.
      (1)   Lighting facilities shall not produce any glare, or hazardous
interference on abutting properties or highway.
      (2)   Glare control shall be accomplished through the selection and
application of lighting equipment, including shields.
      (3)   Light fixtures shall not be located higher than 12 feet above
grade.
      (4)   Light fixtures in parking lots shall be installed within a raised
landscape island.
   D.   Landscaping and buffer requirements.
      (1)   All areas of a developed tract not covered by building and/or
impervious paving materials shall be maintained as landscaped areas containing
trees, shrubs and ground cover materials.
      (2)   A softening buffer shall be maintained along side and rear property
lines pursuant to §
212-32.F(2), except that buffer planting is not required along those segments
of lot lines where shared access and/or shared parking are located.
      (3)   All other landscaping and buffering standards shall be satisfied in
accordance with §
212-32 of the Subdivision and Land Development Code [
Chapter 212].
§ 255-51.   Parking.
   A.   Each tract or lot shall be provided with parking off of public streets
. Such parking areas shall be in addition to the areas required for recreation,
service areas and traveling lanes to or on the tract or lot and shall not be
leased but shall be for the sole use of the occupants of such building or
buildings and visitors thereto.
   B.   The general parking provisions set forth in §
255-135 shall be complied with. [Amended 5- 11-2004 by Ord. No. 1127]
   C.   No parking shall be permitted in a front yard , except in the case of a
twin, duplex or twin duplex dwelling .
   D.   No parking or circulation driveway shall be permitted within 30 feet of
a property line or ultimate right-of-way line . [Amended 5-11-2004 by Ord. No.
1127]
   E.   For age-restricted multiple dwellings and senior assisted living
residences , site density can be increased by three units per acre if 40% or
more of the required parking spaces are within a garage below the residential
units or below a deck where residents do not have to walk outdoors to reach the
parking. [Added 5-11-2004 by Ord. No. 1127; amended 9-13-2005 by Ord. No. 1155]
§ 255-52.   Senior assisted living residence. 
[Added 6-8-1999 by Ord. No. 1001]
The following regulations shall apply only to a senior assisted living
residence :
   A.   Residence regulations.
      (1)   The minimum unit size for each dwelling unit occupied by one
resident shall be 375 square feet. The minimum unit size for each residential
unit occupied by two residents shall be 750 square feet.
      (2)   No more than two residents shall be permitted to reside in any
dwelling unit .
      (3)   Each dwelling unit shall contain a fully private bathroom
(including toilet, bathtub and/or shower and vanity/sink), personal closet
space, emergency call systems, lockable entry doors accessible by master key or
similar system available at all times in the senior assisted living residence
and for designated staff and prewiring for private telephone and television
reception.
      (4)   No less than 80 square feet of floor area per resident shall be
provided for community common areas for dining, active and passive recreation,
circulation and socialization, exclusive of hallways and passageways.
      (5)   A central dining area shall be provided, together with a private
dining room available for use by residents and their families and guests for
private visitation and entertaining.
      (6)   All residential units shall be part of a complex, similar to
multifamily housing. No stand-alone units or townhouses shall be permitted.
   B.   (Reserved) 18
   C.   General requirements. [Amended 5-11-2004 by Ord. No. 1127]
      (1)   Utilities. A senior-assisted living residence shall be served by a
public sewage system and public water system. [Amended 5-11-2004 by Ord. No.
1127]
      (2)   Common areas and facilities. Provision shall be made for the
maintenance and care of all internal and external common areas , including
dining and social rooms, driveways, parking areas, walkways, landscaped
planting areas and recreation areas. [Amended 5-11-2004 by Ord. No. 1127]
      (3)   Other facilities. Such other improvements , including driveways,
curbs, sidewalks and stormwater collection and control facilities as required
by
Chapter 212 herein, Subdivision and Land Development, shall be provided.
18. Editor’s Note: Former Subsection B, Development regulations, as amended 6-
11-2002 by Ord. No. 1089, was repealed 5-11-2004 by Ord. No. 1127.
§ 255-53.   Development requirements; plan.
The general plan for a multiple dwelling  development shall include evidence
and facts showing that it has considered and made provisions for, and the
development shall be executed in accordance with, the following essential
conditions:
   A.   The proposed development shall be substantially in accordance with this
chapter, shall consider the surrounding land features of the area, including
but not limited to residences, schools , parks, other reservation of open
spaces, locations, width and grade of streets and location and arrangement of
parking spaces , local and regional business areas and shopping centers,
densities proposed for surrounding areas and such other features as shall
contribute to the harmonious development of the area, with due regard to the
character of the neighborhood and its peculiar suitability for this type of use
. [Amended 1-10-1995 by Ord. No. 879]
   B.   The proposed development shall be constructed in accordance with an
overall plan and shall be designed as a unified architectural scheme with
appropriate landscaping.
      (1)   If the development of the multiple dwellings is to be carried out
in stages, each stage shall be so planned that the foregoing requirements and
the intent of this chapter shall be fully complied with at the completion of
any stage. The initial stage of development shall comprise a total floor area
of not less than 12,000 square feet.
      (2)   The developer shall assure the provision of required improvements
by means of a proper completion and guaranty in the form of a bond or the
deposit of funds or securities in escrow to cover the cost of the improvements
. The work shall be performed in accordance with all requirements and the
approved plans.
   C.   The area shall be adaptable to community development , being located in
relation to major thoroughfares, streets , railroads, public transportation,
shopping or other facilities and as far as possible shall have within or
through it no major thoroughfare or other physical feature which will tend to
destroy the neighborhood or community cohesiveness.
   D.   All utility lines servicing the multiple dwellings shall be placed
underground.
   E.   Concrete, curbs and sidewalks shall be constructed on each street or
road abutting the tract or lot .
   F.   All buildings shall be served by a public sanitary sewage disposal
system and public water supply.
   G.   No building shall be located on land subject to flooding.
   H.   The developer shall be required where possible to preserve or
incorporate natural features such as woods, streams and open space areas, which
add to the overall cohesive development of the Multi-Dwelling District and
overall Township development .
   I.   The developer shall be encouraged to give consideration to the
provision of community areas, laundry facilities, playground, open space and
tot-lots and other services necessary for the comfort and convenience of
multiple dwelling residents.
   J.   Areas for loading and unloading of delivery trucks and other vehicles
and for the servicing of refuse collection, fuel and other service shall be
provided and shall be adequate in size and shall be so arranged that they may
be used without blockage or interference with the use of access ways or
automobile parking facilities.
   K.   Provision shall be made for safe and efficient ingress and egress to
and from public streets and highways serving the apartment without undue
congestion to or interference with normal traffic flow. The Board of
Commissioners may require a traffic study to satisfy itself as to the adequacy
of the thoroughfare to carry out the additional traffic engendered by the
multi-dwelling use as well as to the street frontage of the proposed district.
   L.   Lighting facilities provided shall be arranged in a manner which will
protect the community and neighboring properties from unreasonable direct glare
or hazardous interference of any kind. Lighting facilities shall be required
where deemed necessary for the safety and convenience of Multi-Dwelling
District residents.
   M.   Areas for the deposit, retention and disposal of waste materials shall
be screened from view.
   N.   Each tract shall contain a minimum recreation area at least equal to
the number of dwelling units multiplied by 100 square feet.
   O.   All roof, parking, delivery-collection areas and traveling lanes shall
be provided with drainage facilities to collect, transport and deliver, via
underground conduits, storm- or surface waters to the nearest storm sewers or
stream as approved by the Township Engineer.
§ 255-53.1.   Age-restricted multiple dwelling units.
[Added 5-11-2004 by Ord. No. 1127]
The use of any property may be age-restricted by its owner in compliance with
the Federal Fair Housing Act. Where that has occurred, and where the applicant,
in addition, seeks conditional use approval for such use so that the specific
regulations herein applicable to age-restricted housing would apply, the
applicant shall comply with the following additional regulations:
   A.   Perpetual use guarantee.
      (1)   A property which has been developed to the special standards
allowed for this use shall not, at any time in the future, change from age-
restricted use unless all of the standards for the other use are complied with.
      (2)   An applicant for an age-restricted use shall provide at the time of
final plan approval proof of deed restrictions or other documentation
satisfactory to the Township Solicitor that limits the residential use of the
property to one where the residents are restricted by age in compliance with
the Federal Fair Housing Act.
      (3)   Any homeowners, condominium or renters association associated with
an age-restricted property shall include in their bylaws provisions to restrict
and enforce the restriction of residents by age in compliance with the Federal
Fair Housing Act and the provisions of applicable Township regulations. Such
provisions may not be amended unless approved by the Township.
      (4)   Should the management, homeowners, condominium or renters
association fail to enforce the age restrictions, the Township reserves the
right to do so by any lawful means, including the imposition of fines on the
violating residents and/or the management, homeowners, condominium or renters
association.
   B.   Common area . For each dwelling unit , a minimum of 80 square feet,
exclusive of hallways, passageways and outdoor trails, shall be provided and
developed for indoor or outdoor common areas and facilities, such as areas used
for dining, or for active recreation or socialization.
   C.   Pedestrian connections and environment. When applicable the following
pedestrian connections and environment shall be provided:
      (1)   Walkways and/or trails shall be provided to connect the property
with adjacent properties, pathways or trails that provide amenities to
residents.
      (2)   Crosswalks, pedestrian signals and warning signage shall be
provided at all major driveways and streets in proximity to the property.
      (3)   Pedestrian-scale walkway lighting shall be provided where necessary
for the safety of the residents, as required by the Township Engineer.
Techniques to minimize the impact of the light on adjacent properties shall be
utilized, including but not limited to, full cut-offs and timed lighting.
      (4)   Shade trees and benches shall be provided along internal walkways.
   D.   Development requirements. To mitigate the impacts and promote the
safety and welfare of residents in a higher-density setting, compliance with
the following requirements shall be demonstrated at the conditional use
hearing.
      (1)   Architectural guidelines. The following regulations shall apply to
the erection, construction and alteration of structures :
         (a)   Flat roofs shall be prohibited except when designed to allow use
of the roof for residents, such as for roof decks or roof gardens Flat roofs
shall also be allowed if they are to be used for stormwater detention or for a
landscaped "green roof ' that might not be accessible by residents. In no case
may the flat roof area exceed 50% of the entire roof area of all buildings on
the property. Architectural embellishments that serve a function and add visual
interest to roofs, such as dormers, masonry, chimneys, cupolas, towers, and
other similar elements shall be included in the design of buildings . Gable and
hipped roofs shall have a minimum pitch of 6/12 and shall provide overhanging
eaves on all sides extending a minimum of one foot beyond the building wall.
         (b)   Fenestration shall be architecturally compatible with the style,
materials, colors, and details of the building . Windows shall be vertically
proportioned wherever possible. To the extent possible, upper-story windows
shall be vertically aligned with the location of windows and doors on the
ground level.
         (c)   Windowless walls, if visible from a right-of-way or vehicular or
pedestrian circulation area, are prohibited unless the construction of a blank
wall is necessitated by local building codes, in which case the wall should be
articulated by details in masonry courses and/or the provision of blank window
openings trimmed with frames, sills, and lintels.
         (d)   The Board of Commissioners may approve the use of architectural
concepts and designs which differ from those set forth above, if the applicant
demonstrates to the satisfaction of the Board that such concepts and designs
are in furtherance of the legislative intent of this article and the intent of
this subsection.
         (e)   In conjunction with the conditional use application, the
applicant shall provide representative, color, perspective renderings and
elevations of all proposed buildings . The applicant shall also provide graphic
representations showing the relationship between the proposed development and
structures on adjacent properties.
         (f)   Balconies, at least 60 square feet in size and with at least six
feet in depth from the exterior wall, shall be provided for at least 30% of the
dwelling units .
         (g)   Exterior wall and detail materials are to be brick, stone
(natural or man-made) or wood on at least 35% of all building faces.
         (h)   One percent of the project's construction costs shall be
allocated to public art work to be located in interior and/or exterior common
spaces.
      (2)   Signs . Signs shall be designed and constructed to give the
appearance of natural materials, shall be of muted color and shall not be
internally illuminated. Signs anchored in the ground shall not exceed 10 feet
in height. In all other respects, signs shall comply with Article XXI.
      (3)   Bicycle storage. Sufficient area for the storage of bicycles shall
be provided as approved by the Township Engineer, including racks or other
permanently affixed storage devices to accommodate one bicycle for each 25
required vehicular parking spaces , at a minimum Bicycle storage facilities may
be held in reserve upon approval of the Township Engineer upon a finding that
the requirements set forth herein exceed the foreseeable need therefor.
      (4)   Traffic control. The conditional use application shall be
accompanied by a transportation impact study and parking and circulation
analysis as provided in §
212-35.1. The study shall set forth the improvements needed to provide for the
safe, efficient and orderly movement of traffic and shall be subject to the
approval of the Township Engineer.
      (5)   The applicant shall provide appropriate transit shelters for
integration with public or private transit services.
      (6)   Continuous walls or fences and guard booths shall be prohibited
within the required setback area.
§ 255-54.   Submission of plans.
Plans for any multiple dwelling  use shall be submitted to the Board of
Commissioners, pursuant to
Chapter 212, Subdivision and Land Development, prior to the issuance of any
permit , and such plans shall include, among other things, the following:
   A.   A plot plan of the tract showing the location of all proposed buildings
, constructional features on the tract and all parking, delivery-collection
areas, recreation areas, traveling lanes, entrances and exits to tract , extent
and species of landscaping abutting streets , either public or private,
easements, streams and other topographical features of the tract .
   B.   Architectural plans for any proposed building .
   C.   Engineering and architectural plans for the handling and disposal of
sewage and other wastes.
   D.   A plot plan showing location of lots .
   E.   Any other data or evidence that the Board may require.
§ 255-55.   (Reserved) 19
19. Editor's Note: Former 255-55, Signs, was repealed 7-10-2001 by Ord. No.
1066. See Art. XXI for sign regulations.
§ 255-56.   Fire prevention.
[Amended 1-10-1995 by Ord. No. 879]
Each apartment, townhouse or condominium shall be constructed in accordance
with the requirements of the BOCA Basic Building Code for use Group R,
Residential buildings. 20
20. Editor's Note: See
Ch. 73, Building Construction and
Ch. 117, Fire Prevention.
§ 255-57.   Condominium development.
[Amended 1-10-1995 by Ord. No. 879]
   A.   In the case of a condominium  development , the Declaration recorded
pursuant to the provisions of the Uniform Condominium Act 21 of Pennsylvania
shall contain the requirements that the Upper Dublin Township Commissioners be
given notice of all meetings of the unit owners and all meetings of the
Council, together with a provision that the Upper Dublin Township Commissioners
or their representatives shall be entitled to attend all such meetings. The
Code of Regulations adopted pursuant to the Uniform Condominium Act of
Pennsylvania shall likewise contain a requirement that the Upper Dublin
Township Commissioners or their representatives be given notice of, and shall
have the right to attend, all meetings of unit owners and all meetings of the
council. It shall also contain a covenant that after 50% of the units are sold,
the Council membership shall be placed in the hands of the owners thereof.
   B.   No permit for condominium  development shall be granted until there
shall have been filed with the Township Secretary a certified copy of the
Declaration, the Declaration Plan and the Code of Regulations, adopted in
accordance with the Uniform Condominium Act of Pennsylvania.
   C.   In the event that all or part of the property subject to the Uniform
Condominium Act Declaration shall be removed from the provisions of the Uniform
Condominium Act by means of a revocation or an amendment recorded pursuant to
the provisions of the Act or by any other means whatsoever, then all use and
occupancy of the units shall cease until such time as adequate provision has
been made to assure proper maintenance of the common elements of the
condominium and approved by the Township Commissioners.
   D.   In the event that the Declaration or Code of Regulations shall be
amended or altered in such a way as to effect a noncompliance with the
provisions of this section hereof, no occupancy permits may be issued for any
units included in the Declaration Plan or amendments thereto until such time as
such noncompliance has been removed.
21. Editor's Note: See 68 Pa.C.S.A. § 3101 et seq.
ARTICLE IX
OC Office Center District
§ 255-58.   Purpose; intent.
   A.   The purpose of establishing planned office center districts shall be to
encourage the logical and timely development of land for office purposes in
accordance with the objectives, policies and proposals of this chapter; to
discourage any land use which would interfere with the use of the District as
an employment and service center and to assure suitable design to protect the
residential environment of adjacent and nearby neighborhoods . It is further
hereby declared to be the intent of the Township to provide the office center
with a minimum of traffic congestion, overcrowding of land, noise, glare and
pollution, so as to lessen the danger to the public safety. The protective
standards contained in this article are intended to minimize any adverse effect
of the office center on nearby property values and to provide for safe and
efficient use of the office center itself. [Amended 1-10-1995 by Ord. No. 879]
   B.   The governing body shall make a determination prior to the
establishment of an Office Center District that there is a need for
diversification of land use to support new and improved municipal service and
facilities, that said Office Center District is integrated in a general plan of
land use and that the density of population within an Office Center District
will not have an adverse effect on the overall employee and/or density of
population in the Township.
§ 255-59.   Authorization.
The governing body may authorize as an amendment to the Zoning Map the
designation of an area as an OC Office Center District for the location of an
integrated office center, subject to the regulations of this and any pertinent
article of this chapter, as amended.
§ 255-60.   Use regulations.
In an OC Office Center District, a building or combination of buildings may be
erected or used and a lot area may be used or occupied for any of the following
purposes and no others:
   A.   Office buildings . Professional, executive, administrative and
governmental; such uses shall include but not be limited to the following:
      (1)   Insurance, real estate and other similar business and professional
offices.
      (2)   Dental and medical clinics and testing laboratories.
      (3)   Private, vocational, business and professional schools , except
those of industrial character.
      (4)   Office buildings for companies and corporations.
   B.   Personal service and/or convenience type commercial facilities for the
primary use of employees, visitors and/or clients of the Office Center District
and only for the incidental use of the general public shall be permitted. Such
uses include but are not necessarily limited to the following: eating
establishments, facilities providing living quarters for transients, banks,
drugstores, barbershops and beauty parlors.
   C.   Accessory uses customarily incidental to any of the above uses . Such
use may include garages for storage and maintenance of motor vehicles of owner
or owners, tenants, their employees, invitees and other visitors, parking
facilities, maintenance and utility shops for the upkeep and repair of other
buildings , structures and services, central heat and power plants for
furnishing heat and electrical energy to all structures and buildings and
storage of documents, records and personal property and cafeterias,
recreational facilities, post offices and guest lodges for the use of employees
and visitors to the Office Center, provided that such uses are planned as an
integral part of the office building  development and are located on the same
site, and provided further that guest lodges are approved by the Zoning Hearing
Board and authorized as a special exception .
   D.   Mixed use development. A mixed use development, as defined in §
255-7, when approved by the Board of Commissioners as a conditional use,
subject to the requirements and criteria of § 255.61.1. [Added 3-28-2017 by
Ord. No. 17-1330]
   E.   No area shall be used for an OC Office Center District use if there
exists in the area sought to be used for an OC Office Center District use any
use which would be nonconforming under the terms of this section. However, the
governing body may authorize the office center with a nonconforming use if,
prior to the issuance of a building and/or zoning permit , the developer agrees
and guarantees, in writing, to the satisfaction of the governing body, that all
nonconforming uses are removed from the area within three years from the date
of the issuance of a permit for the building of the principal structure . Upon
written request, the governing body may extend the time for an additional year.
Said guaranty shall be in the form of a performance bond or cash escrow
security. The amount of the security shall be at least equal to 120%, as
determined by the governing body, of the estimated cost of removal of the
nonconforming uses . The creation of an odd-shaped area which excludes
nonconforming uses is to be avoided.
   F.   If the development of the office center is to be carried out in stages,
each stage shall be so planned that the foregoing requirements and the intent
of this chapter shall be fully complied with at the completion of any stage.
   G.   Personal use heliport .
      (1)   A personal use heliport may be permitted as a conditional use upon
application to the Board of Commissioners and the determination by the Board
that:
         (a)   Such use is consistent with §
255-58, Purpose; intent.
         (b)   Such use will not adversely affect the neighborhood in which
such use is contemplated or neighboring tracts .
         (c)   The design of the heliport meets the criteria provided in
Chapters 4 through 8, inclusive, and Appendices I and II of Heliport Design
Criteria, Federal Aviation Administration, Department of Transportation
Advisory Circular AC No. 150/5390-1B, dated August 22, 1977, as revised or
amended. 23
         (d)   A buffer strip shall be landscaped so as to provide a visual
barrier unless waived by the Board of Commissioners.
      (2)   Additional conditions.
         (a)   The heliport shall be licensed by the Pennsylvania Department of
Transportation.
         (b)   A heliport shall be located not less than 400 feet from a
residential district as measured from the center of the helipad to the
residential district line.
         (c)   A heliport located at least 400 feet but less than 600 feet from
a residential district shall be restricted to use by helicopters in the
following categories:
            [1]   Single-engine turbine-powered helicopters having maximum
gross weights not exceeding 4,500 pounds.
            [2]   Twin-engine turbine-powered helicopters having maximum gross
weights not exceeding 10,000 pounds.
         (d)   A heliport located at least 600 feet but less than 800 feet from
a residential district shall be restricted to use by helicopters in the
following categories:
            [1]   Single-engine piston-powered helicopters having maximum gross
weights not exceeding 4,500 pounds.
            [2]   Single-engine turbine-powered helicopters having maximum
gross weights not exceeding 8,000 pounds.
            [3]   All helicopter categories listed in Subsection G(2)(c) above.
         (e)   A heliport located not closer than 800 feet from a residential
district shall be restricted to use by helicopters in the following categories:
            [1]   All helicopter categories listed in Subsection G(2)(c) and
(d) above.
            [2]   All helicopters having maximum gross weights not exceeding
15,000 pounds.
         (f)   No more than two flights shall be permitted between the hours of
8:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m., local time, unless waived by the Board of
Commissioners.
         (g)   No maintenance or supply facility or facility for the storage of
fuel shall be permitted on site.
         (h)   The heliport shall be protected by a safety barrier or fence not
less than three feet in height above grade to preclude unauthorized persons
from entering the operational area. A sufficient warning and identification
signs shall be installed on the exterior side of the fence for the information
of the general public. The Commissioners may allow waivers of the fence,
barrier and/or sign requirements in appropriate cases.
      (3)   Exceptions to the above may be granted on a temporary basis only in
conjunction with a special event such as an athletic contest, a holiday
celebration, parade or similar activity after reasonable advance notice has
been given to the Upper Dublin Township Police of the intention to do so or
when necessary for law enforcement purposes and emergencies. 24
23. Editor's Note: Said circular is on file in the Township offices.
24. Editor's Note: Original Section 4, regarding penalties, which immediately
followed this subsection, was deleted 1-10-1995 by Ord. No. 879.
§ 255-61.   Development requirements; plan.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5df02b024b4c8f2f8cc81a782b45029f5e431e28/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6293.jpg]Publisher's Note: This Section has been AMENDED by new
legislation (Ord. 25-1400, passed 3-11-2025). The text of the amendment will be
incorporated below when the amending legislation is codified.
The general plan for an office center shall be executed in accordance with the
following essential conditions:
   A.   The development shall consist of a harmonious selection of uses and
groupings of buildings , service and parking areas, circulation and open
spaces, planned and designed as an integrated unit, in such a manner as to
constitute a safe, efficient and convenient office center.
   B.   The proposed development shall be constructed in accordance with an
overall plan and shall be designed with complementary architectural concepts
and with appropriate landscaping.
   C.   The total lot area shall be not less than 25 acres.
   D.   All buildings shall be arranged in a well-related manner.
   E.   The maximum building coverage shall be 20% of the square foot area of
the lot , plus 2.5% per acre multiplied by the lot area in acres, not to exceed
40%. For example: lot area of two acres: 20% plus 5% (2 times 2.5) equals 25%.
Impervious surface : the maximum impervious surface of a lot shall not exceed
60%. [Amended 9-14-2004 by Ord. No. 1138]
   F.   The maximum height of any building or structure erected or enlarged in
an OC Office Center District shall be 65 feet. The height of a building shall
be a building's vertical measurement from the mean level of the ground abutting
the building to a point midway between the highest and the lowest points of the
main roof levels. Said height may be increased by parapets, but not in excess
of three feet; and by chimneys and housings for equipment, provided that said
housings for equipment shall not be in excess of 15 feet in height and provided
that they shall not occupy more than 10% of the roof area. Building units
constructed with continuous walls and joined on several floor levels shall be
considered one building in calculating building height.
   G.   Adequate areas shall be provided for loading and unloading of delivery
trucks and other vehicles, servicing of offices by refuse collection, fuel,
fire and other service vehicles; automobile accessways; and pedestrian walks
All areas provided for use by vehicles and all pedestrian walks shall be
constructed in accordance with Township specifications. Service areas shall be
screened from view from any abutting roadway and from within the parking area.
   H.   Provision shall be made for safe and efficient ingress and egress to
and from public streets and highways servicing the office center without undue
congestion to or interference with normal traffic flow. The governing body
shall satisfy itself as to the adequacy of the thoroughfares to carry the
additional traffic engendered by the office center. The developer shall obtain
from the governing body permission to determine and locate the access to the
abutting highways. Should the concerned governing body require as a condition
of approval the erection and maintenance of a traffic control system, the
required system shall be erected at the cost of the developer.
   I.   No building may be located closer than:
      (1)   Two hundred feet to a public highway or right-of-way , except as
provided in Subsection I(3) herein;
      (2)   One hundred fifty feet to any property line, except as provided in
Subsection I(3) herein;
      (3)   One hundred feet to any toll or controlled public highway; and (4)
One hundred fifty feet to any residential zoned district.
   J.   No parking area may be located closer than:
      (1)   Two hundred feet to a public highway or right-of-way except as
provided in Subsection J(3) herein;
      (2)   Fifty feet to any property line or any residential zoned district;
and (3) Fifty feet to any toll or controlled public highway.
   K.   No service area may be located closer than 100 feet to a residential
zoned district. A service area shall include the area provided for the loading
and unloading of delivery trucks and other vehicles and the servicing of
offices by refuse collection, fuel, fire and other service vehicles.
   L.   No driveway may be located closer than 25 feet to a side or rear
property line adjacent to an agricultural or residential zoned district.
   M.   Adequate off-street parking shall be provided in accordance with the
requirements of Article XIX, §
255-135C(5) of this chapter.
   N.   Where parking areas and/or buildings in an office center are located
within 200 feet of an abutting residential district, there shall be a buffer
area along that portion of the residential district line which is within 200
feet of said parking area and/or buildings , which buffer area shall be at
least 25 feet measured from the residential district line, and said buffer area
shall be used for no purpose other than planting and landscaping. There shall
be a twenty-five-foot buffer area along street frontage occupied by an OC
Office Center District, which area shall be used for no purpose other than
planting and landscaping.
   O.   Parking, loading or service areas used by motor vehicles shall be
located entirely within the lot lines of the office center and shall be
physically separated from public streets .
   P.   All utility lines within the lot lines of the office center district
shall be placed underground.
   Q.   All materials, including trash, supplies, rubbish, refuse, etc., shall
be stored within the buildings . They shall not be handled so as to give rise
to smoke, odor or litter. An odor violation will be determined in accordance
with
Chapter 158 of this Code. [Amended 5-13-1997 by Ord. No. 943]
   R.   Lighting facilities shall be arranged in a manner which will protect
the highways and neighboring properties from unreasonable direct glare or
hazardous interference of any kind.
   S.   No office center permitted in an office center district shall be
erected or used that is not adequately served with both public sanitary sewers
and public water. This section shall not be interpreted to exclude the use of
water obtained from the surface or ground, provided that such sources can be
developed on the premises without impairment to similar services on adjacent or
nearby properties or to public water supplies. No on-site sanitary sewer
disposal system shall be permitted.
   T.   For the purpose of calculating the minimum area lot dimension and yard
requirements established by this section, a single planned office center
district cannot lie on two sides of a public street or highway. Any area
designated as being an OC Office Center District and lying on both sides of a
public street or highway shall be deemed to be two Office Center Districts, and
all minimum requirements shall be met by buildings on each side of said public
street or highway as separate districts. The OC Office Center District shall be
unified and contiguous in shape.
   U.   The governing body may prescribe particular requirements or any further
reasonable conditions deemed appropriate with respect to the suitability of the
office center in harmonious relationship to surrounding areas.
§ 255-61.1.   Use and development requirements for mixed use developments.
[Added 3-28-2017 by Ord. No. 17-1330; amended 3-11-2025 by Ord. No. 25-1400, §§
2 – 6]
A Mixed Use Development shall comply with the following requirements and
criteria:
   A.   The development shall consist of a harmonious selection of uses and
groupings of buildings, service and parking areas, circulation and green areas,
planned and designed as an integrated unit, in such a manner as to constitute a
safe, efficient and convenient center and encourage the use of green building
technologies and sustainable design features.
   B.   Permitted uses. Any of the following uses may be permitted when
included in a Mixed Use Development :
      (1)   Retail and commercial establishments to include the following:
         (a)   Retail sale of household merchandise, food and beverage
products, and personal effects, such as dry goods, variety and general
merchandise, clothing, prepared and packaged food, grocery items, deli
products, flowers, beverages, pharmaceuticals and medical supplies, household
supplies and furnishings, jewelry, optical goods, musical items, and antiques.
         (b)   Personal care, to include barber shop, hairdresser, clothes
cleaning, tailoring, nail care and spa.
         (c)   Personal fitness center.
         (d)   Child and/or adult daycare facility.
         (e)   Restaurant , coffeehouse, tea room, café, confectionary or
similar establishment serving food or beverage, provided that the establishment
shall not be open for business between the hours of 1:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m.
daily and on weekends.
         (f)   Bank or financial institution.
         (g)   Business, medical or professional office.
         (h)   Hotel.
      (2)   Residential uses:
         (a)   Apartment buildings.
         (b)   Townhouse dwellings.
         (c)   Stacked townhouse dwelling s.
      (3)   Accessory uses :
         (a)   Parking garage.
         (b)   Clubhouse, pool or other amenity uses, as an accessory use to a
permitted residential use .
         (c)   Drive-thru service, as an accessory use to any permitted use,
provided (i) the drive-thru is internal to the site with no direct access onto
a public street , (ii) is intended for vehicular access only and does not
include walk-up and/or order pick-up areas; and (iii) no more than three drive-
thru facilities shall be permitted within a Mixed Use Development .
         (d)   Outdoor seating and/or dining areas, provided that no outdoor
seating or dining shall occur after 11:00 p.m. each day.
      (4)   Institutional uses:
         (a)   Senior assisted living residence .
      (5)   Municipal uses.
   C.   Development requirements. The general plan for a Mixed Use Development
shall comply with the following requirements and criteria:
      (1)   Lot area . The minimum gross lot area shall be 20 acres.
      (2)   Road frontages. The site, which may include adjacent parcels under
common control, shall have frontage on and road access to at least two public
road s. The grant of an irrevocable access easement over and across an adjacent
property to a public road , shall constitute frontage and road access.
      (3)   Mix requirements. Every Mixed Use Development shall provide a mix
of three or more uses, including office, commercial, residential, institutional
and/or municipal use s, and no one use may utilize more than 80% of the
building area. Accessory parking, including any parking garage, shall not be
included as a separate use and its square footage shall not be counted in the
calculation of the mix requirements.
      (4)   Site plan. A site plan shall be required and shall include a
unified architectural theme, preliminary stormwater management design and
conceptual landscaping.
      (5)   Neighborhood Open Space. A minimum of 10% of the net developable
area of the lot shall be developed as Neighborhood Open Space. Neighborhood
Open Space shall consist of parks, plazas, gardens, water features and other
similarly improved common areas and amenities provided for the benefit of the
residents, tenants and/or customers of the Mixed Use Development , and the
general public. Trail and sidewalk connections also shall be provided to
connect Neighborhood Open Spaces. A public access easement shall be granted in
favor of the Township to provide public access to the trails and to certain
portions of the Neighborhood Open Space within a Mixed Use Development that are
appropriate for public access.
         (a)   A Mixed Use Development which includes stacked townhouse
dwelling s, shall provide a minimum of 200 square feet per stacked townhouse
dwelling (i.e., 400 square feet per stack of two dwellings) of outdoor
courtyard space between the building s containing such stacked townhouse
dwelling s, which shall be improved with a minimum of one bench for every five
stacked townhouse dwelling s with additional landscaping. Such space is
separate from, and in addition to, the overall Mixed Use Neighborhood Open
Space otherwise required in subsection C.(5) above and shall be improved and
arranged in a manner to encourage outdoor recreation among the residents
whether passive or active in nature.
      (6)   Stormwater facilities. Naturalized stormwater facilities may occupy
up to 25% of the Neighborhood Open Space if such facilities are designed and
landscaped using Best Management Practices (BMPs), as published from time to
time by the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection and
incorporated into the landscaped area. There shall be no limit on the area of
underground stormwater facilities.
      (7)   Buffers. There shall be a buffer area along the property line of a
residential zoned district of at least 50 feet, which buffer area shall include
planting and landscaping. There shall be a buffer area of at least 25 feet
where parking is located along a street frontage, which buffer area may include
a low wall, fencing and/or landscaping.
      (8)   Permitted density. A Mixed Use Development may contain up to 15
dwelling units per gross acre of the lot area . To encourage the use of green
building technology and sustainable design features, increases in the base
density are permitted in accordance with the following table. These increases
are cumulative and can be combined up to a maximum density of 20 dwelling units
per gross acre of the lot area .
 
Bonus Feature  Bonus Feature Standard                                                           Density
                                                                                                Bonus
                                                                                                For each
                                                                                                additional
                                                                                                5% of net
                                                                                                developable
                                                                                                area
                                                                                                preserved,
Neighborhood   Preserve additional land as Neighborhood Open Space in excess of the required    permitted
Open Space     10%                                                                              density may
                                                                                                be
                                                                                                increased
                                                                                                by 0.5
                                                                                                dwelling
                                                                                                units per
                                                                                                gross acre.
                                                                                                2.0
Structured     A minimum of 35% of the total required number of parking spaces is provided in   dwelling
parking        structured parking.                                                              unit per
                                                                                                gross acre.
                                                                                                2.0
                                                                                                dwelling
                                                                                                unit per
                                                                                                gross acre
                                                                                                for the
                                                                                                first
                                                                                                building
               The green roof shall cover at least 70% of the net roof area (the total gross    with a
               area minus areas covered by mechanical equipment) of a building with a footprint qualifying
               of at least 20,000 square feet. Green roofs shall be designed and installed      green roof
Green Roof     under the direction of a professional with demonstrated expertise in green roof  and another
               design and construction . Vegetation must be maintained for the life of the      0.5
               building . The green roof shall conform to the best available technology         dwelling
               standards, such as those published by LEED.                                      unit per
                                                                                                acre for
                                                                                                each
                                                                                                additional
                                                                                                building
                                                                                                with a
                                                                                                qualifying
                                                                                                green roof
                                                                                                .
                                                                                                For each
                                                                                                qualifying
               Qualifying features:                                                             feature,
                  a) Provide electric plug-in charging stations for electric/hybrid vehicles density may
Alternative    for 1% of total required parking.                                                be
transportation    b) Provide bike racks throughout development .                             increased
                  c) Implement a bike-share program within the development .                 by 1.0
                  d) Provide a public transit stop.                                          dwelling
                                                                                                units per
                                                                                                gross acre.
               Install a solar, geothermal or other renewable energy power-generation facility  1.0
Alternative    that is designed to provide at least 10% of the expected annual energy use for   dwelling
energy sources the building . The facility shall be designed and installed under the direction  unit per
               of a professional with demonstrated expertise in the design and construction of  gross acre
               such facilities.
 
   D.   Area and bulk requirements.
      (1)   Building coverage . The maximum building coverage shall not exceed
40% of the net developable area of the lot .
      (2)   Impervious coverage. The maximum impervious coverage shall not
exceed 70% of the developable acreage of the lot .
      (3)   Building height. The maximum building height of any residential or
mixed use  building or structure within a Mixed Use Development shall be 65
feet, in accordance with the requirements under §
255-61.F. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the maximum height of any mixed use
building containing a commercial use on the first floor and residential uses
above and/or an apartment building may be increased to 75 feet if the building
is located at least 500 feet from the boundary of a residential zoning
district. The maximum building height for a single-story commercial use shall
be 35 feet.
      (4)   Building setbacks. No building may be located closer than:
         (a)   Seventy feet to any public highway or ultimate public right-of-
way , or to any toll or controlled public highway right-of-way .
         (b)   Fifty feet to any other property line or the center line of any
existing private road .
      (5)   Parking setbacks. No parking area may be located closer than 25
feet to any public highway or ultimate public right-of-way , or to any toll or
controlled public highway right-of-way , or any other property line.
      (6)   Parking requirements.
         (a)   Nonresidential uses: 4 spaces per 1,000 square feet of gross
building floor area.
         (b)   Residential uses:
            (i)   Townhouses and stacked townhouses: Two parking spaces per
dwelling unit , provided that (i) a garage shall be considered one parking
space and (ii) overflow parking shall be provided at a ratio of 0.5 parking
spaces per dwelling unit .
            (ii)   Apartment buildings (including the residential component of
a mixed use  building ): One parking space per bedroom.
   E.   Design standards. The intent of these standards is to ensure
development contributes to a high-quality, mixed-use environment without
limiting design flexibility and innovation. The applicant shall submit plans,
elevations, renderings, reports, documents and samples as necessary in the form
of proposed design guidelines to demonstrate compliance with the following
standards:
      (1)   Building design.
         (a)   Coherent architectural theme. Mixed Use Developments shall have
a common and coherent architectural theme throughout the development .
         (b)   Primary façade. Any building façade with a customer or visitor
entrance shall be treated as a primary façade. On non-residential or mixed use
 building s at least 50% of the length of the ground floor of primary façades
shall consist of windows, glass doors, or other transparent or semi-transparent
building surfaces. Mirrored glass is prohibited. Walls or portions of walls
where windows are not provided shall have architectural treatments and details,
such as a change in building material or color, lighting fixtures, decorative
tiles, hanging planters, awnings and/or similar features.
         (c)   Secondary façade. All other building façades shall be treated as
a secondary façade. Secondary façades must have architectural treatments and
building materials that are complimentary to the primary façade. On secondary
facades visible from a public or private street, or drive aisle blank walls are
prohibited.
         (d)   Building entrances. All building entrances on primary facades
shall be accentuated. Permitted entrance accents include: recessed, protruding,
canopy, portico, overhang and/or similar feature.
         (e)   Parapets, etc. Buildings shall be designed with parapets,
mansards, or other architectural treatment along all roof edges to conceal
large vents, HVAC and other rooftop equipment and structures.
         (f)   Building breaks.
            [1]   Buildings must have at least a three-foot break in depth, for
the full height of the building , every 150 feet of continuous primary facade.
            [2]   For buildings greater than four stories tall, the facade of
the building shall step back a minimum of three feet above the first floor of
the building .
         (g)   Balconies. Balconies or Juliette style balconies shall be
provided for every residential unit.
      (2)   Signage. The applicant for a Mixed Use Development shall submit a
sign plan meeting the requirements of §
255-152.2.H.
      (3)   Landscape and streetscape standards.
         (a)   Sidewalks or multi-use trails shall be provided along all street
frontages. Sidewalks along public and private street frontages shall be a
minimum of six feet wide. Trails shall be a minimum of ten feet wide.
         (b)   A landscape plan prepared by a licensed landscape architect is
required for all Mixed Use Developments . Landscaped areas include green areas,
streetscapes, the interior and perimeter of surface parking areas, greenways,
verges, stormwater basins, and natural areas.
         (c)   Within 100 feet of a residential zoning district the landscape
plan shall include plantings, decorative fencing or a wall to shield headlights
and soften the view of cars from the street and from adjacent residential
areas.
      (4)   Standards for Neighborhood Open Space.
         (a)   The minimum width of any land area to be counted as Neighborhood
Open Space shall be 15 feet.
         (b)   Neighborhood Open Space shall be landscaped and/or hardscaped
with a mix of trees, shrubs, groundcover decorative paving or walls in
accordance with the overall landscape plan prepared for the development by a
registered landscape architect.
         (c)   Neighborhood Open Space shall be provided with benches, trash
containers and/or lighting fixtures.
      (5)   Public transit. Transit facilities and shelters shall be provided
in mutually agreeable location(s) and in accordance with the design standards
established by the Southeastern Pennsylvania Transit Authority (SEPTA).
   F.   Special conveyancing. When a parcel or parcels are developed as a
mixed-use development pursuant to this §
255-61.1, then the creation of and conveyance of a lot or parcel(s) within such
mixed-use development shall be permitted upon compliance with the following
conditions:
      (a)   Irrevocable cross-easements in favor of, and duly binding on, all
title owners within the area of the mixed-use development , their successors
and assigns, with respect to use, control and maintenance of the common areas
including access, green space, and parking areas are in effect and recorded.
All easement s shall be submitted to the Township Solicitor for review prior to
recording of same.
      (b)   The application of zoning regulations including, but not limited
to, building coverage, impervious coverage, parking, loading and landscaping,
as well as required area, width and yard regulations, shall apply to the
overall approved mixed-use development and the individual lots or parcels
created pursuant to this section need not comply with such zoning requirements.
§ 255-62.   Submission of plans; review; approval.
   A.   Plans for any office center use shall be submitted to the governing
body prior to the issuance of any zoning or building  permit as provided in
Article XXIV. Information to be shown on all office center plans or on attached
reports shall include:
      (1)   A plot plan of the lot showing the location of all present and
proposed buildings , sidewalks and other areas to be devoted to pedestrian use
, drives, parking lots, loading and unloading areas and other construction
features on the lot ; and all buildings , streets , highways, streams and other
topographical features of the lot within 200 feet of any lot line . The off-
site information may be shown by aerial photographs and by the United States
Geological Survey information.
      (2)   Architectural plans for any proposed buildings .
      (3)   The location, size in square feet, dimensions and arrangements of
areas and buildings to be devoted to any purpose.
      (4)   A description of any land uses proposed, including approximate
number of employees and an indication of the number of visitors in sufficient
detail to indicate the effects of those operations in producing traffic
congestion, noise, glare, air pollution, water pollution, fire hazards or
safety hazards.
      (5)   Engineering and architectural plans for the treatment and disposal
of sanitary sewage and surface and storm waters, including the general drainage
system.
      (6)   The stages which shall be followed in the construction of the
planned office center.
      (7)   If requested by the governing body, a market analysis suitable for
the size center proposed, showing the desirability of an office center in the
location requested.
      (8)   If requested by the governing body, a statement of financial
responsibility as to the developer's ability to proceed with construction .
   B.   If requested by the governing body, the Township Planning Agency
Advisory Board or any other advisory body of the Township shall review such
plans as the governing body shall submit to them for office center district
uses . Such review shall be promptly made and recommendations thereon submitted
to the governing body.
   C.   Upon receipt of the plans for any office center use and recommendations
thereon by the Township advisory bodies, the governing body shall have the
power of approval or disapproval of these plans.
   D.   Upon approval of the final plan, construction shall begin in accordance
with the approved plan within one year From final approval, unless otherwise
extended by the governing body.
   E.   In the event that initial development has not been completed within the
specified time limit and the property has been re-zoned as from OC Office
Center District to another classification and the office has been partially
constructed, such partial construction shall not be considered a nonconforming
use as defined in this chapter.
ARTICLE X
(Reserved)
[“Motel - Motor Inn - Motor Lodge District,” amended as noted where applicable;
repealed 5-14-2019 by Ord. No. 19-1351, §3]
§ 255-63.   (Reserved)
[“Purpose; intent,” amended 1-10-1995 by Ord. No. 879; repealed 5-14-2019 by
Ord. No. 19-1351]
§ 255-64.   (Reserved)
[“Authorization,” repealed 5-14-2019 by Ord. No. 19-1351]
§ 255-65.   Reserved)
[“Use regulations,” repealed 5-14-2019 by Ord. No. 19-1351]
§ 255-66.   (Reserved) 25
25. Editor's Note: Former §
255-66, Signs, was repealed 7-10-2001 by Ord. No. 1066. See Art. XXI for sign
regulations.
§ 255-67.   (Reserved)
[“Prohibited placement,” repealed 5-14-2019 by Ord. No. 19-1351]
§ 255-68.   (Reserved)
[“Development requirements; plan,” amended 5-13-1997 by Ord. No. 943; 9-14-2004
by Ord. No. 1139; repealed 5-14-2019 by Ord. No. 19-1351]
§ 255-69.   (Reserved)
[“Submission of plans; review; approval,” repealed 5-14-2019 by Ord. No. 19-
1351]
ARTICLE XI
RE Recreational Districts
§ 255-70.   Intent.
In expansion of the declaration of intent contained in Article I, §
255-2, of this chapter, it is hereby declared to be the intent of this article
with respect to recreational districts to establish reasonable standards
therein, in order to maintain and protect the desirable benefits which
recreational uses have throughout the community.
§ 255-71.   Use regulations.
Land may be used or occupied, and buildings and structures , as accessory
adjuncts thereto, may be erected or used, for any of the following purposes and
no other: private or public golf course, tennis court, swimming pool, ice
skating rink, marina, playing field and for like recreational uses , provided
that such recreational facilities are conducted out of doors and are primarily
used for owner, guest, membership or patron participation.
§ 255-72.   Accessory uses.
[Amended 9-14-2004 by Ord. No. 1139]
   A.   Accessory uses for RE Recreational Districts shall be as follows:
      (1)   A clubhouse, provided that such is planned and used as an integral
part of the principal recreational facility.
      (2)   Dwellings occupied or intended for occupancy by the employees and/
or guests of the principal facility.
   B.   The accessory uses permitted above shall not occupy more than 9% of
land area nor shall the impervious surface of a lot exceed 15%.
§ 255-73.   Prohibited locations.
No area shall be used for recreational uses if there exists in the area sought
to be used for the defined recreational uses a commercial and/or a permitted
industrial use .
§ 255-74.   Required area.
No RE Recreational District shall have an area less than 25 acres.
§ 255-75. On-site parking.
Adequate on-site all-weather parking shall be provided for the accommodation of
all persons customarily using the facilities afforded.
§ 255-76.   Performance standards.
   A.   Control of noise. At no point on the boundary of a residential district
shall the level of sound from a recreational use be such as to disturb the
residential environment of the adjacent residences. A violation of this section
will occur when the level of sound is determined to be excessive in accordance
with the provisions of §
158-12 of this Code. [Amended 5-13-1997 by Ord. No. 943]
   B.   Control of glare. Any operation producing glare shall be performed in
such a manner as to be completely imperceptible from any point beyond the lot
lines .
§ 255-77.   Submission of plan; approval.
   A.   Plans for any RE recreational use shall be submitted to the Township
Commissioners. Such plans shall be drawn to a uniform scale and shall show:
      (1)   The boundaries of the area, the nature of the recreational
facility, an outline of existing or proposed buildings , the parking area, the
means of ingress and egress, the sanitary arrangements and the provision for
surface water drainage.
      (2)   The shape and dimensions of all of the buildings or structures ,
together with plans and specifications.
      (3)   The appearance, preferably in color, of the buildings or structures
on conversion or completion and of any signs to be attached thereto or to be
located on the premises.
      (4)   The landscaping of the premises.
   B.   All plans shall be approved or disapproved by the Township
Commissioners. If approved, copies thereof shall be filed among the Township
records, and the Commissioners may, at their discretion, require the owner to
file for record in the office of the Recorder of Deeds of Montgomery County
additional copies or such other instruments as the Commissioners may require.
If a plan or other instrument is required to be recorded, the recording thereof
shall constitute the final step in the approval of such plan or plans. The cost
of recording shall be paid by the owner.
   C.   All plans finally approved and whether or not recorded shall be binding
upon the owner, his heirs, executors, administrators, successors and assigns;
shall limit and control the issuance and validity of all building  permits and
use regulation permits and limit the use and operation of all land, buildings
and structures designated in such plans to the conditions appearing in such
plans and the approval thereof.
   D.   The approval of plans shall not be construed as relieving the owner or
his successors in title from strict compliance with and liability under the
provisions of this chapter and all other ordinances of the Township of Upper
Dublin.
§ 255-78.   Amendment of approved plans.
Approved plans may be amended pursuant to the same procedure and subject to the
same limitations and requirements by which such plans were originally approved.
ARTICLE XII
AHS Apartment House Special District
§ 255-79.   Purpose.
Special districts are designed as a special and exceptional Apartment District,
having all the necessary conditions of the MD Multi-Dwelling District as
described in Article VIII, but in addition having the particular locational
characteristic of being in close proximity to major mass transportation routes,
including limited-access highways.
§ 255-80.   Use regulations.
[Amended 1-10-1995 by Ord. No. 879]
A building or group of buildings may be erected or used and a lot may be used
and occupied for any of the following purposes and no other upon application to
and approval as a conditional use by the Board of Commissioners in accordance
with the conditional use requirements of this chapter:
   A.   Apartment house or group of apartment houses designed as a single
architectural project or unit.
   B.   Accessory uses on the same lot which are customarily incidental to any
of the above permitted uses , provided that the total floor area does not
exceed 25% of the total ground floor area. Such accessory uses include:
      (1)   Retail store or personal service shop. (First floor only).
      (2)   Restaurant .
      (3)   Bank or similar institution. (First floor only).
      (4)   Professional office.
§ 255-81.   Lot, yard and bulk regulations.
In case of each lot or tract of land developed for an Apartment House Special
District, the following area and height regulations shall apply:
   A.   Lot area . The total area of the lot or tract shall be not less than 10
acres, and the ratio of lot width to length or lot length to width shall be not
more than 3:1 in either case.
   B.   Density . Density of dwelling units shall not exceed 20 units per acre.
However, the density may be increased by one unit per acre for every two
enclosed parking spaces .
   C.   Surface area. [Amended 9-14-2004 by Ord. No. 1139]
      (1)   Building area . Not more than 15% of the area of the lot or tract
may be occupied by buildings , exclusive of terraces, walkways and parking
facilities.
      (2)   Impervious surface . The impervious surface of a lot or tract may
not exceed 60%.
   D.   Yards and building placement.
      (1)   Front yard . There shall be a front yard on each street of which
the lot or tract abuts which shall be not less than 75 feet in depth.
      (2)   Side yards . There shall be two side yards , neither of which shall
be less than 50 feet in width.
      (3)   Rear yard . There shall be a rear yard which shall be not less than
50 feet in depth.
      (4)   (4) The side and rear yard requirements may be waived to provide
for parking structures , under the following conditions only: [Amended 1-10-
1995 by Ord. No. 879]
         (a)   When the rear or side yard abuts unzoned railroad land or fully
developed industrial or heavy commercial uses .
         (b)   When the parking structure is necessary to provide for adequate
circulation elsewhere on the lot or to provide maximum separation between
automobiles and pedestrians on the front of the lot .
      (5)   When the parking structure is so situated that it is in no place
adjacent to the front yard of any adjoining properties.
   E.   Height. No building shall have a height of less than 50 feet or five
stories, whichever is less, and shall not be higher than 10 stories or 120
feet, whichever is less, exclusive of equipment.
§ 255-82.   Development regulations.
In addition to the other regulations of this district, the following
requirements shall apply:
   A.   The development shall be consistent with the purpose of this chapter to
promote the health, safety, morals and general welfare of the Township.
[Amended 1-10-1995 by Ord. No. 879]
   B.   The development shall consist of an harmonious selection of uses and
groupings of buildings , service and parking areas, circulation and open
spaces, planned and designed as an integrated unit in such manner as to
constitute a safe, efficient and convenient development .
   C.   Each use other than parking areas shall be conducted entirely within an
enclosed building .
   D.   In any case where a repair or processing activity is permitted in
conjunction with a personal service shop, custom shop or similar use , any such
activity shall, if located on the ground floor, be effectively screened from
the front portion of the building used by customers by a wall or partition.
   E.   No storage of materials, equipment or goods shall be permitted outside
a building , and no merchandise shall be displayed on the exterior of a
building .
   F.   Adequate provision shall be made for safe and efficient pedestrian and
vehicular traffic circulation within the boundaries of the center or planned
business district.
   G.   The developer shall assure the provision of required improvements to be
dedicated by means of a proper completion and guaranty in the form of a bond or
the deposition of funds or securities in escrow to cover the cost of the
improvements . The work shall be performed in accordance with all requirements
and the approved plans.
   H.   Areas for loading and unloading of delivery trucks and other vehicles
and for the servicing of refuse collection, fuel and other services shall be
provided and shall be adequate in size and shall be so arranged that they may
be used without blockage or interference with the use of accessways or
automobile parking facilities.
   I.   Provision shall be made for safe and efficient ingress and egress to
and from public streets and highways serving the apartment without undue
congestion to or interference with normal traffic flow.
   J.   All utility lines servicing the apartment center shall be placed
underground.
   K.   Each lot for apartments shall contain a minimum recreation area of
least equal to the number of dwelling units multiplied by 100 square feet.
   L.   Parking, delivery - collection areas and traveling lanes on each lot
shall be paved in accordance with Township specifications and approved by the
Township Engineer.
   M.   Concrete sidewalks shall be constructed on each street or road abutting
the lot .
   N.   All buildings shall be served by a public sanitary sewage disposal
system and public water supply.
   O.   Lighting facilities provided shall be arranged in a manner which will
protect the highway and neighboring properties from unreasonable direct glare
or hazardous interference of any kind. Lighting facilities shall be required
where deemed necessary for the safety and convenience of apartment residents.
   P.   A landscaped planting area shall be provided, along any property line
(other than in a street ) which the lot abuts, of not less than 15 feet in
depth. The landscaping shall be permanent and designed for screening from view
residential, commercial and industrial uses which are adjoining and contiguous
to the apartment house project. Continuous hedges may not be used except in
connection with play areas, and then only when kept low, and have acceptable
appearance. Escrow or bond for improvements under the plan for perimeter and
surrounding buildings under permit shall be provided.
   Q.   Areas for the deposit, retention and disposal of waste materials shall
be screened from view.
   R.   No building located shall be on land subject to flooding as reflected
in the fifty-year flood level as established by the Corps of Engineers.
   S.   The developer shall be required, where possible, to preserve or
incorporate natural features such as woods, streams and open space areas which
add to the overall cohesive development of the Apartment House Special District
and overall Township development .
   T.   All roof, parking, delivery - collection areas and traveling lanes
shall be provided with drainage facilities to collect, transport and deliver
via underground conduits storm- or surface waters to the nearest storm sewers
or stream as approved by the Township Engineer. No more than 10% of units shall
contain three bedrooms.
§ 255-83.   Parking.
   A.   Each lot shall be provided with off-street parking and off-street
delivery - collection areas. Such parking and delivery - collection area shall
be in addition to the areas required for recreation, service areas and
traveling lanes on the lot and shall not be leased but shall be in addition to
the areas required for recreation, service areas and traveling lanes on the lot
and shall not be leased but shall be for the sole use of the occupants of such
building or buildings and visitors thereto.
   B.   Not less than two off-street parking spaces shall be required for each
dwelling unit .
   C.   No parking shall be permitted within 30 feet of a property line or
ultimate right-of-way line , except as provided in §
255-81D(4) herein.
§ 255-84.   Submittal of plans; review; approval.
   A.   Plans for any apartment house use shall be submitted to the Planning
Commission prior to the issuance of any permit , and such plans shall include,
among other things, the following:
      (1)   A plot plan of the lot showing the location of all proposed
buildings and constructional features on the lot ; and all parking and delivery
- collection areas, recreation areas, traveling lanes, entrances and exits to
lots , extent and species of landscaping abutting streets , either public or
private, easements, streams and other topographical features of the lot .
      (2)   Architectural plans for any proposed building .
      (3)   Engineering and architectural plans for the handling and disposal
of sewage and other wastes.
      (4)   Any other data or evidence that the Planning Commission may
require.
   B.   The Planning Commission shall review all plans for apartment house uses
submitted to it and shall, within 30 days of its receipt, submit these plans,
with recommendations thereon, to the Board of Commissioners for final approval.
   C.   Upon receipt of plans for any apartment house use and recommendations
thereon by the Planning Commission, the Board of Commissioners shall have the
power of approval or disapproval of these plans
§ 255-85.   (Reserved) 26
26. Editor's Note: Former §
255-85, Signs, was repealed 7-10-2001 by Ord. No. 1066. See Art. XXI for sign
regulations.
§ 255-86.   Fire-resistive construction required.
Each apartment house shall be constructed in accordance with requirements of
the current applicable building code for Type 1-A fire-resistive construction.
27
27. Editor's Note: See
Ch. 73, Building Construction.
ARTICLE XIII
INST Institutional Districts
§ 255-87.   Purpose and intent.
[Amended 9-12-1995 by Ord. No. 895]
It is the purpose and intent of this district to encourage the development of a
mixture of institutional uses compatible with surrounding uses in accordance
with an approved plan of development subject to the requirements of this
chapter.
§ 255-88.   Use regulations.
[Amended 6-14-1994 by Ord. No. 866; 9-12-1995 by Ord. No. 895]
   A.   A building may be erected or used, and a lot may be used or occupied,
for any of the purposes listed in this section:
      (1)   Educational uses , including private schools , colleges and
universities.
      (2)   Library or museum.
      (3)   Licensed hospital or medical center.
      (4)   Nursing or convalescent home.
      (5)   Office or clinic for medical or dental examination or treatment of
persons as outpatients, including laboratories incidental thereto.
      (6)   Uses accessory to a dwelling in accordance with §
255-27 herein.
      (7)   Accessory buildings , structures or uses customarily incidental to
uses permitted in INST District.
      (8)   Off-street parking, subject to the provisions of Article XIX. 28
   B.   [Amended 10-12-1999 by Ord. No. 1010] The following uses are permitted
as a special exception when authorized by the Zoning Hearing Board in
accordance with the provisions of Article XXIII:
      (1)   Conversion of an existing residential building .
      (2)   Recreational facility owned or operated by a nongovernmental
agency.
      (3)   Private club or lodge.
      (4)   Community center, adult education center or other similar facility.
      (5)   Parking area.
      (6)   Customary home occupation or professional office accessory to a
dwelling in accordance with §
255-27 herein.
      (7)   Place of religious worship.
   C.   The following accessory uses may be allowed:
      (1)   Agriculture .
      (2)   Dormitory.
   D.   The following uses are permitted as a conditional use when authorized
by the Board of Commissioners in accordance with the provisions of Article XXV:
      (1)   Licensed day-care center .
      (2)   Life care complex, subject to the provisions of §
255-90 herein.
      (3)   Senior assisted living residence , subject to the provisions of §
255-90.1 herein.
      (4)   A building may be constructed or converted for emergency medical
services  use subject to the following provisions: [Added 11-5-1997 by Ord. No.
956]
         (a)   The building (s) will comply with the lot , yard and bulk
requirements for the institutional district as set forth in §
255-89.
         (b)   The property shall conform to any impervious cover limitations
of the institutional zoning district.
         (c)   The organization or agency which provides the emergency medical
services must maintain tax-exempt status under Section 501(C)(3) or (4) of the
Internal Revenue Code, as amended.
         (d)   A minimum two-mile separation distance shall be provided between
like emergency medical service facilities.
         (e)   Outdoor lighting must be restricted to eliminate glare onto
surrounding properties.
         (f)   One parking space must be provided for each 200 square feet of
office area. Additional parking and maneuvering space for volunteers and
emergency medical equipment must be provided based upon the number or size of
the vehicles anticipated. The required parking must be provided on all weather
surface.
         (g)   Land-based sirens shall not be operated. The Board of
Commissioners may impose further restrictions to eliminate noise from the
facility or the emergency medical services vehicles to prevent a public
nuisance.
         (h)   Signage shall be limited to that otherwise permitted in the
institutional zoning district.
         (i)   All emergency medical services vehicles, except those
immediately available for use, shall be stored at all times in a fully enclosed
building .
         (j)   No motor repair or body work may be performed at the site.
Routine maintenance may be performed, but only within a fully enclosed building
.
         (k)   Buffering shall be provided in accordance with the requirements
of the institutional zoning district. Fencing may also be required for public
safety or to avoid a public nuisance. Access drives may penetrate the buffer.
         (l)   The applicant shall demonstrate that any increase in traffic and
any use of abutting streets by emergency medical services vehicles shall not
adversely impact local traffic conditions or represent a danger to the
community.
         (m)   The emergency medical services vehicles shall have direct access
onto a primary or secondary street , as set forth on the Official Township Map
of Streets.
28. Editor's Note: Former Subsection A(9), Signs, which immediately followed
this subsection, was repealed 7-10-2001 by Ord. No. 1066. See Art. XXI for sign
regulations.
§ 255-89.   Lot, yard and bulk requirements.
The regulations for INST Institutional District pertaining to lot area ,
density and the arrangement of buildings on subject lots shall be specified
below:
   A.   Lot area and width. Any parcel of land developed under the terms of
this article shall contain a total minimum area of 80,000 square feet with a
width of not less than 200 feet at the building line .
   B.   Surface area. [Amended 9-14-2004 by Ord. No. 1139]
      (1)   Building area . Not more than 20% of the area of each lot may be
occupied by buildings .
      (2)   Impervious surface . The impervious surface of a lot may not exceed
60%.
   C.   Front yard . There shall be a front yard of not less than 100 feet in
depth.
   D.   Side yards . There shall be two side yards on each lot , neither of
which shall be less than 25 feet in width.
   E.   Rear yard . There shall be a rear yard on each lot which shall not be
less than 50 feet in depth.
   F.   Interior yards .
      (1)   For buildings of three stories or less, but not in excess of 35
feet in height, a minimum distance between any two buildings shall be 35 feet.
      (2)   The required distance between any two buildings shall be increased
by an amount equal to that portion of the height of each building which exceeds
35 feet or three stories, whichever is lower. Part or all of the additional
required distance between buildings may be provided by setbacks in the building
at the thirty-five-foot or three-story level.
   G.   Buffer yards . Along any district boundary line separating the INST
Institutional District from a residential district, a buffer yard shall be
provided which shall be not less than 50 feet in width measured from such
boundary line, or from the street line where such street constitutes the
district boundary line. Such buffer yard may be conterminous with any required
yard in this district, and in case of conflicts, the larger yard requirements
shall apply. In addition, a buffer yard of not less than 50 feet in width shall
be provided in the area separating nonresidential uses from residential uses
within the INST Institutional District.
   H.   Parking. Off-street parking space shall be provided in accordance with
the provisions of Article XIX.
   I.   Streets . All access streets shall have minimum right-of-way widths of
60 feet.
   J.   Utilities. Each building and use shall be served by public water and
sanitary sewer facilities at the time of development .
§ 255-90.   Life care complexes.
   A.   Intent. It is declared to be the intent of this section to allow life
care complex developments only as a conditional use in the Institutional
District and to establish reasonable standards of performance and promote the
desirable benefits which will follow the development of a safe and adequate
life care complex and to ensure that adequate area in a suitable environment is
provided. It is the further intent of this section to set forth standards which
will ensure that the development of a life care complex in Upper Dublin
Township will provide appropriate safety features for the residents as well as
ancillary health care, recreational and community facilities as an integral
part of the complex. Finally, it is the intent of this section to provide for
standards of dwelling unit  density , parking space and open space areas to
increase opportunity of the development of such housing in the Township through
private, public or semipublic means, while providing necessary standards and
controls to ensure that such life care complex will not exert an adverse impact
on surrounding neighborhoods .
   B.   Definition. A life care complex is a development consisting of
residential living units exclusively for persons who are 60 years of age or
older and for married couples with one spouse or both spouses being of 60 years
of age or older. Such developments shall provide nursing facilities, living
units, health care services and meals for residents (with or without common
dining facilities). Such developments may also provide the following facilities
and services for the exclusive use of the residents: physical therapy
facilities; auditoriums, recreation facilities; on-site service shops; and
other ancillary services deemed to be appropriate by the Zoning Hearing Board.
   C.   Use regulations. Permitted uses , in conjunction with a life care
complex, shall be as follows:
      (1)   Single-family attached dwellings for elderly persons .
      (2)   Apartment building and condominiums for elderly persons .
      (3)   Health care facility for elderly persons who require nursing or
convalescent care for extended periods of time.
      (4)   Accessory uses exclusively to meet the needs of the occupants of
the complex.
   D.   Required open space. For purposes of this section, the term "required
open space" shall mean land required under the terms of this article to be
permanently preserved for recreation, environmental and aesthetic purposes.
Required setbacks from lot lines or street rights-of-way shall not be used in
calculating the required open space.
   E.   Development regulations. The following density , area width and yard
regulations shall apply to a life care complex.
      (1)   Maximum density . A maximum density of six units per acre shall be
permitted. Nursing beds shall be provided for not more than 25% of allowable
density and not less than 10% of allowable density of the number of residential
living units.
      (2)   Minimum area. An area of not less than 25 acres shall be provided
for every life care complex.
      (3)   Permanent open space. No less than 40% of the area of a tract
developed as a life care complex shall be retained as permanent open space for
use by the residents for recreational and leisure activities.
      (4)   Distance between buildings .
         (a)   For any two exterior facing walls, (the building of which is
oriented front-to-front, front-to-rear or rear-to-rear) the minimum distance
apart shall be equal to 1 1/2 times the height of the tallest building or a
minimum distance of 20 feet, whichever is greater.
         (b)   For any combination of exterior facing walls not qualified under
Subsection E(4)(a) above, the total distance apart shall be equal to the height
of the tallest building or a minimum distance of 40 feet, whichever is greater.
      (5)   Setbacks.
         (a)   The following minimum setbacks shall be observed.
            [1]   Apartment buildings and health care facilities: 100 feet from
any property line.
            [2]   Single-family attached dwellings : 75 feet from any property
line.
            [3]   All buildings : 75 feet from the ultimate right-of-way of any
public street .
         (b)   There shall be access provided for commercial vehicles to all
sides of the building .
      (6)   Parking shall comply with the requirements set forth in Article XIX
of this chapter. [Amended 6-11-2002 by Ord. No. 1089]
      (7)   Building height. The maximum building height (to the base of the
roofline) shall be 35 feet.
   F.   General requirements.
      (1)   Utilities. All buildings within a life care complex shall be served
by a public sewage system and public water system.
      (2)   Common areas and facilities. Provisions shall be made for the
perpetual maintenance and care of all common areas , including streets ,
driveways, parking areas, walkways, landscaped planting areas, open space and
recreation.
      (3)   Other facilities. Such other improvements , including roads , curbs
and stormwater collection and control facilities, as required by
Chapter 212, Subdivision and Land Development, shall be provided.
   G.   Buffer and screening requirements.
      (1)   Buffer.
         (a)   General requirements. Along all exterior property boundary lines
there shall be a permanent buffer at least 15 feet in depth, unless this is
waived pursuant to Subsection G(1)(c) or (d) below. A screen buffer (as defined
herein) shall be provided wherever the development abuts existing residential
uses , with the exception of mid-rise or high-rise structures and where
abutting other types of uses when deemed necessary by the Township governing
body to provide sufficient buffering and transition. A softening buffer (as
defined herein) shall be provided wherever the development abuts mid-rise or
high-rise residential uses ; existing commercial, office industrial and
institutional uses ; any existing street [as modified by Subsection G(1)(c)
below], drive or parking area; or open (not wooded) undeveloped land. An open
buffer shall be provided wherever the development abuts wooded undeveloped land
or where extensive buffers are deemed unnecessary by the governing body.
         (b)   Components. The minimum component of each type of buffer shall
be as follows:
            [1]   Screen buffers. The primary components of a screen buffer
shall be a row of evergreen trees, at the height of not less than six feet when
planted, spaced not more than 10 feet apart on-center, and these trees shall be
of such species to attain a height at maturity of not less than 20 feet. Also
required as a secondary component of the buffer is one of the following:
mounding (the use of which is encouraged), provided that the slopes shall be a
maximum of 3:1; visually opaque fencing not greater than six feet in height;
and coniferous shrubbery. Any combination of evergreen trees, coniferous shrubs
or other natural vegetation or mounding is allowable, provided that an
effective visual screen at least 15 feet in height above the adjacent ground
elevation in the development is achieved within a reasonable time. But whenever
only vegetation is used, there shall be at least a double row of evergreen
trees, with the trees in one row offset five feet from the trees in the other
row and the rows at least five feet apart.
            [2]   Softening buffer. The primary component of a softening buffer
shall be a row of trees, spaced not more than 25 feet apart on-center, at least
25% of which shall be evergreens. The evergreen trees shall be at least six
feet in height when planted and shall attain at least 20 feet in height at
maturity. Any deciduous trees shall be at least 1 1/2 inches in caliper and
eight feet in height when planted and shall attain a height of not less than 20
feet at maturity. These trees shall be interspersed with other allowable
components, including any other type of trees, shrubs, mounding, fencing and/or
similar natural or man-made elements having a visible vertical dimension or any
combination thereof.
            [3]   Open buffer. The open buffer shall at a minimum consist of
grass, ground cover and/or similar vegetative material and may include trees,
shrubs or other natural landscaping materials.
         (c)   Street boundaries. Rather than the extensive buffer described in
Subsection G(1)(b) above, the use of a single row of deciduous trees at least
eight feet in height when planted and at least 20 feet in height at maturity,
with a spacing of not more than 40 feet on-center, may be provided along all
property boundaries which abut a street , wherever necessary for adequate sight
distance or where the governing body determines this to be a sufficient buffer
to protect the welfare and safety of the community.
         (d)   Existing buffers. In cases where an edge(s) of a development
occurs along natural features which function as buffers, including but not
limited to mature vegetation, significant grade changes or stream valleys,
which are likely to be permanently preserved, buffering may be waived along
that edge(s) upon approval of the governing body.
         (e)   Maintenance. All vegetation shall be maintained permanently, and
in the event of death or other destruction shall be replaced within one year by
the persons responsible for maintenance when death or destruction occurred.
         (f)   Buffer landscape plan. A landscaping plan shall be submitted
with the final plans showing all pertinent information, including the location,
size and species of all individual trees and shrubs to be preserved or planted
or alternatively the general characteristics of existing vegetation masses
which are to be preserved.
      (2)   Screening.
         (a)   Loading zone. Truck loading zones shall be maintained and
clearly marked and shall be used only for their intended purpose. Truck loading
zones shall be screened from view from the ultimate right-of-way and from any
adjacent residential use or district. To the fullest extent possible, truck
loading zones shall be located to minimize potential auditory impacts on any
adjacent residential use or district.
         (b)   Refuse. All refuse shall be kept or stored within the building
or buildings of the development .
§ 255-90.1.   Senior assisted living residence.
[Added 9-12-1995 by Ord. No. 895]
   A.   It is the intent of this section to allow senior assisted living
residences only as a conditional use in the Institutional District and to
establish reasonable zoning standards to promote the desirable benefits which
will follow the development of a safe and adequate senior assisted living
residence and to ensure that adequate space in a suitable environment is
provided. It is the further intent of this section to set forth standards which
will ensure that the development of a senior assisted living residence in Upper
Dublin Township will provide appropriate safety features for the residents as
well as adequate social residential services and community facilities as an
integral part of the senior assisted living residence . It is the further
intent of this section to provide for standards of dwelling unit  density ,
parking space and common areas to enhance the residential nature of the senior
assisted living residence , while providing necessary standards and controls to
ensure that a senior assisted living residence will not exert an adverse impact
on surrounding neighborhoods .
   B.   Definition. A senior assisted living residence is a residence for
persons age 62 and over, regulated by the commonwealth as a personal care home,
as defined in the Pennsylvania Code, which consists of private dwelling units
and accessory uses , provides supportive social residential services such as
meals, housekeeping, medication management, dressing and grooming assistance,
security and twenty-four-hour monitoring, an emergency call system, wellness
promotion, exercise programs, local transportation, laundry services and social
and recreational programs, together with accessory uses customarily incidental
to senior assisted living residences . A senior assisted living residence does
not provide in-house skilled nursing home services or hospital services.
   C.   Residence regulations. The following requirements shall apply to a
senior assisted living residence :
      (1)   The minimum unit size for each dwelling unit occupied by one
resident shall be 200 square feet. The minimum unit size for each residential
unit occupied by two residents shall be 300 square feet.
      (2)   No more than two residents shall be permitted to reside in any
dwelling unit .
      (3)   Each dwelling unit shall contain a fully private bathroom
(including toilet, bathtub and/or shower and vanity/sink), personal closet
space, emergency call systems, lockable entry doors accessible by master key or
similar system available at all times in the senior assisted living residence
and for designated staff, and pre-wiring for private telephone and television
reception.
      (4)   No less than 80 square feet of floor area per resident shall be
provided for community common areas for dining, active and passive recreation,
circulation and socialization, exclusive of hallways and passageways.
      (5)   A central dining area shall be provided, together with a private
dining room available for use by residents and their families and guests for
private visitation and entertaining.
      (6)   All residential units shall be part of a complex, similar to
multifamily housing. No stand-alone units or townhouses shall be permitted.
   D.   Development regulations. The following density , area, dimensional,
parking and buffer regulations shall apply to a senior assisted living
residence :
      (1)   Lot area . A lot area of not less than seven acres with a minimum
lot width at the building line of 300 feet.
      (2)   Frontage. The minimum length of the front property line shall be
300 feet.
      (3)   Density . A maximum density of 14 units per acre shall be
permitted. No more than 25% of the allowable units shall be provided for
double-occupancy.
      (4)   Building coverage . A maximum building coverage of 15% of the total
lot area shall be permitted.
      (5)   Impervious surface coverage. A maximum impervious surface coverage
of 30% of the total lot area shall be permitted.
      (6)   Yard setbacks. The following minimum yard setbacks shall be
observed from the property line, unless the applicable yard is adjacent to a
street , in which case the setback shall be provided from, the ultimate right-
of-way line :
 
Yard  Immediately Abutting Institutional Immediately Abutting Residential Use
      Use
Front 100 feet                           150 feet
Side  100 feet                           150 feet
Rear  50 feet                            100 feet
 
      (7)   The maximum building height, as defined in
Chapter 212, Subdivision and Land Development, shall be two floors, not
exceeding a maximum height of 35 feet.
      (8)   Parking shall be provided as required by Article XIX of this
chapter. A maximum of 35% of the required parking may be held in reserve if the
applicant can demonstrate, to the satisfaction of the Board of Commissioners,
that the additional parking will not be needed. Regardless of the number of
spaces actually developed, a parking area to accommodate the aggregate number
of parking spaces required shall be fully designed, and the area which is
proposed to be eliminated shall be shown on the land development plan as
"parking reserve area." The parking reserve area shall be considered in
calculating the impervious surface ratio. The parking reserve area shall be
planted with vegetative cover and integrated into the site's land development
plan. Such area shall be required to be developed as designed if and when the
Zoning Officer determines the need. [Amended 6-11-2002 by Ord. No. 1089]
      (9)   Buffer and screening requirements. The buffer and screening
requirements for a senior assisted living residence shall be the same as those
outlined in §
255-90G herein for a life care complex. If there is a conflict between said
provisions and the Landscape Ordinance, the Landscape Ordinance shall control.
   E.   General requirements.
      (1)   Utilities. A senior assisted living residence shall be served by a
public sewage system and public water system.
      (2)   Common areas and facilities. Provisions shall be made for the
maintenance and care of all internal and external common areas , including
dining and social rooms, driveways, parking areas, walkways, landscaped
planting areas and recreation areas.
      (3)   Other facilities. Such other improvements , including driveways,
curbs, sidewalks and stormwater collection and control facilities as required
by
Chapter 212 herein, Subdivision and Land Development, shall be provided.
§ 255-91.   Application procedure.
   A.   Application requirements. Before a life care complex or senior assisted
living residence can be permitted in the INST Institutional District, it will
be necessary for the applicant to submit an application for conditional use
approval to the Upper Dublin Board of Commissioners. [Amended 1-10-1995 by Ord.
No. 879; 9-12-1995 by Ord. No. 895]
      (1)   The conformance of the proposed development with this chapter and
compatibility with existing and proposed land uses adjacent to the site.
      (2)   The impact on existing floodplains , waterways, heavily wooded
areas, steep slopes and other sensitive natural features , if any.
      (3)   The impact on the Township and regional transportation system and
the ability of adjacent streets and intersections to efficiently and safely
handle the traffic generated by the proposed development .
      (4)   The impact on public utilities, including but not limited to sewage
disposal, water supply and storm drainage.
      (5)   The impact upon provisions of policy and fire protection.
      (6)   The impact on the open space and recreation facilities of Upper
Dublin Township.
      (7)   The impact upon the character of the surrounding neighborhood . The
applicant must show that the proposed development will not adversely affect the
surrounding neighborhood .
   B.   Required documentation shall include the following:
      (1)   The location and size of the site, with evidence supporting the
general adequacy for development .
      (2)   The proposed residential density of the development and the
percentage mix of permitted dwelling types.
      (3)   The location, size, accessibility and proposed use of the open
space, manner of ownership and maintenance.
      (4)   Conceptual plans of proposed utility and drainage systems.
      (5)   Plans and renderings indicating the design, utility and aesthetic
relationship of building and landscaping within the proposed development .
      (6)   The text of covenants, easements and existing restrictions or those
to be imposed upon the land or structures , including provisions for public
utilities and trails for such activities as hiking or bicycling, if applicable.
   C.   Application review.
      (1)   The Upper Dublin Township Planning Commission shall review the
conditional use application for compliance with the terms of this chapter,
Chapter 212, Subdivision and Land Development and shall submit its
recommendations thereon to the Upper Dublin Township Board of Commissioners,
after review by the Montgomery County Planning Commission in accordance with
the requirements of
Chapter 212, Subdivision and Land Development. [Amended 1-10-1995 by Ord. No.
879]
      (2)   Upon receipt of the Planning Commission recommendation, the Board
of Commissioners shall review the preliminary plans and may:
         (a)   Grant conditional use approval for the proposal as submitted;
         (b)   Grant conditional use approval subject to specified conditions
not included in the development plan as submitted; or
         (c)   Deny conditional use approval for the proposal.
      (3)   Upon receiving conditional use approval or approval thereof with
conditions, the developer shall submit a final development plan to the Upper
Dublin Township Planning Commission complying with the requirements of
Chapter 212, Subdivision and Land Development, for Planning Commission review
and recommendations. The Planning Commission may require the final development
plan be submitted separately for the first and each successive stage.
      (4)   The Planning Commission shall determine at each stage if the final
development plans conform to the plans permitted for conditional use approval
and the requirements of this chapter and
Chapter 212, Subdivision and Land Development. The Commission, having reviewed
the final development plans, shall present its recommendations to the Board of
Commissioners.
      (5)   Upon approval of the final development plans by the Board of
Commissioners and execution by the developer of any necessary land development
agreement with the Township of Upper Dublin and posting by the developer of
security for construction of public improvements , as required by
Chapter 212, Subdivision and Land Development, construction shall begin in
accordance with the approved final plan.
      (6)   Development of the tract shall commence in earnest within 36 months
of approval under §
255-90 or 255-90.1 of this chapter, or the applicable conditional use approval
shall be void. [Amended 9-12-1995 by Ord. No. 895]
ARTICLE XIV
CR Commercial Retail District
§ 255-92.   Classification.
In a CR Commercial Retail District, the permitted uses shall be divided into
two classifications, i.e., L and I, and the following sections shall apply.
§ 255-93.   Class L.
   A.   In Class L a building may be erected, altered or used and a lot or
premises may be used for any of the following purposes and no other:
      (1)   Retail sale of dry goods, variety and general merchandise,
clothing, food, flowers, beverages, drugs, household supplies or furnishings;
and sale or repair of jewelry, watches, clocks, optical goods, musical,
professional or scientific instruments.
      (2)   Barbershops, hairdressers, cleaning and pressing, pickup stations
and such other shops for personal services.
      (3)   Restaurant , tea room, cafe, taproom, confectionary or similar
establishment serving food or beverage.
      (4)   Business or professional office, studio, bank and financial
institution, telephone exchange or other public utility office and passenger
station for public transportation.
      (5)   Club , fraternal organization and lodge.
      (6)   Greenhouse, garden center, or landscape nursery, including an
outdoor area for the sale and storage of plants and materials. [Amended 10-14-
2003 by Ord. No. 1116]
      (7)   Indoor theater, bowling alley, billiard room or similar indoor
amusement.
         (a)   Amusement games , provided that there are no more than three per
establishment.
         (b)   Amusement games , in excess of three, when allowed as a special
exception by the Zoning Hearing Board in accordance with
Chapter 61, Amusement Games.
      (8)   Newspaper publishing and job printing.
      (9)   Educational, religious or philanthropic use .
      (10)   Undertaking establishment.
   B.   The following uses are permitted as a conditional use by the Board of
Commissioners in accordance with the provisions of Article XXV:
      (1)   Licensed day-care center .
§ 255-94.   Class I.
   A.   In Class I, a building may be erected, altered or used and a lot or
premises may be used for any of the following purposes and no other:
      (1)   Any use permitted in Class L.
      (2)   New automobile sales and service agency, including used car lot and
repair shop adjacent to and in connection therewith, and including the outdoor
storage of new and used automobiles. [Amended 7-9-1996 by Ord. No. 911; 10-14-
2003 by Ord. No. 1116]
      (3)   Sale of lumber, plumbing and other building materials and supplies,
and the outdoor storage thereof. [Amended 10-14-2003 by Ord. No. 1116]
      (4)   Hand or automatic self-service laundry, provided that there is
adequate provision made for water disposal.
      (5)   Carpenter, cabinetmaking, furniture or upholstery shop, electrician
shop, metalworking, blacksmith, tinsmith, plumbing, gas, steam or hot water
fitting shop and paint or paperhanging shop.
      (6)   Gasoline service stations , storage or public garage or automobile
repair shop. [Amended 7-9-1996 by Ord. No. 911]
      (7)   Outdoor theater.
      (8)   Machine laundry, dry-cleaning or dyeing plant.
      (9)   Animal hospital or kennel.
      (10)   Laboratories.
   B.   The following uses , are permitted, when authorized as a special
exception :
      (1)   Motel or motor court, hospital or sanitarium which shall be
satisfactory as regards sewage disposal.
      (2)   Any use of the same general character as any of the above permitted
uses .
   C.   Accessory dwelling units . A single permanent dwelling unit as a
customary accessory use to the permitted retail operation under Class L and I
may be allowed, provided that an additional 5,000 square feet of lot area is
added to the minimum requirements of §
255-95 of this article, and provided that such dwelling unit shall be occupied
by the owners or employees employed on the premises and the immediate families
of such owners or employees. [Amended 1-10-1995 by Ord. No. 879]
   D.   The following uses are permitted as a conditional use in Commercial
Class I Districts, in accordance with the conditional use standards of Article
XXV: [Added 7-9-1996 by Ord. No. 911]
      (1)   Body and fender repair shops.
§ 255-95.   Yard and bulk requirements.
   A.   Front yard . There shall be a front yard on each lot , the depth of
which shall not be less than 40 feet. For all corner lots , there shall be a
front yard on each street of not less than 40 feet. Parking is permitted in the
front yard , provided that no parking shall be permitted within 15 feet of the
near side lines of the abutting streets or intersection rights-of-way, and
provided further that there shall be no vision obstructions. [Amended 9-10-1991
by Ord. No. 805]
   B.   Side yard . On a lot abutting any residential district there shall be a
side yard abutting the district having a width of 20 feet or a width equal to
that required on the residential district, whichever is larger. [Amended 9-10-
1991 by Ord. No. 805]
   C.   Rear yard . There shall be a rear yard on each lot , the depth of which
shall be not less than 20 feet.
   D.   Surface area. [Amended 9-14-2004 by Ord. No. 1139]
      (1)   Building coverage : shall not exceed 25% of total lot area .
      (2)   Impervious surface : shall not exceed 7 5c7o of total lot area .
   E.   The maximum number of floors and the maximum height of any building
erected or used in this district shall be as follows:
      (1)   Floors: two.
      (2)   Height: 30 feet.
§ 255-96.   Development requirements.
No permit for the erection or use of any building within the district shall be
issued until the following conditions are met:
   A.   Provisions are made to serve the building by public water and a public
sanitary sewer collection and disposal system.
   B.   Adequate off-street parking shall be provided in accordance with the
requirements of Article XIX, §
255-135C.
   C.   Provisions are made for adequate loading and service areas which shall
be exclusive of parking and traffic lane areas.
   D.   Provisions are made to store all materials, including trash, supplies,
rubbish, refuse, etc., within the building . They shall not be handled so as to
give rise to smoke, odor or litter. An odor violation will be determined in
accordance with
Chapter 158 of this Code. [Amended 5-13-1997 by Ord. No. 943]
   E.   The provisions, as hereinabove are provided, are assured to and
approved by the Board of Commissioners at a public meeting by guaranties in a
form and to the extent as required by the Board of Commissioners and provided
that there is no use or occupancy of the building until a certificate of
occupancy, as required by the ordinances of the Township, is obtained.
§ 255-96.1.   Outdoor storage.
[Added 10-14-2003 by Ord. No. 1116]
Except where specifically authorized in this article, the temporary or
permanent storage of goods and materials must occur within a wholly enclosed
building . The outdoor storage of, within or upon a trailer or other storage
vehicle, other than by a contractor working under a valid building  permit , is
expressly prohibited.
ARTICLE XV
SC Shopping Center District
§ 255-97.   Intent.
In expansion of the declaration of legislative intent contained in Article I, §
255-2, of this chapter, it is hereby declared to be the intent of this article,
with respect to Shopping Center Districts, to establish reasonable standards
for the height and size of buildings , the areas and dimensions of yards and
open spaces, the provision of facilities to minimize traffic congestion, noise,
glare and pollution, so as to lessen the danger to the public safety and
surrounding building values from traffic congestion, overcrowding of land,
inadequate provision for water and sewage facilities and inadequate
transportation; and to establish reasonable standards for a shopping center
suitable with the general character of the adjoining district. In any SC
Shopping Center District, the following regulations shall apply:
§ 255-98.   Use regulations.
In an SC Shopping Center District, a building or combination of buildings may
be erected or used and a lot area may be used or occupied for any of the
following purposes and no other:
   A.   Retail store, including retail outlet or showroom for uses permitted in
Subsection I below, but not including automobile sales agency, provided that no
goods shall be displayed on the exterior of any building or on the lot and
provided that only incidental storage, including floor samples, shall be
permitted.
   B.   Restaurant .
   C.   Office or studio.
   D.   The following personal service shops, dealing directly with customers;
beauty parlors, barbershops, clothes cleaning agency (not including a cleaning
and dyeing plant), automatic self-service laundry, dressmaking, millinery or
similar shops, provided that all repair or processing work is conducted in
accordance with Subsection I below.
   E.   Theater, not including outdoor motion picture establishment; assembly
hall or community building , indoor recreational establishments or library;
licensed day-care center . [Amended 10-12-1999 by Ord. No. 1010]
      (1)   Amusement games , provided that there are no more than three per
establishment.
      (2)   Amusement games , in excess of three, when allowed as a special
exception by the Zoning Hearing Board in accordance with
Chapter 61, Amusement Games.
   F.   Bakery, confectionary or custom shop for the production of articles to
be sold at retail on the premises, provided that all baking or processing is
conducted in accordance with Subsection I below.
   G.   Bank.
   H.   Passenger bus station; electric substation; telephone and telephone
offices.
   I.   The following uses , provided that if such uses are located on the
ground, they shall not be located within 20 feet of the front of the building ,
and provided that they shall be effectively screened from the front portion of
the building by a wall or partition.
      (1)   General servicing or repair.
      (2)   Upholstering.
      (3)   Carpentry and woodworking.
      (4)   Electrical, radio or television repair.
      (5)   Hand laundering, dry cleaning or pressing, provided that no
inflammable fluids are used.
      (6)   Tailoring, dressmaking or repair.
      (7)   Millinery repair or processing.
      (8)   Watch or clock repair.
      (9)   Baking, confectionery making or similar processing.
      (10)   Frozen food lockers.
      (11)   Any similar use involving a repair, processing or storage
activity.
   J.   Accessory uses customarily incidental to any of the above uses .
   K.   Any use of the same general character as any of the above permitted
uses , when authorized as a special exception by the Zoning Hearing Board,
provided that such use shall be permitted subject to such reasonable
restrictions as the Zoning Hearing Board may determine, and further provided
that no trade or business shall be permitted which is either noxious or
hazardous. [Amended 1-10-1995 by Ord. No. 879]29
29. Editor's Note: Former Subsection L, Signs, which immediately followed this
subsection, was repealed 7-10-2001 by Ord. No. 1066. See Art. XXI for sign
regulations.
§ 255-99.   Development requirements.
[Amended 1-10-1995 by Ord. No. 879]
The development shall be executed in accordance with, the following essential
conditions:
   A.   The development shall be consistent with this chapter and with the
purpose of the ordinances to promote the health, safety, morals and the general
welfare of the Township.
   B.   The development shall consist of an harmonious selection of uses and
grouping of buildings , service and parking areas, circulation and open spaces,
planned and designed as an integrated unit, in such manner as to constitute a
safe, efficient and convenient retail shopping center. The distance at the
closest point between buildings or groups of attached buildings shall be not
less than 12 feet.
   C.   The appropriate use of property adjacent to the center shall be
safeguarded. Where such center abuts any residential district, a suitable and
uninterrupted planting screen, not less than 25 feet in depth, shall be
provided and maintained by the owner of the shopping center. Lighting
facilities shall be arranged in a manner which will protect the highway and
neighboring properties from direct glare or hazardous interference of any kind.
   D.   All buildings within the center shall be served by a central sanitary
sewage disposal system and public water supply and available public utilities.
   E.   Adequate provision shall be made for safe and efficient pedestrian and
vehicular traffic circulation within the boundaries of the center.
   F.   Provision shall be made for safe and efficient ingress and egress to
and from public streets and to highways serving the center without undue
congestion to or interference with normal traffic flow within the municipality.
All points of vehicular access to and from public streets shall be located not
less than 200 feet from the intersection of any public street lines with each
other.
   G.   Parking shall be provided as required by Article XIX of this chapter.
[Amended 6-11-2002 by Ord. No. 1089]
   H.   All access roads , parking areas, service and other areas for vehicular
use shall be paved with bituminous or other concrete material to a minimum
standard of secondary roads of the Pennsylvania Department of Highways.
   I.   All utility lines serving the center shall be placed underground.
   J.   (Reserved) 30
   K.   If the development of the center is to be carried out in progressive
stages, each stage shall be so planned that the foregoing requirements and the
intent of this chapter shall be fully complied with at the completion of any
stage. The initial stage of development shall comprise a total ground-floor
area of not less than 25,000 square feet and at least three of the selected and
designated uses .
   L.   Required minimum area and yards and maximum building and impervious
coverage regulations shall be as follows: [Amended 9-14-2004 by Ord. No. 1138]
      (1)   Lot area : six acres.
      (2)   Front yard : 40 feet.
      (3)   Side yard (each): 50 feet.
      (4)   Rear yard : 50 feet.
      (5)   Building coverage : 15% of total lot area .
      (6)   Impervious surface : 75% of total lot area .
   M.   Required height. The maximum height of any building or structure
erected or enlarged in this district shall be 40 feet, except that the height
of any such other building or structure may be increased to a maximum of 65
feet, provided that for every foot of height in excess of 40 feet there shall
be added to each yard requirement one corresponding foot of width or depth.
   N.   The Board of Commissioners may prescribe particular requirements or any
further reasonable conditions deemed appropriate with respect to the
suitability of the shopping center in the neighborhood .
30. Editor's Note: Former Subsection J, concerning signs , was repealed 7-10-
2001 by Ord. No. 1066. See Art. XXI for sign regulations.
§ 255-100.   Submission of plans; review; approval.
   A.   Plans for any SC Shopping Center use shall be submitted to the Planning
Commission prior to the issuance of any building  permit or certificate of
occupancy as provided in Article XXIV. If, however, portions of the project are
to be completed in successive stages, a less detailed sketch or layout of the
area not scheduled for immediate development will suffice initially, provided
that as further development occurs, a plan showing all of the required detail
shall then be submitted prior to this construction of any portion. Information
to be shown on all shopping center plans shall include:
      (1)   A plot plan of the lot showing the location of all present and
proposed buildings , sidewalks and all other areas to be devoted to pedestrian
use , drives, paving lots , loading and unloading areas and other
constructional features on the lot ; and all buildings , streets , alleys ,
highways, streams and other topographical features of the lot and within 200
feet of any lot line .
      (2)   Architectural plans for any proposed buildings .
      (3)   The location, dimension and arrangement of areas to be devoted to
planting lawns, trees or any other purpose.
      (4)   A description of the commercial uses proposed, including the
approximate number of employees and expected number of customers in sufficient
detail to indicate the effects of those operations in producing traffic
congestion, noise, glare, air pollution, water pollution, fire hazards or
safety hazard.
      (5)   Engineering and architectural plans for the treatment and disposal
of sewage.
      (6)   Analysis of the market area, market needs, adequacy of service of
needs by present or proposed commercial centers or enterprises, with evidence
of need for the planned shopping center. Such evidence of need shall include
estimates for the extent of the need, of the floor area or magnitude of
enterprise and of appropriate timing for the stages of development .
      (7)   Any other date or evidence that the Planning Commission may
require.
   B.   The Planning Commission shall review all plans for SC Shopping Center
uses submitted to it and shall submit these plans, with recommendations
thereon, to the Board of Commissioners for final approval.
   C.   Upon receipt of plans for any SC Shopping Center use and
recommendations thereon by the Planning Commission, the Board of Commissioners
shall have the power of approval or disapproval of these plans. The Secretary
of the Board of Commissioners shall notify, in writing, the Zoning Officer of
the final decision and any special conditions agreed upon regarding any SC
shopping center use .
   D.   As a guide for the recommendations by the Planning Commission and for
the final approval or disapproval by the Township Commissioners, on any SC
shopping center plan, all the provisions of this article shall be considered.
   E.   The procedure set forth herein shall apply to any subsequent use or
expansion of a shopping center.
ARTICLE XVI
EC Employment Center District 31
31. Editor's Note: The name of this district was changed from LIM Limited
Industrial District 7-14-1998 by Ord. No. 972.
§ 255-101.   Intent.
[Amended 7-14-1998 by Ord. No. 972]
In expansion of the declaration of legislative intent contained in Article I, §
255-2, of this chapter, it is hereby declared to be the intent of this article,
with respect to the EC Employment Center District, to:
   A.   Create a vibrant, mixed-use district which contributes toward the
economic vitality of Upper Dublin Township.
   B.   Encourage the redevelopment of under-utilized or vacant buildings .
   C.   Promote a range of activities, such as exhibitions and conferences with
supporting hotel , service and retail uses .
   D.   Allow for industrial, office, institutional and recreational
development with controls to limit air, land and water pollution, noise
emissions and traffic congestion.
   E.   Provide for selected commercial development within office buildings or
other buildings and on stand-alone sites.
   F.   Provide protection to people and buildings from fire, offensive noise,
vibrations, odors and other nuisances through strict performance standards .
   G.   Ensure that site development design includes stormwater management
measures, both on- site and as part of area-wide controls.
   H.   Ensure adequate buffering of adjacent districts and land uses .
   I.   Ensure safe pedestrian access from buildings to streets and transit
stops.
   J.   Support the creation of a bicycle trail to serve existing and future
development in the district.
   K.   Support the use and growth of transit service within the district.
   L.   Ensure safe and efficient vehicle access.
§ 255-102.   Uses permitted by-right.
[Amended 7-14-1998 by Ord. No. 972; 5-13-2008 by Ord. No. 1201, § 1; 5-10-2011
by Ord. No. 11-1238, § 1; 11-26-2013 by Ord. No. 13-1277, § 2]
   A.   The specific uses permitted in this district shall be the erection,
construction , alteration or use of buildings or premises for the following
uses and no other:
      (1)   Any industrial use not specifically excluded, which meets the
provisions of this article.
      (2)   Dwelling quarters for watchmen and caretakers employed on the
premises.
      (3)   Medical facilities , animal hospitals and the offices of
veterinarians.
      (4)   Banks and automated teller machines.
      (5)   Hotels .
      (6)   Schools .
      (7)   Places of worship.
      (8)   Restaurants , both stand-alone and as part of any other building in
the district. The term “restaurant ,” as used in this chapter, does not include
drive-in or drive-through facilities; only facilities that provide food for
patrons to eat on the premises or to pick- up inside and take off the premises
to eat.
      (9)   Commercial/retail uses when located on the ground floor of any
building in the EC District and limited to 750 square feet in area. This limit
does not apply to commercial uses within an exhibition center .
      (10)   Office buildings .
      (11)   Public and private recreation lands or facilities.
      (12)   Transfer of development credits . Certain lots within the EC
District are also within the TDR Transferable Development Rights Overlay
District. These lots may be developed in accordance with the provisions of
Article XVI, EC Employment Center District. In the alternative, a landowner/
applicant may choose to develop a lot within a sending or receiving zone in
accordance with the provisions of Article XXXVI, TDR - Transferable Development
Rights Overlay District.
         (a)   Those lots in the TDR Transferable Development Rights Overlay
District and that have been specifically identified in Article XXXVI, §
255-272, are within the TDR sending zone .
         (b)   Those lots that are in the TDR Transferable Development Rights
Overlay District and are outside of the TDR sending zone are within the TDR
receiving zone . Provided the standards in Article XXXVI are met, additional
uses and higher densities are permitted on receiving parcels utilizing
development credits .
[Added 11-26-2013 by Ord. No. 13-1277]
   B.   Where lots within the district abut two regional vehicular or rail
transportation corridors, such as the Norfolk Southern Railroad corridor, or
its successor, and the Pennsylvania Turnpike, uses shall be restricted to the
following:
      (1)   Public or private recreation lands or facilities, such as tennis
court, swimming pool, ice skating rink, playing field and for like recreational
uses .
      (2)   Greenhouse, garden center, or landscape nursery, including an
outdoor area for the sale and storage of plants and materials.
      (3)   Animal hospital or kennel.
      (4)   Indoor storage facility .
      (5)   Agricultural use .
   C.   Highway and interchange uses . Where a lot abuts a regional vehicular
corridor designed with limited access points, such as the Pennsylvania Turnpike
or the Route 309 corridor, and there is no more than 1,000 feet between the
subject lot ’s access point and the vehicular corridor’s access point, the
following use is permitted, provided the given criteria and standards are
satisfied. Measurement of the 1,000 foot distance shall be along the route
vehicles must utilize to access the site.
      (1)   Freestanding retail sales, which attract high volumes of vehicular
traffic and require convenient automobile access in relation to a highway,
interchange or limited access thoroughfare, shall be permitted provided the
following criteria and standards are met:
         (a)   Adequate provisions shall be made to accommodate increased
traffic on public streets as required by §
255-114, Traffic control.
         (b)   The provisions of §
255-115, Lot, yard and bulk regulations, shall apply to this use , except as
noted below:
            [a]   Maximum building coverage shall be 7,500 square feet or less.
         (c)   Fuel dispensing may be provided as an accessory use , provided
the following criteria and standards are met:
            [a]   There shall be no more than sixteen fueling positions.
            [b]   Tools and/or equipment needed for incidental activities, such
as window cleaning and checking/adding air to vehicle tires, may be provided.
            [c]   Fuel storage and dispensing equipment shall be located
entirely outside of any floodplain and all fuel storage facilities shall be
underground.
            [d]   Canopies over fuel dispensing positions may be installed to
protect users from poor weather conditions, provided they are no taller than 20
feet.
         (d)   Overnight rest facilities or publically available electric
hookups are prohibited, as are showers or other similar personal hygiene
facilities, except for customarily available public rest rooms.
         (e)   Signs permitted for Highway and Interchange uses are provided
for in §
255-155D.
         (f)   Site lighting shall be designed so as to shield the source of
illumination and eliminate glare that will be seen by motorists passing by on
adjacent roadways and limited access highways.
      (2)   Off-street parking and loading areas.
         (a)   Parking shall be provided as required in this article in §
255-116, Parking, and in Article XIX, Off-Street Parking.
         (b)   Parking and loading areas shall be designed so as to ensure the
safe, orderly and efficient movement and use of the site by both motorists and
pedestrians.
         (c)   Conflicts between vehicular and pedestrian movements shall be
minimized to the greatest extent practical. Solutions such as changing the
materials, color and texture of parking areas, driving lanes and pedestrian
routes shall be utilized to clearly define and differentiate the vehicular and
pedestrian circulation patterns and pathways.
      (3)   Architectural and design standards.
         (a)   Other than roofing material, no less than 30% of the primary
building ’s exterior facade, excluding window and door openings, shall be faced
with natural building materials, such as wood, stone and/or brick, or high
quality, man-made materials that are engineered and designed to replicate these
natural materials.
         (b)   Steel or other metals shall not be used on building exteriors,
except as may be needed for roofing, window trim, gutters and downspouts.
         (c)   Unpainted concrete block, except when textured or tinted is
prohibited on building exteriors.
         (d)   Trash receptacles and other outdoor furniture shall be designed
as an integral part of the site’s design and shall be consistent with and
incorporated into the site’s overall architectural character.
         (e)   All mechanical equipment shall be visually screened from all
public rights of way. The screening shall be architecturally appropriate and
designed as an integral part of the site’s design.
[Added 5-10-2011 by Ord. No. 11-1238]
§ 255-103.   Uses permitted by conditional uses.
[Amended 10-14-1986 by Ord. No. 714; 11-9- 1988 by Ord. No. 759; 7-14-1992 by
Ord. No. 824; 2-8-1994 by Ord. No. 864; 6-14-1994 by Ord. No. 866; 2-13-1996 by
Ord. No. 904; 7-14-1998 by Ord. No. 972; 5-13-2008 by Ord. No. 1201, § 2]
One or a combination of the following uses are permitted by conditional use in
accordance with the standards for approval under §
255-116.2 and under Article XXV of this chapter, except all such uses shall be
prohibited on lots which abut two regional vehicular or rail transportation
corridors, such as the Norfolk Southern Railroad corridor, or its successor,
and the Pennsylvania Turnpike: [Amended 5-13-2008 by Ord. No. 1201, § 2]
   A.   Museum.
   B.   A personal care facility , assisted living center or nursing home,
provided that the Board of Commissioners determines that:
      (1)   Such use is consistent with §
255-101, Intent.
      (2)   Such use will not adversely affect the health, safety or welfare of
the neighborhood .
      (3)   Parking is provided in accordance with Article XIX of this chapter.
      (4)   Buffer and screening requirements required for a life care complex
in an INST - Institutional District shall be complied with unless waived by the
Board of Commissioners.
      (5)   The density of the building does not exceed 12 dwelling units per
acre.
      (6)   The plans must comply with the development requirements for
multiple dwelling  development in Article VDT hereof.
   C.   Licensed day-care center .
   D.   An exhibition center , provided that the Board of Commissioners
determines that:
      (1)   Such use is consistent with §
255-101, Intent.
      (2)   Such use will not adversely affect the health, safety or welfare of
the neighborhood .
      (3)   Adequate provision has been made to accommodate increased traffic
on public streets .
      (4)   The Board of Commissioners may limit the total square footage of
gross floor area of an exhibition center based on the legislative intent of the
EC Employment Center District and the standards and criteria contained in
Article XXV, Conditional Use by Board of Commissioners.
§ 255-104.   Prohibited uses.
[Amended 7-14-1998 by Ord. No. 972; 4-10-2012 by Ord. No. 12- 1258, § 3]
Prohibited uses include, but are not limited to, the following:
   A.   Residential uses , including any dwelling as defined in this chapter,
community residential homes and mobile homes shall not be permitted in the EC
Employment Center District, unless such residential use is specifically
permitted herein. [Added 10-13-1998 by Ord. No. 976332]
   B.   Abattoir.
   C.   Acetylene gas manufacture and/or storage.
   D.   Acid manufacture (hydrochloric, nitric, picric, sulphuric sulphanous
carbolic).
   E.   Ammonia, bleaching powder or chlorine manufacture.
   F.   Ammunition manufacture and/or storage.
   G.   Arsenal.
   H.   Asphalt manufacture or refining.
   I.   Blast or reverberatory or foundry.
   J.   Bone distillation.
   K.   Celluloid manufacture.
   L.   Cement, including cement mixing plant, lime, gypsum or plaster of
paris, manufacture.
   M.   Coal distillation.
   N.   Coke ovens.
   O.   Creosote treatment or manufacture.
   P.   Dead animal and offal reduction.
   Q.   Distillation of bones, coal petroleum, refuse grain or wood.
   R.   Distillation of tar.
   S.   Drop hammer
   T.   Explosives, fireworks and gunpowder manufacture or storage.
   U.   Fat rendering.
   V.   Fertilizer manufacture.
   W.   Forge plant.
   X.   Hog farm.
   Y.   Kiln, except fired by oil, gas or electricity and having a maximum
capacity of 200 cubic feet.
   Z.   Incineration, reduction, storage or dumping of slaughterhouse refuse,
rancid fats, garbage, or offal. [Amended 4-10-2012 by Ord. No. 12-1258]
   AA.   Oilcloth or linoleum manufacture.
   BB.   Ore reduction.
   CC.   Petroleum or kerosene refining, distillation or derivation of by-
products and/or storage.
   DD.   Potato works.
   EE.   Power forge [riveting, hammering, punching, chipping, drawing, rolling
or tumbling of iron, steel, brass, copper, (except as a necessary incident or
manufacture of which those processes form a minor part and which are carried on
without objectional noise outside the plant and permitted as a special
exception )].
   FF.   Reduction of fish and animal products and vegetable oils.
   GG.   (Reserved)
   HH.   Rolling mill.
   II.   Steel furnace, blooming or rolling mill
   JJ.   Stockyards.
   KK.   Tar distillation or manufacture.
32.   Editor’s Note: This ordinance also redesignated former Subsections A
through JJ as Subsections B through KK, respectively.
§ 255-105.   Emissions.
   A.   Smoke control.
      (1)   No smoke shall be emitted from any chimney or other source with
visible gray greater than No. 1 on the Ringelmann Chart as published by the
U.S. Bureau of Mines.
      (2)   Smoke of a shade not darker than No. 2 on the Ringelmann Smoke
Chart may be emitted for not more than four minutes in any 30 minutes.
      (3)   These provisions, applicable to visible gray smoke, shall also
apply to visible smoke of a different color, but with an equivalent apparent
opacity.
   B.   Control of dust and dirt, fly ash and fumes, vapors and gases.
      (1)   No emission shall be made which can cause any damage to health, to
animals or vegetation or other form of property or which can cause any
excessive soiling at any point.
      (2)   No emission of liquid or solid particles from any chimney or
otherwise shall exceed 0.3 grains per cubic foot of the covering gas at any
point.
      (3)   For measurement of the amount of particles in gases resulting from
combustion, standard correction shall be applied to a stack temperature of
500ºF. and 50% excess air.
§ 255-106.   Noises.
[Amended 5-13-1997 by Ord. No. 943]
At no point on the property boundary line shall noise be other than as
permitted by the provisions and regulations set forth in
Chapter 158, §
158-12, of this Code.
§ 255-107.   Odors.
[Amended 5-13-1997 by Ord. No. 943]
There shall be no emission of odorous gases or other odorous matter in such
quantities as to be offensive at property boundary lines. Any process which may
involve the creation or emission of any odors shall be provided with a
secondary safeguard system, so that control will be maintained if the primary
safeguard system should fail. The guide for determining the quantity of
offensive odors shall be established by the provisions set forth in
Chapter 158 of this Code.
§ 255-108.   Glare and heat.
Any operation producing intense glare or heat shall be performed within an
enclosed building or behind a solid fence in such manner as to be completely
imperceptible from any point along the lot lines .
§ 255-109.   Vibration.
No vibration which is discernible to the human sense of feeling shall be
perceptible without instruments at any point on the lot line .
§ 255-110.   Radioactivity; electrical disturbances.
There shall be no activities which emit dangerous radioactivity at any point.
There shall be no electrical disturbances (except from domestic household
appliances) adversely affecting the operation at any point of any equipment
other than that of the creator of such disturbance.
§ 255-111.   Outdoor storage and waste disposal.
   A.   No flammable or explosive liquids, solids or gases shall be stored in
bulk above the ground; provided, however, that tanks or drums directly
connecting with energy devices, heating devices or appliances located on the
same lots as the tanks or drums are excluded from this provision.
   B.   All outdoor storage facilities for fuel, raw materials and products
stored outdoors, including those permitted in Subsection A hereinabove, shall
be enclosed by a fence of a type, construction and size as in the opinion of
the Board of Township Commissioners shall be adequate to protect and conceal
the facilities from any adjacent properties. In determining the same, the
Commissioners shall not only consider the question of safety, but the screening
as determined by the Board of Commissioners may be in the nature of trees,
shrubbery, etc.
   C.   No materials or wastes which might cause fumes or dust or which
constitute a fire hazard or which may be edible or otherwise be attractive to
rodents or insects shall be stored except outdoors only in closed containers.
[Amended 1-10-1995 by Ord. No. 879]
   D.   Flammable or explosive liquids, solids or gases may not be placed or
stored within 200 feet of a residential zoning district. [Added 7-14-1998 by
Ord. No. 972]
§ 255-112.   Power sources.
Every use requiring power shall be operated so that the service lines,
substation, etc., shall conform to the highest safety requirements known, shall
be so constructed, installed, etc., as to be an integral part of the
architectural features of the plant or, if visible from abutting residential
properties, shall be concealed by coniferous planting.
§ 255-113.   Industrial waste and sewage.
No use shall be conducted in such a way as to discharge any untreated sewage
into any stream. Treated sewage or industrial waste may be discharged into a
stream, provided that the written approval of all agencies, both state and
local, having jurisdiction of the same is first obtained.
§ 255-114.   Traffic control.
[Amended 7-14-1998 by Ord. No. 972; 5-10-2011 by Ord. No. 11- 1238, § 2]
   A.   All development in the EC District shall be designed to safely permit
vehicles to enter and exit the property. A traffic impact study may be required
by the Board of Commissioners for new buildings or building additions of 10,000
square feet or greater, for any freestanding retail use permitted under this
Article, §
255-102C, and shall be required for all conditional uses . [Amended 5-10-2011
by Ord. No. 11-1238]
   B.   If a traffic study is required by the Board of Commissioners, the Board
of Commissioners reserves the right to request its own traffic engineer to
establish the type and nature of the assumptions used for the generation and
distribution of vehicular trips, review and comment on the applicant’s traffic
study, and require acceptable improvements necessary to minimize any identified
traffic impacts. The expense for such review will be payable by the applicant
to the Township. [Amended 5-10-2011 by Ord. No. 11-1238]
   C.   If the Board of Commissioners requires an applicant to submit a traffic
study (whether pursuant to subdivision and land development or conditional use
approval) the traffic study must meet the requirements outlined in §
255-116.2 of this chapter.
   D.   The Board of Commissioners may also require the applicant to submit to
the Township an emergency plan for ingress and egress of personnel for any use
where the buildings , accessory facilities and/or the access and egress points
onto the site are located within, raised above or cut across a floodplain .
[Amended 5-10-2011 by Ord. No. 11-1238]
§ 255-114.1.   Stormwater management.
[Added 7-14-1998 by Ord. No. 972]
All development will be subject to the provisions of
Chapter 212, Subdivision and Land Development, as well as all stormwater
management provisions in the Township Code. In addition to installing
facilities to control runoff caused by any development , applicants shall offer
easements for dedication to the Township where, in the view of the Township,
such easements are necessary to direct or detain stormwater to the benefit of
the entire EC District.
§ 255-115.   Lot, yard and bulk regulations.
[Amended 7-14-1998 by Ord. No. 972; 5-10-2011 by Ord. No. 11-1238, § 3; 11-26-
2013 by Ord. No. 13-1277, § 3]
   A.   Area and yard regulations.
      (1)   Tract area . No EC Employment Center District shall be less than 10
acres.
      (2)   Minimum lot size: two acres.
      (3)   Minimum lot width: 200 feet, measured at the building  setback line
.
      (4)   Yard requirements. [Amended 10-13-1998 by Ord. No. 976]
         (a)   Front yard . The required minimum depth of a front yard shall be
50 feet, except where a building takes access from a street , on the opposite
side of which the land is zoned residential, in which case the front yard shall
be 100 feet.
         (b)   Side yards . The required minimum depth of a side yard shall be
50 feet.
         (c)   Rear yards . The required minimum depth of a rear yard shall be
50 feet.
         (d)   Exceptions for side and rear yards . Where a side or rear yard
abuts a residential zoning district or a street adjacent to a residential
zoning district, the required minimum depth of the abutting side or rear yard
shall be 100 feet. No side or rear yard setback shall be required from a
property line which abuts a railroad right-of-way .
         (e)   Maintenance of yards and open areas. All yards and open areas
(except for the portion provided for driveways and parking as herein provided)
shall be planted in grass and shrubbery or trees and be maintained by the owner
or tenants in a careful and prudent manner. Planting shall comply with the
requirements in §
212-32, Landscaping. In addition, any front yard shall be planted with a
softening buffer, as provided for in §
212-32(F)(2). [Amended 5-10-2011 by Ord. No. 11-1238]
   B.   Building regulations.
      (1)   Building coverage . The maximum building coverage shall be 20% of
the square foot area of the lot , plus 2.5% per acre multiplied by the lot area
in acres, not to exceed 40%. For example: Lot area of two acres: 20% plus 5% (2
times 2.5) equals 25%.
      (2)   Impervious surface . The maximum impervious surface of a lot shall
not exceed 60% for office buildings , and 65% for all other uses . Where
feasible, pervious paving surfaces shall be used.
      (3)   Gross floor area . For office buildings , based on the outside
perimeter of the building , total gross floor area shall not exceed 11,000
square feet per acre of lot area .
      (4)   Plans for any change in use of lots or buildings , or a portion of
a lot or building , shall be submitted to the Township for approval by the
Board of Commissioners.
      (5)   Height regulations.
         (a)   The maximum height of buildings in the Employment Center
district is as follows:
            [1]   Office buildings : 50 feet, maximum 4 stories.
            [2]   Nursing homes, assisted living centers, and personal care
facilities : 45 feet, maximum three stories.
            [3]   Hotels : 60 feet, maximum four stories.
            [4]   All other buildings : 35 feet.
         (b)   The height of a building may be increased above the main roof to
accommodate the following:
            [1]   Parapets, but not in excess of three feet in mean height.
            [2]   A structure or structures limited to 10 feet in height and
utilizing not more than 10% of the roof area only for elevator penthouses and
air conditioning, heating or ventilating equipment, provided that such
equipment is screened from public view.
         (c)   Any portion of a multi-story building erected above 30 feet
shall be erected within a recession plane beginning at the height limit as
fixed herein and receding at the rate of one foot of recession for each one
foot of additional height.
      (6)   Pedestrian and trail improvements shall be made by the applicant,
including offering bike trail right-of-way for dedication, constructing
frontage sidewalks and sidewalk connections to buildings and providing areas
for bus stops, where needed.
   C.   Adjustments to yard requirements.
      (1)   The front yard setback noted above shall be replaced with a “build-
to line ” as detailed below, for new development on lots near the intersection
of Delaware Avenue, Commerce Drive and Pinetown Road:
         (a)   Those lots on the north and south side of Delaware Avenue within
500 feet east of the above noted intersection.
         (b)   Those lots on the east and west sides of Commerce Drive within
600 feet south of the above noted intersection.
         (c)   Those lots on the east and west sides of Pinetown Road within
250 feet north of the above noted intersections.
      (2)   The front facades of buildings on lots within the above noted area
shall be situated no further than 25 feet from the street  right of way line .
The build-to line may be increased an additional 15 feet, to a total of 40
feet, when the additional area is designed and used for outdoor dining and/or
for use as a public plaza with outdoor seating areas.
      (3)   Surface parking for buildings on lots within the above noted area
shall be situated to the rear of the building . A minor number of parking
spaces , equal to horizontal dimension of the side of the building measured in
feet and divided by 10, may be located along the side of the building provided
that parking is screened from the view of pedestrians and vehicles traveling in
the public right of way . Screening may be created by using fences and/or
landscaping.
[Added 11-26-2013 by Ord. No. 13-1277]
§ 255-116.   Parking.
[Added 10-14-1986 by Ord. No. 714; amended 7-14-1998 by Ord. No. 972]
   A.   Parking. No parking shall be permitted within the required yard area
abutting a residentially zoned district. Parking shall be set back 50 feet from
the right-of-way opposite nonresidential districts and 25 feet from the side or
rear property line adjacent to nonresidential districts. No setback shall be
required for parking areas which abut a railroad right-of-way .
   B.   Multilevel parking. Multilevel parking shall be considered a building
for setback and definitional purposes. The footprint of a multilevel parking
area shall be included in calculation of impervious surface coverage, but shall
not be included in calculating the permitted building coverage on the premises.
   C.   (Reserved)
   D.   Reserve parking. Required parking may be held in reserve if the
applicant can show, to the satisfaction of the Board of Commissioners, that the
additional parking will not be needed, subject to the following maximum
percentages: 25% for office buildings and exhibition centers ; 50% for all
other uses . Regardless of the number of spaces actually developed, a parking
area to accommodate the aggregate number of parking spaces normally required
shall be fully designed and the area which is proposed to be eliminated shall
be shown on the land development plan as "parking reserve area." The parking
reserve area shall be planted with vegetative cover and integrated into the
site's landscaping plan. Such area shall be required to be developed as
designed if and when the Zoning Officer determines the need therefor.
   E.   In addition to the parking requirements outlined in this section, any
additional parking requirements that are applicable in Article XIX of this
chapter shall be met.
§ 255-116.1.   (Reserved) 33
33. Editor's Note: Former § 255-116.1, Commercial signs, added 7-14-1998 by
Ord. No. 972, was repealed 7-10-2001 by Ord. No. 1066. See Art. XXI for sign
regulations.
§ 255-116.2.   Standards for conditional use approval.
[Added 7-14-1998 by Ord. No. 972]
   A.   Traffic impact study. All conditional uses shall prepare a traffic
impact study for review by the Township officials and consultants. The
objective of the traffic impact study is to provide the Township enough
information to properly determine:
      (1)   The impact generated by the proposed development on the Township
road network.
      (2)   The capital improvements to existing transportation facilities that
will be needed because of additional traffic volumes generated by the proposed
land development in order to maintain the existing level of service.
      (3)   The traffic safety problems that may be generated by the proposed
land development .
   B.   Minimum contents. As a minimum, the impact study should include the
following:
      (1)   Existing twenty-four-hour and peak hour traffic volume data for
streets providing direct access to the proposed land development and for all
impacted adjacent streets and intersections. The Township may request data for
other locations if warranted.
      (2)   Estimates of the total number of vehicle trips to be generated by
the proposed land development for a typical twenty-four-hour period and typical
a.m. and p.m. peak periods. Data shall be collected for a minimum two-hour
period during a normal, weekday, non-holiday period for both a.m. and p.m.
peaks.
      (3)   Assignment of future twenty-four-hour and peak-hour volumes to the
streets that will serve the proposed land development based on the estimates
from Subsection B(1) above and estimate of normal growth in overall traffic
volumes. The impact study must include traffic estimates from other nearby land
developments .
      (4)   Projected twenty-four-hour and peak-hour turning movement data for
all access points proposed for the land development .
      (5)   Capacity analyses of major intersections in the Township which will
be impacted by the additional volumes generated by the proposed land
development .
      (6)   Data about existing accident levels at these intersections
categorized by accident type for each intersection.
      (7)   Descriptions of, and cost estimates for the improvements to roads ,
streets and intersections that will be required in order to avoid problems of
traffic congestion and traffic safety that might be generated by traffic from
the proposed land development , including all locations which will have an
expected peak-hour increase of 50% or more or carry 10% or more of traffic to
the proposed development .
      (8)   Cost estimate of any proposed improvements that will be required.
      (9)   Description of any actions proposed or offered by the applicant to
alleviate any burdens caused by the impact of the proposed land development on
the transportation network. Such actions may include ridesharing (carpooling or
vanpooling), transit service and flexible work hours.
      (10)   Provisions for transit stops.
      (11)   Written text to interpret the information and data presented in
terms of the aforementioned objectives.
   C.   Organization of report. The traffic impact study findings should be
labeled as consecutively numbered exhibits and properly referenced throughout
the text of the documents. The report shall be written in a manner and style
that clearly focus the information, data and analysis on the issues mentioned
above. Sources of all data must be appropriately documented. The name and title
of the preparer is required. The preparer must be a licensed engineer
experienced in transportation.
§ 255-117.   Submittal of plans; review; approval.
[Amended 1-10-1995 by Ord. No. 879; 2-13-1996 by Ord. No. 904; 7-14-1998 by
Ord. No. 972]
   A.   Plans for any subdivision , land development or change of use in the EC
Employment Center District shall be submitted to the Township prior to the
issuance of any zoning permit or certificate of occupancy as provided in
Article XXIV, and such plans shall include, but not be limited to the
following:
      (1)   A plot plan of the lot showing the location of all present and
proposed buildings , drives, parking lots, waste disposal fields and other
constructional features on the lot ; and all buildings , streets , alleys ,
highways, streams and other topographical features of the lot and within 200
feet of any lot line .
      (2)   Architectural plans for any proposed buildings .
      (3)   A description of any industrial operations proposed in sufficient
detail to indicate the effects of those operations in producing traffic
congestion, noise, glare, air pollution, water pollution, fire hazard or safety
hazard.
      (4)   Engineering and architectural plans for the handling and disposal
of sewage and industrial waste.
      (5)   Engineering and architectural plans for the handling of any excess
traffic congestion, noise, glare, air pollution, water pollution, fire hazard
or safety hazard.
      (6)   Designation of the fuel proposed to be used and any necessary
architectural and engineering plans for controlling smoke.
      (7)   The proposed number of shifts to be worked and the maximum number
of employees on each shift.
      (8)   Any other data or evidence that the Board of Commissioners may
require.
   B.   (Reserved)
   C.   (Reserved)
   D.   As a guide for recommendations by the committee responsible for
planning and for final approval or disapproval by the Township Commissioners on
any EC Employment Center plan, the following provisions shall be considered:
      (1)   The plan is consistent with the purpose of this chapter to promote
the health, safety, morals and the general welfare of the Township.
      (2)   The appropriate use of property adjacent to the area included in
the plan will be safeguarded.
      (3)   The development will consist of an harmonious grouping of buildings
, service and parking areas, circulation and open spaces, planned as a single
unit, in such manner as to constitute a safe, efficient and convenient site.
      (4)   The uses to be included are limited to those permitted by this
article.
      (5)   There is adequate provision made for safe and efficient pedestrian
and vehicular traffic circulation within the boundaries of the site.
      (6)   Provision is made for safe and efficient ingress and egress to and
from public streets and highways serving the site without undue congestion to
or interference with normal traffic flow within the Township.
      (7)   Adequate off-street parking and loading space is provided in
accordance with §
255-116 and Article XIX of this Chapter.
      (8)   All buildings within the development shall be served by a central
sanitary sewage disposal system.
      (9)   If the development is to be carried out in progressive stages, each
stage shall be so planned that the foregoing requirements and intent of this
chapter shall be fully complied with by the development at the completion of
any stage.
ARTICLE XVII
MHD Mobile Home Development District
§ 255-118.   Intent.
[Amended 11-13-2007 by Ord. No. 1188, § 4]
In addition to the purpose set forth in §
255-2 of Article I of this chapter, it is hereby declared to be the specific
intent of this article with respect to the MHD Mobile Home Development District
to establish standards of performance and promote the desirable benefits which
planned mobile home development and other types of compact, pedestrian
oriented, residential development may have upon the community and the residents
within them. It is further the intent of this article to ensure the
interdependency and compatibility of these types of proposed developments with
essential utilities and surrounding land uses in the Township. It shall further
be the intent of this district: [Amended 11-13-2007 by Ord. No. 1188]
   A.   To reflect the changes in the technology of home building and land
development so that resulting economies may insure to the benefits of those who
need homes.
   B.   To further the general welfare by extending greater opportunities for
better housing to all citizens and residents of Upper Dublin Township.
   C.   To provide for better quality and greater variety in type, design and
layout of mobile home development and other types of compact, pedestrian
oriented, residential developments , than has been evident in many mobile home
parks or other residential developments in the past by enforcing uniform
standards, desirable design criteria and encouraging innovative design
approaches. [Amended 11-13-2007 by Ord. No. 1188]
   D.   To provide for a diversity of housing types and prices.
   E.   To encourage mobile home development and other types of compact,
pedestrian oriented, residential developments that are not detrimental to
property values and the general welfare of the area in which they are proposed.
[Amended 11-13-2007 by Ord. No. 1188]
   F.   To enable alternative housing types in the form of compact, pedestrian
oriented, residential developments , compatible in density and scale with the
MHD and be in close proximity and have direct pedestrian connection to support
uses such as shopping, personal services and dining, that create, in total, a
village center environment. [Added 11-13-2007 by Ord. No. 1188]
§ 255-119.   Definitions.
[Amended 11-13-2007 by Ord. No. 1188, § 5]
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
   COMMON AREA — Any area or space designed for joint use of tenants occupying
mobile home development .
   COMPACT, PEDESTRIAN ORIENTED RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT — A self contained
residential community consisting of single-family detached dwellings , twin
dwellings  and townhouse dwellings , or a combination thereof. The development
shall be designed as a compact, human scaled environment that is pedestrian
friendly and it shall provide multiple routes for motorists, pedestrians and
bicyclists. The development  shall also provide for internal open space  and
adequate perimeter buffering from adjacent uses . [Added 11-13-2007 by Ord. No.
1188; amended 5-10-2022 by Ord. No. 22-1375]
   DENSITY — The number of mobile homes or mobile home stands per developable
acre .
   DEVELOPABLE ACRE — All land is defined as developable acreage except land
area located within existing rights-of-way of roads and utility lines, water
bodies, watercourses , floodplains (as defined in § 255-161 of Article XXII,
Floodplain Conservation District) and land area with slopes of 15% or greater.
Developable acreage is used in density calculations.
   DOUBLE-WIDE UNIT — A mobile home constructed from two sections delivered
separately to the site that, when attached, form on integral unit. [Added 4-16-
2002 by Ord. No. 1088]
   MOBILE HOME — A single-family dwelling intending for permanent occupancy,
contained in one unit or in two or more units designed to be joined into one
integral unit capable of again being separated for repeated towing, which
arrives at a site complete and ready for occupancy except for minor and
incidental unpacking and assembly operations and constructed so that it may be
used without a permanent foundation. Further, mobile homes shall meet Township,
state and federal regulations, such as the Building Officials and Code
Administrators, Inc. (BOCA) Codes, Pennsylvania Department of Community Affairs
standards, National Fire Protection Association (NFPA) standards, as well as
those of the Federal Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD)
   MOBILE HOME DEVELOPMENT — A parcel of land under single ownership which has
been planned and improved for the placement of mobile homes for nontransient
use , consisting of two or more mobile home lots .
   MOBILE HOME LOT — A parcel of land in a mobile home development ,
constructed with the necessary utility connections, patio and other
appurtenances necessary for the erection thereon of a single mobile home and
for the exclusive use of its occupants.
   MOBILE HOME STAND — That part of an individual lot which has been reserved
and prepared for the placement of the mobile home .
   PUBLIC NOTICE — Notice published once each week for two successive weeks in
a newspaper of general circulation in the municipality. Such notice shall state
the time and place of the hearing and the particular nature of the matter to be
considered at the hearing. The first publication shall be not more than 30 days
nor less than 14 days from the date of the hearing.
   SERVICE BUILDING — A structure containing the management office and other
common facilities for the development . [Added 4-16-2002 by Ord. No. 1088]
   SINGLE-WIDE UNIT — A mobile home constructed from one section. [Added 4-16-
2002 by Ord. No. 1088]
   TRACT AREA — Total acreage of the mobile home development .
§ 255-120.   Use regulations.
[Amended 11-13-2007 by Ord. No. 1188, § 6]
   A.   Permitted uses . Any tract zoned MHD shall be used exclusively for
either a mobile home development (s) or a compact, pedestrian oriented,
residential development . [Amended 11-13- 2007 by Ord. No. 1188]
   B.   Conditional uses . The following uses are permitted as a conditional
use by the Board of Commissioners in accordance with the provisions of Article
XXV:
      (1)   Licensed day-care center .
   C.   Accessory uses .
      (1)   Accessory uses and structures customarily incidental to the
maintenance, servicing and well-being of residents living in mobile home
development or compact, pedestrian oriented, residential developments shall be
permitted only as part of an approved development plan for the site. [Amended
11-13-2007 by Ord. No. 1188]
      (2)   Accessory uses on individual mobile home lots , customarily
incidental to mobile homes , such as storage sheds, shall be permitted on the
individual mobile home lots , provided that the provisions of §
255-122 and other applicable sections of this chapter are complied with.
      (3)   Added rooms and other additions may be joined onto a mobile home ,
provided that all requirements of §
255-122 are met.
   D.   Areas for nonresidential uses . No part of any mobile home development
or compact, pedestrian oriented, residential development shall be used for
nonresidential purposes, except, in a mobile home development such uses that
are required for the direct servicing, recreation and well-being of the
residents and for the management and maintenance of the development are
permitted. However, nothing in this article shall be deemed as prohibiting the
sale or resale of a mobile home located on a mobile home stand and connected to
the pertinent utilities. [Amended 11-13-2007 by Ord. No. 1188]
§ 255-121.   Development requirements. 
[Amended 11-13-2007 by Ord. No. 1188, § 7]
   A.   The tract of land to be developed shall be in one ownership or shall be
the subject of an application filed by the owner of the entire tract , and it
shall be agreed that the tract shall be developed under single direction and in
the manner approved. [Amended 4-16-2002 by Ord. No. 1088]
   B.   Any area to be used as a mobile home development or a compact,
pedestrian oriented, residential development must have a minimum gross area of
10 contiguous acres of land. [Amended 11-13-2007 by Ord. No. 1188]
   C.   Every area to be used as a mobile home development or a compact,
pedestrian oriented, residential development must be served exclusively by the
municipal sanitary waste disposal system and a public water supply system.
[Amended 11-13-2007 by Ord. No. 1188]
   D.   The applicant shall demonstrate to the Board of Commissioners that he
has complied with all requirements of Chapter 179 of Title 25, Part I, Subpart
D, Article II, of the Rules and Regulations of the Pennsylvania Department of
Environmental Resources and with all other pertinent regulations of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
   E.   Any site proposed for a mobile home development or a compact,
pedestrian oriented, residential development shall not be subject to flooding
or other adverse environmental influence, such as swamps, marshes, garbage or
rubbish disposal areas or other potential breeding places for insects or
rodents. [Amended 11-13-2007 by Ord. No. 1188]
   F.   Any site proposed for a mobile home development or a compact,
pedestrian oriented, residential development shall not be subject to any hazard
or nuisance, such as excessive noise, vibration, smoke, toxic matter,
radiation, heat, odor or glare. Odor and excessive noise violations will be
determined in accordance with
Chapter 158 of this Code. [Amended 5-13- 1997 by Ord. No. 943; 11-13-2007 by
Ord. No. 1188]
   G.   Any tract intended for a mobile home development or a compact,
pedestrian oriented, residential development must have direct access to
secondary streets (or a street of a higher classification), as defined by this
chapter which the Board of Commissioners deems capable of accommodating the
transport of mobile home units, after approval of the Township Engineer.
[Amended 11-13-2007 by Ord. No. 1188]
   H.   Plans evidencing provision for safe and efficient ingress and egress to
and from the public streets and highways servicing the mobile home development
district without causing undue confusion or interference with the normal
traffic flow shall be submitted to the Board of Commissioners and must be
approved by the Township Engineer, who shall make a determination by concerning
himself with the adequacy of the thoroughfare to carry the additional traffic
generated by the mobile home development , as well as to the street frontage of
the proposed district.
   I.   Any site proposed for a mobile home development or a compact,
pedestrian oriented, residential development shall include area(s) to stockpile
snow along any internal street or alley that ends in a cul-de-sac, court or
dead-end. Area(s) shall be provided and shown on the preliminary plan. The
Township Engineer shall approve any proposed location(s). [Added 11-13-2007 by
Ord. No. 1188]
   J.   Because of the unique design elements which will distinguish a compact,
pedestrian oriented, residential development from other forms of residential
developments the following design standards shall apply:
      (1)   Architectural features, such as gables, dormers, shed roofs and
porticos, shall be utilized on all dwelling units .
      (2)   Entry and garage doors shall be insulated, with raised panels and
sidelights or glass inserts.
      (3)   Windows shall have integrated, detailed mullions and shutters with
hardware when these types of architectural feature are employed.
      (4)   The roof shall be designed with either overhangs eaves, bargeboards
or cornices on all sides.
      (5)   Roof material may include natural slate, shakes, shingle (either
wood or asphalt composition), or fiberglass architectural shingles that
represent slate or wood.
      (6)   Building materials. Exterior walls shall be high quality and
include a combination of materials including, for example: architectural or
real stone, stucco or brick and wood or vinyl siding. [Amended 5-10-2022 by
Ord. No. 22-1375]
      (7)   The following building materials are prohibited: exterior
insulation and finishing systems (EiFS), aluminum siding, aluminum shutters, T-
111 or other similar plywood siding. Metal buildings are also prohibited.
[Added 11-13-2007 by Ord. No. 1188]
§ 255-122.   Lot, yard and bulk requirements.
[Amended 4-16-2002 by Ord. No. 1088; 11-13- 2007 by Ord. No. 1188, § 8]
   A.   Mobile home developments .
      (1)   Density . The total number of lots in a mobile home development
shall not exceed a maximum density of five per acre. All areas not contained in
developable acreage (as defined in §
255-119) shall be excluded from density calculations.
      (2)   Height. No structure built in a Mobile Home Development shall
exceed a height of one story or a maximum of 22 feet, except those permitted as
accessory uses .
      (3)   Lot size. Mobile home lots in a mobile home development shall have
a minimum lot size of 4,500 square feet.
      (4)   Lot width. No individual double-wide mobile home lot shall be less
than 50 feet in width at the building  setback line . No individual single-wide
mobile home lot shall be less than 40 feet in width at the building  setback
line . No individual mobile home lot shall be less than 25 feet in width at the
right-of-way line of an internal street or the edge of the pavement of a
private street .
      (5)   Distance between structures . Mobile homes shall have side to side
separation of not less than 30 feet. Mobile homes shall have rear to rear
separation of not less than 20 feet.
      (6)   Mix of unit types. A minimum of 50% of units shall be double-wide
units .
      (7)   Setback from tract boundary. No mobile home or other primary
building may be located closer than 50 feet from any boundary of a mobile home
development , regardless of whether that boundary abuts a lot , water body,
road or other right-of-way . In the event that a mobile home development abuts
another such development , this provision will not apply; however, all other
applicable setbacks prescribed herein shall apply.
      (8)   Setbacks from streets . No mobile home, other primary building or
accessory use shall be located closer than 25 feet to the right-of-way line of
any internal street or to the edge of the cartway of any alley in a mobile home
development .
      (9)   Accessory building setbacks. Accessory buildings on individual
mobile home lots shall be set back a minimum of five feet from side or rear lot
or lease line and a minimum of 10 feet from any building on adjacent lots .
      (10)   Side and rear setbacks. No mobile home or accessory building may
be located closer than 10 feet to any rear lot or lease line or five feet to
any side lot or lease line of an individual mobile home lot ; provided,
however, that all minimum requirements of Subsection A(5) of this section must
be met.
      (11)   Unit location on individual lots . Mobile homes placed on
individual lots are encouraged to utilize the minimal setbacks specified in
Subsection A(10) of this section and to be placed off-center on the lots so as
to provide a large usable open yard space and outdoor living area in one area
of the lot .
      (12)   Surface area.
         (a)   Building coverage . The maximum coverage of any individual
mobile home lot by all primary and accessory buildings and structures shall be
no greater than 35%.
         (b)   Impervious surface . The maximum impervious surface of any
individual mobile home lot or any lot improved with a mobile home park shall
not exceed 60%.
      (13)   Service buildings . Service buildings" shall be set back a minimum
of 24 feet from front lot lines , 10 feet from side lot lines , and 10 feet
from rear property lines, but in no case shall be less than 50 feet from any
other structure . Parking for a service building shall be provided at a rate of
four spaces per 1,000 square feet of floor area. Parking areas for the service
building shall be set back 40 feet from any mobile home , 50 feet from site
property lines, 25 feet from cartways, and 10 feet from the service building .
   B.   Compact pedestrian oriented residential development .
      (1)   Density . The total number of dwelling units in a compact,
pedestrian oriented, residential development shall not exceed a maximum density
of five dwelling units per developable acre , as defined in §
255-119.
      (2)   Height. No structure built in a compact, pedestrian oriented,
residential development shall exceed a height of 3 stories or a maximum of 35
feet.
         (a)   If the architectural style of each unit’s top floor is the same,
such as for example, if each unit has a dormered third floor, then no more than
two adjoining dwelling units shall have the same building height.
      (3)   Building length. No building shall exceed 140 feet in length or
contain more than 4 individual dwelling units .
         (a)   The front facade of any building containing three or more
individual dwelling units shall articulate each unit by providing a minimum two
foot offset between at least one of the units.
         (b)   Other alternative designs may be utilized, if approved by the
Board of Commissioners as part of a land development application, provided the
applicant demonstrates that the facade of each unit is visually differentiated
in an architecturally significant fashion.
      (4)   Lots . If residential units are placed on individual lots , the
following standards apply:
         (a)   Lots for interior dwelling units , those units in the center of
a structure with 3 or more individual units shall have a minimum lot size of
3,300 square feet.
         (b)   Lots for end units, those dwelling units at either end of a
multi-dwelling structure , shall have a minimum lot size of 4,400 square feet.
         (c)   Lot width. All lots shall have a minimum width of 30 feet at the
building  setback line and 10 feet at the right of way line of an internal
street or the edge of the pavement of an alley .
      (5)   Separation requirements. All primary buildings and accessory
structures shall be separated by the following minimum distances. In no case
may one structure be closer than 20 feet to another structure .
         (a)   front to front:   60 feet
         (b)   front to side:   60 feet
         (c)   side to side:   20 feet
         (d)   side to rear:   35 feet
         (e)   rear to rear:   32 feet
      (6)   Tract setbacks. The tract  setback line shall be 50 feet.
      (7)   Street setbacks. No residential dwelling shall be located closer
than 10 feet to the right-of-way line of an internal street . No residential
dwelling or accessory structure shall be located closer than six feet to the
cartway of the nearest alley .
      (8)   Surface area.
         (a)   Building coverage . The total building coverage of any tract
developed as a compact, pedestrian oriented, residential development shall be
no greater than 25% of the tract ’s developable acreage , as defined in this
article.
         (b)   Impervious surface . The maximum impervious surface of any tract
developed as a compact, pedestrian oriented, residential development shall be
no greater than 55% of the developable acreage , as defined in this article.
§ 255-123.   Common areas.
[Amended 11-13-2007 by Ord. No. 1188, § 9]
   A.   Mobile home developments .
      (1)   At least 10% of the site area of the mobile home development must
be in common space other than parking and roadways, including recreation space,
space for laundry and storage facilities. Buffer areas may not count toward the
minimum common space requirements.
      (2)   The common space shall be designed as a contiguous area unless the
applicant demonstrates to the satisfaction of the Board of Commissioners that
two or more separate areas would be preferable. The open space shall also have
paved pedestrian and visual accessibility to all residents of the mobile home
development .
      (3)   Recreation areas and facilities shall be provided to meet the
anticipated needs of the residents of the development . Not less than 5% of the
usable site area exclusive of lands within the required setback area shall be
devoted to recreation. Recreation areas should be of a size, shape and relief
that is conducive to active and passive recreation.
      (4)   Service building . The structure or structures containing the
management office and other common facilities shall be conveniently located for
the use intended. Consolidation of laundry, recreation, management and other
common facilities in a single building and location is encouraged, if the
single location will adequately serve all mobile home lots .
      (5)   Maintenance. After the successful completion of the development ,
provision acceptable to the Township Board of Commissioners and Solicitor for
the maintenance and/or ownership of the common open space, service and
recreational facilities shall be established.
   B.   Compact, pedestrian oriented, residential development .
      (1)   Open space. A minimum of 25% of the developable acreage of the
compact, pedestrian oriented, residential development  tract shall be preserved
as common open space, not a part of any privately owned lot . The open space
shall be an undeveloped green space , the use of which shall be limited to
landscaping and the following:
         (a)   A walking/biking trail that will serve to connect the proposed
development with adjacent residential communities and other surrounding land
uses . The trail(s) shall comply with current Township standards. The Board of
Commissioners may authorize an alternative trail design as a conditional use
provided the applicant demonstrates the improvements meet or exceed the
Township’s existing construction standards.
         (b)   Open space may contain areas within the tract boundary setbacks,
provided it is not improved for vehicular parking or circulation. It may also
contain any required utility services and stormwater management facilities,
provided the utilities are below ground and the facilities are designed using
best management practices, such as, for example, naturalized basins, ponds and/
or rain gardens.
         (c)   Open space shall include, to the greatest extent practical, any
existing environmentally sensitive natural features . Such natural features
include, but are not limited to, floodplain , wetlands, streams, slopes greater
than 15%, and areas of mature woodlands.
         (d)   Recreational area. At least 10% of the open space shall be
consolidated in one centrally located area, such as a common green or pocket
park, for the residents’ active or passive use .
      (2)   Maintenance and operation of common facilities and open land .
         (a)   The applicant shall, at the time of preliminary plan submission,
provide a plan for maintenance and operation of common facilities . Such plan
shall:
            (i)   Define ownership.
            (ii)   Establish necessary regular and periodic operation and
maintenance responsibilities.
            (iii)   Estimate staffing needs, insurance requirements, and
associated costs and define the means for funding on an ongoing basis from year
to year. Such funding plan shall include means for funding long-term capital
improvements as well as regular yearly operating and maintenance costs.
            (iv)   At the Township’s discretion, the applicant may be required
to escrow sufficient funds for the maintenance and operation costs of common
facilities for up to one year from the date the residents assume majority
control of the homeowners association .
         (b)   Failure to maintain; corrective action. In the event that the
organization established to maintain common facilities , or any successor
organization thereto, fails to maintain all or any portion of the common
facilities in reasonable order and condition, the Township may enter the
premises and take corrective action.
            (i)   The costs of such corrective action may be charged to the
property owner or homeowners’ association and may include administrative costs
and penalties as stipulated in Article XXVI of this chapter. Such costs shall
become a lien on said properties. Notice of such lien shall be filed by the
Township in the office of the Prothonotary of Montgomery County.
§ 255-124.   Access and circulation.
[Amended 11-13-2007 by Ord. No. 1188, § 10]
   A.   Access limitations. No mobile home or dwelling unit built as part of a
compact, pedestrian oriented, residential development shall have direct access
to any existing public street .
      (1)   If garage apron/driveways are served by alleys , the aprons and/or
driveways  shall be located a minimum of 25 feet from the point where the alley
intersects the nearest internal street . If the driveway  is located on a one-
way alley , this requirement shall only apply to that end where vehicles can
enter. [Amended 5-10-2022 by Ord. No. 22-1375]
   B.   Pedestrian circulation. All mobile home development and compact,
pedestrian oriented, residential developments shall provide safe, convenient,
all-season pedestrian access of adequate width for intended use , durable and
convenient to maintain, between individual residential structures , streets and
all community facilities provided for the resident.
      (1)   Sidewalks, with a minimum width of four feet, shall be installed
along internal streets in compact, pedestrian oriented, residential
developments . Sidewalks, with a minimum width of six feet, shall be installed
along adjacent, existing public roads .
         (a)   A grass planting strip for street trees, with a minimum width of
five feet, shall separate the sidewalks from the adjacent internal street .
         (b)   A grass planting strip, with a minimum width of four feet, shall
separate sidewalks from adjacent public streets .
   C.   Vehicular circulation.
      (1)   Design standards for streets  in compact, pedestrian oriented,
residential developments  shall comply with the standards provided in the
Subdivision and Land Development Code, §
212-15, Streets, except as otherwise provided herein. In lieu of the
requirements of Chapter 255, Article III, §
255-18, and Chapter 255, §
212-15, individual lots of a proposed compact pedestrian oriented residential
development  may access private streets  without a defined right-of-way  when
developed in accidence with the Planned Community Act of Pennsylvania. [Amended
5-10-2022 by Ord. No. 22-1375]
      (2)   Where the design of internal streets is such that yield movement
conditions are created the applicant shall demonstrate that for each block of
more than 100 feet in length there will be at least one break in the on-street
parking sufficient for a passenger vehicle to pull out of the path of an
approaching vehicle.
         (a)   Driveway curb cuts, alley to street intersections, fire hydrant
“no parking zones” and the like are all acceptable breaks in on-street parking
for the purposes of this section.
§ 255-125.   Parking.
[Amended 11-13-2007 by Ord. No. 1188, § 11]
   A.   Mobile home developments .
      (1)   Space required. Two paved off-street parking spaces shall be
provided for each mobile home either on the same lot therewith or in common
parking facilities, provided that parking areas contained therein are within
150 feet of the mobile home lots for which they are intended.
      (2)   Required green areas. Ten percent of all common parking areas on
each lot shall be devoted to green areas which must be interspersed within the
paved parking areas to channel traffic or divide parking areas. The green areas
required by this section shall not constitute a portion of any green area
otherwise required by this chapter or any other ordinance or regulation of the
Township. The exact design and location of the green areas required by this
section shall be disclosed on a development or subdivision or other similar
plan and be permanently maintained as such.
   B.   Compact, pedestrian oriented, residential development .
      (1)   Space required. A minimum of two off-street parking spaces shall be
provided on each lot , for each dwelling unit . There shall also be a minimum
of 0.5 on-street guest parking space provided for each dwelling unit . Guest
spaces shall be within 250 feet of the residential lot being served.
      (2)   If alleys  are provided and there are places where it is not
possible to provide parking for a dwelling unit  in a compact, pedestrian
oriented, residential development  from an alley , then driveway  curb cuts
onto internal streets  may be permitted, provided that the garage door of each
affected dwelling  conforms to one of the design options described below, in
order of preference [Amended 5-10-2022 by Ord. No. 22-1375]:
         (a)   The garage is rear entry, such that garage door(s) is on the
opposite side of the dwelling from the front facade and it is not directly
visible from sidewalks along the internal street .
         (b)   The garage is located behind the rear facade of the dwelling .
Such garage may be detached from or attached to the dwelling , and the garage
doors may face any direction.
         (c)   The garage is side entry from the side street of a corner lot .
In such cases, the garage does not need to be recessed.
         (d)   The garage is front-entry and recessed at least 10 feet from the
principal front facade. This rule shall not apply to dwellings located on
corner lots .
         (e)   The garage is side entry, such that garage doors are
perpendicular or radial to the street or open space which the front facade
faces.
      (3)   Parallel on-street parking spaces .
         (a)   Parallel on-street parking spaces are prohibited on internal
streets with a cartway width less than 24 feet.
         (b)   Parallel on-street parking spaces may be located on one side of
an internal street if the cartway width is 24 feet or wider.
         (c)   Parallel on-street parking spaces may be located on both sides
of an internal street if the cartway width is 32 feet or wider.
         (d)   Parallel parking stalls shall have a minimum length of 22 feet.
§ 255-126.   Buffers.
[Amended 11-13-2007 by Ord. No. 1188, § 12; amended 5-10-2022 by Ord. No. 22-
1375]
   A.   Mobile home developments .
      (1)   Supplementing the landscaping provisions of
Chapter 212, a permanent buffer shall be maintained along all exterior property
boundary lines, other than those adjacent to a right-of-way , designed to
provide screening between the mobile home development and its abutting uses .
The depth of the buffer shall be 40 feet where the boundary line abuts another
mobile home development , a commercial district or an industrial district. In
all other cases the depth of the buffer shall be 50 feet.
      (2)   The primary component of this buffer screen shall be a row of
evergreen trees, at a height of not less than six feet when planted, spaced not
more than eight feet apart on- center, and these trees shall be of such species
as to attain a height at maturity of not less than 20 feet. The buffer must
also include an opaque fence six feet in height. The use of mounding is also
encouraged, provided that the slopes shall be a maximum of 3:1. Along all
property boundaries which abut a public street , the use of a single row of
deciduous trees with a spacing of not more than 40 feet on-center shall be
placed at the edge of the right-of-way , subject to the approval of the Shade
Tree Commission.
      (3)   In cases where an edge(s) of a mobile home development borders
natural features which function as buffers, including but not limited to mature
woodland, severe grade changes or stream valleys, buffering may not be required
along that edge(s) if approved as a conditional use by the Board of
Commissioners.
ARTICLE XVIII
MRD Mixed Residential District
§ 255-127.   Intent.
The intent of this district is:
   A.   To provide for the orderly development of the Township consistent with
the intent of this chapter. 34
   B.   To provide for consideration of an appropriate safeguarding of abutting
land and neighborhoods .
   C.   To provide for a variety of dwelling types in order to create an
opportunity for people of varying income with varying age and family
characteristics to have decent, affordable housing.
   D.   To provide for open space areas in close proximity to the majority of
dwelling units .
   E.   To provide for the protection of existing natural features and
amenities.
34. Editor’s Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see
Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
§ 255-128.   Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
   ATTACHED PATIO DWELLING — A one-family attached dwelling on a separate lot
with open space setbacks on at least two sides. The dwelling is attached to
another one-family dwelling by a common vertical wall, with each dwelling
located on a separate lot .
   MINOR COLLECTOR STREET — A street which collects traffic from minor
residential and residential streets and connects with secondary or primary
streets .
   MINOR RESIDENTIAL STREET — A street that serves a limited number of
residential dwellings and connects into a residential street .
   MULTIPLEX DWELLING — One dwelling in a structure containing up to six such
dwellings in which each unit has individual access to the outside and in which
no unit is on top of another unit.
   SINGLE-FAMILY DETACHED ZERO LOT LINE DWELLING — A one-family detached
dwelling on a separate lot with open space setbacks on three sides and with a
court. This dwelling may be located on a side line and may also be known as a
"zero lot line dwelling."
§ 255-129.   Use regulations.
A building or a group of buildings may be erected or used and a lot may be used
or occupied for any of the following purposes and no others:
   A.   Single-family detached dwelling .
   B.   Single-family detached zero lot line dwelling .
   C.   Attached patio dwelling .
   D.   Townhouse structure .
   E.   Twin dwelling .
   F.   Multiplex dwellings .
   G.   Open space or recreational areas.
   H.   Accessory uses on the same lot with and customarily incidential to the
above permitted uses .
§ 255-130.   Area regulations.
   A.   The tract of land must contain a minimum area of 75 acres.
   B.   The tract of land to be developed shall be in one ownership or shall be
the subject of an application filed jointly by the owner or owners of the
entire tract , and it shall be agreed that the tract will be developed under
single direction and in general accordance with an overall approved plan.
§ 255-131.   Lot, yard and bulk requirements.
   A.   Density . The maximum permitted density in the MRD shall be 2.75
dwelling units per acre (excluding the rights-of-way of existing public roads
).
   B.   Mixing requirements. For any MRD, a minimum of 35% shall be constructed
as single-family detached and single-family patio dwellings . At least 40% of
the 35% shall be single-family detached, with the remaining units patio
dwellings . At least two additional housing types must be included in the MRD,
no one of which shall be more than 40% of the total number of units.
   C.   Impervious coverage. Impervious coverage for the entire MRD shall not
exceed 35%.
   D.   Single-family detached dwellings .
      (1)   Lot area . A minimum lot area of not less than 15,000 square feet
(s.f.) shall be provided.
      (2)   Lot width. A lot width of not less than 80 feet shall be required
at the building  setback line .
      (3)   Front yard . A front yard of not less than 35 feet in depth shall
be required from the right-of-way line .
      (4)   Side yard . Two side yards , together having an aggregate width not
less than 25 feet, but neither having a width less than 10 feet, shall be
required.
      (5)   Rear yard . A rear yard of not less in depth than 30 feet shall be
required.
   E.   Single-family patio dwellings .
      (1)   Lot area . A minimum lot area of not less than 7,000 square feet
shall be provided, with an average lot area of not less than 9,000 square feet
being provided.
      (2)   Lot width. A lot width of not less than 60 feet shall be required
at the building  setback line .
      (3)   Front yard requirements. A front yard of not less than 30 feet in
depth shall be required from the right-of-way line .
      (4)   Side yard . One side yard of not less than 15 feet shall be
required.
      (5)   Rear yard . A rear yard of not less in depth than 25 feet shall be
required.
      (6)   When the wall of a dwelling is constructed on the side line of a
lot , the deed to the adjacent lot shall reserve an easement to permit the
maintenance and reconstruction of the said dwelling .
   F.   Attached patio dwellings and townhouse structures .
      (1)   Lot area . A minimum lot area of not less than 2,500 square feet
shall be provided, with an average lot area of not less than 3,000 square feet
being provided.
      (2)   Lot width. A lot width of not less than 20 feet shall be required
at the building  setback line .
      (3)   Front yard . A front yard of not less than 20 feet in depth shall
be required from the street  right-of-way line .
      (4)   Side yard (end of row). One side yard at each end of the row, not
less than 15 feet in width, shall be required.
      (5)   Rear yard . A rear yard of not less in depth than 25 feet shall be
required.
   G.   Twin dwellings .
      (1)   Lot area . A minimum lot area of not less than 6,000 square feet
shall be provided per dwelling unit .
      (2)   Lot width. A lot width of not less than 40 feet shall be required
at the building  setback line .
      (3)   Front yard . A front yard of not less than 20 feet in depth shall
be required from the right-of-way line .
      (4)   Side yard . One side yard , not less than 15 feet in width, shall
be required.
      (5)   Rear yard . A rear yard of not less in depth than 25 feet shall be
required.
   H.   Multiplex dwellings .
      (1)   Density . The net density of any multiplex area shall not exceed
eight dwelling units per acre. (The net density shall be calculated on an area
which included the multiplex building , parking and adjacent open space
intended for the residents along with all required multiplex yard spaces
established by setback requirements. The area shall specifically exclude all
lot areas devoted to uses other than multiplex dwellings ).
      (2)   Building length. The total length of any multiplex dwelling shall
not exceed 140 feet in any one direction.
      (3)   Distance between buildings . The distance between multiplex
buildings shall not be less than 20 feet end-to-end or 50 feet side-by-side and
shall comply with BOCA Code fire resistance ratings. 35
      (4)   Building setbacks.
         (a)   Setback from property lines. A setback from the tract property
lines of not less than 300 feet shall be required, except where one of the
major frontages is primarily along a primary or secondary street .
         (b)   Setback; interdevelopment. A setback from the lot lines of
adjacent residential lots of not less than 50 feet in depth shall be required.
         (c)   Setback from streets . A setback from the right-of-way of public
streets of not less than 40 feet in depth and from streets of not less than 20
feet in depth shall be required.
         (d)   Rear yard setback. A setback of not less than 25 feet from the
rear lot line shall be required. [Added 2-13-1996 by Ord. No. 904]
   I.   All dwellings shall have access to a public street .
   J.   The proposed development shall be served by both centralized sewer and
water facilities deemed acceptable by the Board of Commissioners.
35. Editor's Note: See
Ch. 117, Fire Prevention.
§ 255-132.   Development regulations.
   A.   Buffer requirements.
      (1)   A landscaped planting area of not less than 15 feet in depth shall
be provided along any perimeter property line (other than in a street ) where
the tract abuts existing residential, commercial, institutional and industrial
uses . The landscaping shall be permanent and designed for screening from view
residential, commercial, institutional and industrial uses which are adjoining
to the MRD. The buffer strip shall not be included in the lots adjacent
thereto, but shall be owned and maintained in accordance with the requirements
set forth in §
255-133.
      (2)   Planting requirements are not required where vegetation exists or
will be preserved or where the units in the MRD District will be of the same
dwelling unit type and approximately the same density of the dwelling units
adjacent to the MRD District.
      (3)   All landscaping requirements contained in
Chapter 212, Subdivision and Land Development, shall be applicable to any MRD
unless less restrictive, in which case the provisions of this chapter shall
control.
   B.   Height regulations. No building and/or structure shall exceed a height
of 35 feet.
   C.   Varied setbacks. To encourage design variety, no more than four
dwelling units in a row may utilize minimum setbacks, and five feet shall be
the minimum offset.
   D.   Corner lot provisions. In the case of a corner lot , all front yard
requirements shall be observed along both street frontages.
   E.   Accessory use provisions. Accessory use  structures may only be erected
within the rear and side yard areas of single-family detached dwellings and
single-family patio dwellings , provided that the accessory structure is not
located within four feet of the rear and/or side property lines.
   F.   Streets . All streets shall be public streets and, as such, shall be
constructed to Township standards regarding paving thickness and materials. The
following right-of-way and paving width standards for an MRD shall apply:
 
Classification           Row    Cartway
                         (feet) (feet)
Minor residential street 40     25
Minor collector street   50     25
 
   G.   Not less than two off-street parking spaces shall be required for each
dwelling unit . Garage spaces shall not be counted toward the parking
requirement.
   H.   Only single-family detached or single-family detached patio homes or
accessory uses customarily incidential to such uses may be erected within 200
feet of the boundary lines of the property where such boundary lines are
contiguous to lands which are located in any residential district on the
Township Zoning map; provided, however, that only single- family detached
dwellings may be constructed on lots abutting residential districts.
   I.   Decks. Decks and patios may extend into the required rear and side yard
setbacks of a residential district, provided that they are not enclosed either
on the sides, by a roof or underneath the deck. The deck perimeter shall not
exceed 20 feet to the rear, 10 feet to the side and in no case be closer than
10 feet to a property line. Decks and patios adjacent to interior townhouses
are not limited by side yard setbacks. [Amended 6-28-1988 by Ord. No. 748; 1-
10-1995 by Ord. No. 879]
§ 255-133.   Open space.
   A.   Characteristics of required open space. Open space created shall have
the following minimal requirements:
      (1)   The land area to be set aside for permanent preservation as open
space shall be so located and so shaped as to be suitable for the purposes
intended. Consideration shall be given to contiguous portions of existing and
potential open space lands in adjacent tracts .
      (2)   A minimum of 25% of the gross tract acreage, exclusive of existing
street rights-of-way, shall be set aside as open space lands.
   B.   Maintenance of required open space. The following requirements shall
govern the maintenance of the required open space:
      (1)   The open space land to be set aside or reserved for park,
woodlands, conservation, playground, active recreational use or other open
space purposes, such as the preservation of natural features , must first be
offered for dedication to the Township or may be reserved for private use if
Township officials decline to accept the offer of dedication, in which case
satisfactory arrangements shall be made, acceptable to the Township, for the
maintenance of all such area.
      (2)   Necessary covenants, easements and/or restrictions must be
established to provide for public utilities, drainage, trails for hiking or
bicycling or any other permitted use designated for the benefit of owners or
occupiers of the development if the open space is to be privately owned.
      (3)   If a development includes a proposal to dedicate to the Township,
land for park and/or open space use , under provisions of this section, the
total land area to be dedicated shall be delineated on the subdivision plan
with a note stipulating that the legal means of conveyance shall be by
dedication.
      (4)   If the open space land is to be retained by the property owners,
the Township will require the property owners to provide for and establish a
homeowner’s association, other organization or funded community trust for the
ownership and maintenance of the open space by sale or otherwise, except to an
organization conceived and established to own and maintain the open space or by
dedication to and acceptance by the Township.
§ 255-134.   Plans to be submitted.
In order to assist the Board of Commissioners in evaluating the development ,
the following plans and documentation shall be provided:
   A.   A plan showing the site, its acreage, proposed uses and existing
surrounding sites.
   B.   The approximate proposed residential density of the development and the
approximate mix of the various dwelling types.
   C.   The location, size, accessibility and proposed use of open space,
manner of ownership and maintenance.
   D.   A traffic impact analysis showing the impact of the development on the
local streets , illustrating all existing and proposed streets .
   E.   Conceptual plans of proposed water, sanitary sewers and stormwater
management systems.
   F.   A fiscal impact analysis showing the effect of the development on the
Township and school district.
ARTICLE XIX
Off-Street Parking and Loading
§ 255-135.   Required spaces.
[Amended 11-3-1990 by Ord. No. 789; 7-14-1992 by Ord. No. 824; 10-12-1993 by
Ord. No. 858; 6-14-1994 by Ord. No. 866; 9-12-1995 by Ord. No. 895; 2-13-1996
by Ord. No. 904; 9-10-1996 by Ord. No. 918; 7-14-1998 by Ord. No. 972; 4-16-
2002 by Ord. No. 1087; 6-11-2002 by Ord. No. 1089; 3-11-2008 by Ord. No. 1195,
§ 6; 3-23-2021 by Ord. No. 21-1368, § 2]
Any building , structure or other facility erected, constructed, altered or
used, and any lot used or occupied, for any of the following purposes shall be
provided with minimum off-street parking spaces as set forth below, together
with adequate passageways or driveways or other means of circulation and access
to and from a street and shall comply with any additional parking requirements
of the zoning district in which the building or other structure is located.
Whenever two or more methods of calculating required parking are provided, that
which results in the greater number of parking spaces shall be applied. Where
no parking requirement is provided for a use or occupancy which will generate
the need therefor, parking shall be provided based on the closest analogous use
or occupancy for which a parking requirement has been specified.
   A.   Dwelling . Two all-weather parking spaces per family on the same lot
therewith. Such parking spaces shall be in addition to enclosed garage space.
   B.   For any of the following uses , the required parking space shall be
all-weather, shall be paved, and shall be located on the same lot therewith or
on land adjacent thereto. Required parking spaces for secondary schools and
post secondary schools may also be provided on land that is owned by the school
district some portion of which is located immediately across a street or public
right of way from the school property. For any of the following uses , the
required parking space shall be all-weather, shall be paved, and shall be
located on the same lot therewith or on land adjacent thereto. [Amended 3-11-
2008 by Ord. No. 1195, § 6]
      (1)   Church, public auditorium, assembly or meeting room or other
similar place of public or private assembly: one parking place for every three
seats provided for public assembly, where one seat is defined as one chair or
three feet of pew/bench.
      (2)   Stadium or other similar place of assembly: one parking space for
every three seats provided, where one seat is defined as one chair or three
feet of bench length.
      (3)   Hospital, convalescent or nursing home: one parking space for every
four beds, plus one per employee on the largest shift.
      (4)   Community center, library, museum or other similar place: one
parking space for every 500 square feet of floor area in public use .
      (5)   Institutional home: one parking space for every 10 occupants.
      (6)   Residential club : one parking space for every two occupants, plus
10 parking spaces for every 1,000 square feet of floor area in public use .
      (7)   Community residential program : at least two parking spaces for
each community residential program occupying a premises, plus one parking space
for every staff member working on the premises.
      (8)   Preschool and primary schools : the greater number of one parking
space per employee, plus one additional space for every two classrooms; or if
the facility has an attached auditorium or other place of assembly, the number
of parking spaces specified in Subsection B(1).
      (9)   Secondary schools : the greater number of one space per employee,
plus one space for every three students based on design capacity; or if the
facility has an attached auditorium or other place of assembly, the number of
parking spaces specified in Subsection B(1). [Amended 3-11-2008 by Ord. No.
1195, § 6]
         (a)   Where the Board of Commissioners determines that the required
number of parking spaces are not currently needed it may authorize up to 15% of
the required parking spaces be reserved as part of a land development
application, provided the following criteria are met: [Added 3-11-2008 by Ord.
No. 1195, § 6]
            [1]   The applicant must document that 100% of the required parking
spaces can be paved without violating any applicable provisions of this
chapter. When constructed, the reserve parking must meet all applicable
provisions of this chapter and the Township’s Engineering and Construction
Standards Improvement Procedures as of the date the construction  permit is
sought.
            [2]   The Township Engineer recommends the reduction and the
applicant then demonstrates, to the satisfaction of the Board of Commissioners,
that the number of code required parking spaces are not currently needed for
the school ’s daily operations.
            [3]   The applicant shall install stormwater management facilities,
as required by the Township, for the total number of required parking spaces ,
including those parking spaces held in reserve, unless the applicant
demonstrates to the Board’s satisfaction that postponing the installation of
the stormwater management facilities required for the reserve parking allows
natural features on the site to be maintained until such time, if ever, that
the construction of the reserved parking is deemed necessary.
            [4]   The reserved parking area shall be fully designed, and the
area held as reserve parking shall be clearly designated on the development
plan. The reserve parking area shall be considered in calculating the
impervious surface ratio. The reserved parking area shall be planted with
vegetative cover and integrated into the applicant’s landscaping plans.
            [5]   The reserved parking , or a limited portion thereof, must be
constructed when the Board of Commissioners, upon the advice of the Township
Engineer and/or Township Zoning Officer, determines that such spaces are needed
to accommodate the school ’s daily operations.
            [6]   Parking capacity can be reevaluated. If there is any change
in the use , ownership, building size or number of occupants/employees using
the property that effect the number of paved parking spaces required, then a
written determination concerning the requirements for parking shall be prepared
by the Township Zoning Officer.
            [7]   The Zoning Officer may deny or revoke a use and occupancy
permit for failure to construct the previously reserved parking spaces when
directed to do so under subparagraph [5] above.
            [8]   For a period of 60 months following approval of a development
plan showing reserve parking, the applicant shall provide a financial guarantee
calculated as provided in
Chapter 212 for the cost of installing the reserve parking, including the
Township’s professional fees. The amount of the guarantee shall be approved by
the Township Engineer and the form of the guarantee shall be approved by the
Township Solicitor.
      (10)   Commercial school : the greater number of one parking space for
every two students based on design capacity, plus one space per employee; or if
the facility has an associated auditorium or other place of assembly on the
same lot , the number of parking spaces specified in Subsection B(1).
      (11)   Post-secondary school : the greater number of one parking space
for every three students not housed in dormitories, based on design capacity,
plus one space per employee; or if the facility has an attached auditorium or
other place of assembly, the number of parking spaces specified in Subsection B
(1).
      (12)   Dormitories: three parking spaces for every four beds.
      (13)   Age-restricted housing : two spaces for each dwelling unit .
[Added 5-11-2004 by Ord. No. 1127]
   C.   For any of the following uses , required parking spaces shall be all-
weather and shall be paved, and such parking spaces shall be located on the
same lot therewith except as provided in §
255-136 below:
      (1)   Retail store or shop: one parking space for every 200 square feet
of gross floor area .
      (2)   Department store or supermarket: one parking space for every 200
square feet of gross floor area .
      (3)   Indoor theater: one parking space for every four seats.
      (4)   Hotel , motel , motor lodge and tourist home: one parking space for
each rental unit.
      (5)   Office or wholesale establishment
         (a)   For any office or wholesale establishment not located in the EC
Employment Center District, the following provisions shall apply: one parking
space for every 250 square feet of gross floor area . Up to 60% of this
required parking area may be placed in reserve and left unpaved upon a showing
by the owner that such parking area is not required for the use of the building
contemplated. Such reserve parking area may not be provided in an area that
would not otherwise be usable for parking because of the requirements of this
chapter or any other ordinance. The owner will be required to pave such reserve
parking area or any part of it upon an inspection by the Zoning Officer showing
that the parking area is overburdened and that additional parking area is
required.
         (b)   For any office or wholesale establishment located in the EC
Employment Center District, there shall be one parking space for every 250
square feet of gross floor area , and the parking spaces shall be provided in
compliance with §
255-116.
         (c)   Medical office: One parking space for every 150 square feet of
gross floor area .
      (6)   Restaurant , café or tea room: one parking space for every 60
square feet of floor space devoted to patron use .
      (7)   Laboratory or industrial establishment:
         (a)   A minimum of one parking space , exclusive of travel lanes,
shall be provided for every 500 square feet of gross floor area . Parking areas
must comply with the standards of §§
255-115B(4) and
255-116G.
         (b)   Additional parking may be required for employees and visitors.
To determine if additional parking is needed, the following calculations shall
be performed:
            [1]   Calculate the number of parking spaces required by Subsection
C(7)(a) above.
            [2]   Calculate the maximum number of employees that reasonably are
to be expected on the premises during any given eight-hour period or, for
multishift operations, the total number of persons employed on the largest
shift. One parking space shall be assigned to each employee, plus an additional
5% for visitor parking.
            [3]   If the number of spaces required by Subsection C(7)(b)[1] is
greater than those required by Subsection C(7)(b)[2], no additional parking is
required. If the number of spaces required by Subsection C(7)(b)[2] is greater
than those required by Subsection C(7)(b)[1], then the difference shall be
added to the number required in Subsection C(7)(a) above.
      (8)   Other commercial buildings : one parking space for every 1,000
square feet of floor area or fraction thereof, except when otherwise authorized
as a special exception consistent with the requirements set forth herein for
comparable establishments.
      (9)   Open areas for commercial purposes: one parking space for every
1,500 square feet of area or fraction thereof.
      (10)   Combination of uses . In the event that any building or
establishment shall combine any of the uses set forth hereinabove, such as, for
example, but not limited to, buildings combining hotel  use and a restaurant or
office use and an industrial establishment, the required parking area shall be
determined by applying the appropriate factor for determining parking area to
each portion devoted to such use within the building containing such
combination of uses .
      (11)   Exhibition center : one parking space for every 100 square feet of
floor area devoted to the exhibition center  use or fraction thereof.
      (12)   Personal care facility or senior assisted living residence : one
parking space for every three residents, plus one parking space for each full-
time staff member employed on the largest shift.
      (13)   Life care complex: 1 1/2 parking spaces shall be provided for each
single-family attached dwelling unit ; one parking space shall be provided for
each apartment dwelling unit ; one parking space shall be provided for each
four beds intended to accommodate patients other than occupants of the
residential portion of the complex within an accessory health care facility;
and one parking space shall be provided for each employee working on the
largest shift.
      (14)   Indoor recreation facility: one parking space per 50 square feet
of rink or court area, if applicable, plus one space for every other 250 square
feet of gross floor area . Bowling alleys shall have five spaces per lane.
      (15)   Outdoor recreation facility: one space per four persons of design
capacity.
      (16)   Motor vehicle service or repair facility: three parking spaces per
service bay.
      (17)   Gasoline service station : one parking space per 300 square feet
of gross floor area or three parking spaces per service bay, whichever is
greater.
      (18)   Motor vehicle sales facility: one parking space per 500 square
feet of indoor gross floor area , plus one parking space per 5,000 square feet
of outdoor sales area, to be set aside for parking and not used for display or
storage, plus any parking as required in §
255-135C(16) for vehicle repair facilities.
      (19)   Day-care center : one parking space per 10 care receivers of
design capacity, plus one parking space per employee on the largest shift.
      (20)   Convenience store/mini-market: one parking space for every 200
square feet of gross floor area , plus two parking spaces for every automated
teller machine and lottery terminal.
      (21)   Home occupation : one parking space shall be provided in addition
to those required for the residential use .
      (22)   Bank: six parking spaces per interior teller window, plus three
parking spaces per self-service facility when drive-in service is provided.
      (23)   Indoor storage facility: Five spaces for customer parking
including one space for employee parking. [Added 3-23-2021 by Ord. No. 21-1368,
§ 2]
   D.   Parking held in reserve. If the number of spaces required by this
section is greater than 125% of the maximum usage anticipated by the applicant,
the Board of Commissioners may grant, by conditional use , a reduction in the
number of spaces required to be maintained in accordance with the following
criteria:
      (1)   A suitable area must be available on the site for 100% of the
required parking.
      (2)   The total number of spaces required may be reduced by up to 50%
upon recommendation of the Township Engineer. The applicant shall have the
burden of demonstrating to the satisfaction of the Board of Commissioners that
the required parking is no more than that set forth on the applicant's plans.
All stormwater controls shall be engineered and constructed based on the total
parking requirements, including the reserve.
      (3)   The applicant must set forth on an approved development plan the
location of the reserve parking.
      (4)   The reserve parking, or a limited portion thereof, must be
constructed when the Board of Commissioners, upon the advice of the Township
Engineer and/or Township Zoning Officer, determines that it is desirable to
accommodate the use of the property.
      (5)   Parking capacity will be reevaluated and a written report
concerning the demand for parking prepared by the Township Zoning Officer
should there be any change in the use , ownership, building size or number of
occupants/employees using the property.
      (6)   The Zoning Officer may deny or revoke a use and occupancy permit
for failure to comply with the provisions of this subsection.
      (7)   For a period of 60 months following approval of the development
plan showing reserve parking, the applicant shall provide a financial guarantee
calculated as provided in
Chapter 212 for the cost of installing the reserve parking, including the
Township's professional fees. The amount of the guarantee shall be approved by
the Township Engineer and the form of the guarantee shall be approved by the
Township Solicitor.
§ 255-136.   Special exceptions.
The parking spaces required in §
255-135C herein may be located elsewhere than on the same lot when authorized
as a special exception , subject to the following conditions:
   A.   That the owners of two or more establishments shall submit, with their
application for special exception , a site plan showing joint use and location
of a common off-street parking area, together with cross easements. [Amended 1-
10-1995 by Ord. No. 879]
   B.   That some portion of the common off-street parking area lies within 200
feet of an entrance, regularly used by patrons, into the buildings served
thereby.
   C.   That the Zoning Hearing Board may, in its discretion, reduce the
required aggregate amount of required parking space upon determination that
greater efficiency is effected by joint use of a common parking area, but in no
case shall the ratio of total off-street parking area to total sales floor area
be reduced less 25%.
§ 255-137.   Reduction of facilities.
Off-street parking facilities existing at the effective date of this chapter
shall not subsequently be reduced to an amount less than required hereunder for
a similar new building or new use . Off- street parking facilities provided to
comply with the provisions of this chapter shall not subsequently be reduced
below the requirements of this chapter.
§ 255-138.   Loading and unloading requirements.
In addition to required off-street parking spaces , the foregoing uses shall be
provided with adequate off-street loading space .
§ 255-139.   Driveways.
All-weather driveways for dwellings shall have a minimum width of 10 feet and
shall be constructed from near curbline to a vehicular parking or storage area
on the same lot . All driveways shall be constructed so as to permit the
turning of vehicles on the lot so as to avoid the necessity of backing out into
the street .
§ 255-140.   Size of spaces.
[Amended 10-14-1986 by Ord. No. 714]
A parking space available for the parking of one motor vehicle shall be not
less than 9½ feet in width and 19 feet in length, having an area not less than
180.5 square feet. The length of a parking space may be reduced two feet,
provided that a motor vehicle may overhang that distance into the landscape
area.
§ 255-141.   (Reserved).
[Deleted 3-11-2008 by Ord. No. 1195, § 7]
§ 255-141.1.   Handicapped-accessible parking.
[Added 6-14-1994 by Ord. No. 868]
Handicapped-accessible parking spaces shall be provided on any site in
accordance with current federal and state regulations. This is a minimum
requirement which should be increased if required by federal or state
regulations or if the owner or operator of a site determines that there is such
a need.
ARTICLE XX
Nonconforming Uses
§ 255-142.   Land.
Any land the existing lawful use of which at the time of passage of this
chapter does not conform with the regulations of the district in which it is
located shall have such use considered as nonconforming use , which may
continue on such land but shall be subject to regulations covering
nonconforming uses .
§ 255-143.   Buildings.
Any lawful building or the lawful use of any building existing at the time of
the passage of this chapter that does not conform to use , height, location,
size or bulk regulations of the district in which it is located shall be
considered a nonconforming  building or use and may continue such use in its
present location, but shall be subject to the regulations covering
nonconforming uses .
§ 255-144.   Buildings under construction.
A building for which a valid permit has been issued and/or is actually under
construction to the extent of completion of footings may be completed as a
nonconforming use . Buildings not under actual construction at the time of
passage of this chapter shall be built in conformity with its requirements.
§ 255-145.   Change of use.
[Amended 5-11-1993 by Ord. No. 839]
A nonconforming  building or use shall be considered as such if the
nonconforming  building or use does not comply with the regulations of the
district in which it is located. A nonconforming use may not be changed to any
use except one which is permitted in the zoning district in which the property
is located.
§ 255-146.   Discontinued use.
A nonconforming use , when discontinued, may be resumed any time within one
year from such discontinued date, but not after, as the same class of use , but
cannot be resumed as a nonconforming use of a lower class.
§ 255-147. Extension and expansion.
[Amended 5-11-1993 by Ord. No. 839; 9-14-1999 by Ord. No. 1004]
A lawful nonconforming use may be expanded or extended when authorized as a
special exception , subject to the following limitations:
   A.   Any such expansion or extension shall be limited to the lot on which
the use is located, as that lot was defined when the use became nonconforming .
   B.   The total of all increases in the area within a building devoted to a
nonconforming use shall not exceed 25% of the floor area devoted to the
nonconforming use on August 20, 1956, or on the date the use became
nonconforming , whichever is later. However, in no case shall the total of all
such increases exceed 25% of the building coverage as it existed on such date.
Where a nonconforming use is made of an area not within a building , the total
of all increases in such area shall not exceed 25% of the area actually
utilized in connection with the nonconforming use on such date.
   C.   Any such extension or expansion shall conform to the requirements of
this chapter as they exist at the time of the proposed extension or expansion
and with the height, yard , setback, buffer, impervious surface , floor and
building area requirements of the zoning district in which the extension or
expansion will be located. [Amended 9-14-2004 by Ord. No. 1139]
§ 255-148.   Change or resumption.
The Zoning Hearing Board shall have discretion to determine that the resumption
or change of nonconforming use is of the same class of use and permissible.
§ 255-149.   Destruction of building.
A nonconforming  building which has been damaged or destroyed by fire,
explosion, accident or calamity (as contrasted to deterioration due to time or
neglect) may be reconstructed and used for the nonconforming use , provided
that:
   A.   The reconstructed building shall not exceed in height, area and volume
the building destroyed.
   B.   Building reconstruction shall be started within one year from the date
the building was destroyed and shall be carried on without interruption.
§ 255-150.   Condemnation.
A nonconforming  building which has been legally condemned shall not be rebuilt
or used except in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. 37
37. Editor's Note: Former Sec. 13.09, Temporary or nonconforming use, Sec.
13.10, Nonconforming signs, and Sec. 13.11, Abatement of certain nonconforming
uses, which immediately followed this section, were deleted at time of adoption
of Code; see
Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
§ 255-151.   Permit required.
Conforming use  permits shall be required for nonconforming uses existing at
the time of passage of this chapter and shall be issued by the Zoning Officer
without charge stating that the use is nonconforming . The Zoning Officer shall
notify the occupant of property being used as a nonconforming use , whereupon
the occupant shall apply for a permit within 30 days after receipt of the
notice.
ARTICLE XXI
Signs 38
[Amended 9-14-1993 by Ord. No. 856; 1-10-1995 by Ord. No. 879; 7-14-1998 by
Ord. No. 972; 7-10-2001 by Ord. No. 1066]
38. Editor's Note: See also
Ch. 196, Signs.
§ 255-152.   (Reserved)
§ 255-152.1.   Declaration of legislative intent.
It is recognized that signs perform an important function in identifying
properties, businesses, services, residences, events and other matters of
interest to the public. It is hereby found and declared, however, that control
of signs is necessary to promote the health, safety and general welfare by:
   A.   Lessening hazards to pedestrian and vehicular traffic.
   B.   Preserving property values.
   C.   Preventing unsightly and detrimental development that has a blighting
influence upon residential, business and industrial uses .
   D.   Preventing signs from reaching such excessive size or number that they
obscure one another to the detriment of all concerned.
   E.   Securing certain fundamentals of design for the Township.
   F.   Requiring signs to be constructed, installed and maintained in a safe
and secure manner
   G.   Encouraging signs that are appropriate to the zoning district in which
they are located and consistent to the category of use to which they pertain.
   H.   Allowing for the communication of information for the conduct of
commerce and enabling the identification of places and businesses.
§ 255-152.2.   General sign regulations for all districts.
[Amended 8-13-2019 by Ord. No. 19-1355, § 1]
The following regulations shall apply to signs in all districts unless
specifically authorized and/or otherwise restricted or regulated by the
specific provisions of the zoning district:
   A.   Prohibited signs . The following signs or illumination of signs shall
be prohibited in the Township:
      (1)   Animated signs .
      (2)   Beacon lighting.
      (3)   Flashing or reflective signs .
      (4)   Moving or swinging signs .
      (5)   Illuminated temporary signs .
      (6)   Revolving signs .
      (7)   Trailer signs .
      (8)   Vehicular signs .
      (9)   Obscene signs .
      (10)   Snipe signs .
      (11)   Painted wall signs .
      (12)   Roof signs .
   B.   Permitted signs . The following signs shall be permitted in all zoning
districts:
      (1)   Government signs (i.e., traffic signs , parking signs , etc.).
      (2)   Legal notices.
      (3)   Public monument, plaque or historic identification sign erected by
a government agency.
      (4)   Government flag, insignia or decorative banners.
      (5)   Public service and information signs advertising availability of
public restrooms, telephones or similar public conveniences, not exceeding
three square feet in area.
      (6)   Address signs , not exceeding two square feet.
      (7)   Name plates and identification signs , provided that characters do
not exceed three inches in height and an area not exceeding two square feet.
      (8)   Vending machine signs , where a product name is an integral
component of the vending machine, provided that the machine is not placed in
the front yard of a property.
      (9)   Incidental signs , provided that the aggregate area of incidental
signs on a property does not exceed four square feet; incidental sign area in
excess of four square feet shall be included in the calculation of a property’s
permitted sign area .
      (10)   Home security signs , not exceeding one square foot.
      (11)   Real estate signs .
      (12)   Yard sale signs .
      (13)   Personal expression signs , provided that they are not illuminated
and are either freestanding, wall or window signs . Such signs may not exceed
four square feet and, in the case of freestanding signs , four feet in height.
      (14)   Temporary signs .
   C.   Yard requirements. No portion of any freestanding sign , business sign
or off-premises sign may be located within the side or rear yard setback or
within the required buffer zone when located adjacent to a residential
district.
   D.   Real estate signs in non-residential districts.
      (1)   Intent. The following regulations are intended to prevent blight
and insure the safety of the public by: limiting the number and the placement
of real estate signs on private property in the Township; standardizing the
size and height of such signs ; and establishing a method for the removal of
outdated or poorly maintained signs .
      (2)   Real estate signs , as defined in this Chapter, located on private
property are subject to the regulations set forth below. Real estate signs that
comply with the requirements in this subsection shall not be included in the
determination of the type, number or area of permanent signs allowed on a
property.
         (a)   Large real estate signs : One large real estate sign is
permitted per property in all non-residential zones, as follows:
             [1]   Permitted types:
               a.   Freestanding sign
               b.   Window sign
               c.   Wall sign
            [2]   Area: Each large real estate sign shall have a maximum area
of 20 square feet.
            [3]   A freestanding sign that is double-sided counts as one sign .
            [4]   A freestanding sign in the form of a "V" counts as one sign
if the angle between the faces is 45 degrees or less.
            [5]   Height: Large real estate signs that are freestanding shall
have a maximum height of eight feet. The height is measured from grade to the
top of the sign.
         (b)   If a property has two street frontages, one additional large
real estate sign may be permitted so long as there is a minimum spacing of 200
feet between the two large real estate signs .
         (c)   Small real estate signs : In addition to the large real estate
signs outlined above, one small real estate sign is permitted per property in
all non-residential zones. If a property is greater than five acres in size and
has at least 400 feet of street frontage or buildings with more than 10,000
square feet of floor area, one additional small sign may be permitted.
            [1]   Permitted types:
               a.   Freestanding sign
               b.   Window sign
               c.   Wall sign
            [2]   Area: Each small real estate sign shall have a maximum area
of 12 square feet.
            [3]   Height: Small real estate sign that are freestanding shall
have a maximum height of six feet.
      (3)   Permit requirements. A permit is required for each real estate sign
, subject to the following regulations:
         (a)   A permit for a real estate sign shall expire in six months, but
may be renewed, with verification of continued property availability
documented, where space is being rented, by a floorplan indicating the area(s)
of space available in the property.
         (b)   One sign is allowed per permit. An applicant may request up to
two permits per address, but is subject to the size and number requirements set
forth in this section.
         (c)   An application for a real estate sign permit must include:
            [1]   A description of the sign indicating its, size, shape, and
dimensions, and the expected length of time the sign will be displayed;
            [2]   A schematic drawing of the site showing the proposed location
of the sign in relation to nearby buildings and streets ;
            [3]   The number of signs on the site.
      (4)   Installation, composition and maintenance.
         (a)   All real estate signs must be installed such that, in the
opinion of the code official, they do not create a safety hazard.
         (b)   All real estate signs must be made of durable materials and
shall be well-maintained.
         (c)   Real estate signs that are frayed, torn, broken, or that are no
longer legible will be deemed unmaintained and required to be removed.
      (5)   Illumination of any real estate sign is prohibited.
      (6)   Real estate signs must be removed upon the full lease-up or sale of
a property.
§ 255-153.   Residential districts. 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5df02b024b4c8f2f8cc81a782b45029f5e431e28/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6293.jpg]Publisher's Note: This Section has been AMENDED by new
legislation (Ord. 25-1408, passed 12-9-2025). The text of the amendment will be
incorporated below when the amending legislation is codified.
[Amended 3-11-2008 by Ord. No. 1195, § 8]
In all residential districts, the following signs shall be permitted and no
other:
   A.   Signs permitted in §
255-152.2 of this article.
   B.   Business sign , provided that the area of any one side of any such sign
shall not exceed six inches by 18 inches, and provided that not more than one
such sign shall be erected for such permitted use or dwelling .
   C.   Sign for a school , church, hospital, sanitarium, club or other
institution of similar nature, on the same lot therewith, for the purpose of
displaying the name of the institution and its activities or services, provided
that not more than one such sign shall be erected on any street frontage of any
property in single and separate ownership, and provided that the area on one
side of such sign shall not exceed 15 square feet except as follows: [Amended
3-11- 2008 by Ord. No. 1195, § 8]
      a.   Signs for a public school on a residentially zoned parcel 25 acres
or larger may not exceed 32 square feet on one side and, in the case of a
monument sign , the height of the sign may not exceed three feet, six inches.
[Added 3-11-2008 by Ord. No. 1195, § 8]
   D.   Trespassing signs and signs indicating private ownership of roadways or
other property, on the same premises therewith, provided that the total area on
any one side of such sign shall not exceed one square foot and shall be spaced
at intervals of not less than 100 feet of street frontage.
   E.   Real estate signs as follows:
      (1)   For advertising the sale or rental of the premises upon which the
sign is erected, provided that the total area on any one side of such sign on
any one street frontage of any property in single and separate ownership shall
not exceed six square feet.
         No real estate sign shall be displayed on the premises more than seven
days after the signing of an agreement of sale or lease.
      (2)   Open house signs (on- and off-premises). There shall be a maximum
of one on-premises open house sign for each property line of street frontage.
         (a)   A maximum of two off-premises directional open house signs shall
be permitted for each home or development .
         (b)   Signs shall not exceed four square feet per side and may not be
illuminated.
         (c)   Off-premises directional signs must have permission in advance
from the property owner where the sign is to be placed. Signs cannot be placed
in the sign setback area .
         (d)   Freestanding open house and directional signs shall not exceed a
height of six feet.
         (e)   All open house signs are allowed only on the day of the showing
and must be taken down immediately after the showing.
   F.   Development signs as follows:
      (1)   Where the subdivision's recorded plan contains fewer than 10 lots ,
the area of any one side of such sign shall not exceed 15 square feet, and not
more than one such sign shall be erected within any such subdivision .
      (2)   Where the subdivision's recorded plan contains 10 or more lots ,
the area of any one side of any such sign shall not exceed 35 square feet, and
not more than two such signs shall be erected within any such subdivision .
      (3)   Signs as permitted in Subsection F(1) and (2) above shall be
permitted only for a period of one year from the date of issuance of the permit
or the date of sale of the last lot , whichever first occurs; such signs may be
maintained thereafter, but only after granting of a special exception by the
Zoning Hearing Board as provided by Article XXIII of this chapter, but in no
event shall the Board be permitted to grant a total period longer than two
years from the date of original permit .
   G.   Signs which advertise public auctions for the disposal of real estate,
property or merchandise. An auction sale sign shall conform to the several
provisions of the several subsections under Subsection E of this section;
however, a permit for such sign shall not be issued for a period greater than
90 days from the date of issuance.
      (1)   Signs shall not exceed nine square feet in area, at a maximum
height of six feet, and shall be placed only on the property where the stated
auction is being conducted.
      (2)   Signs may be erected not earlier than 30 days prior to the
advertised auction and shall be removed within 10 days after the auction.
   H. Signs in connection with the identification, operation or protection of
any public utility or municipal activity on the same lot therewith, provided
that the total sign area on any one street frontage of any property in single
and separate ownership shall not exceed eight square feet.
   I.   For a laboratory or sale of agricultural products, business signs ,
provided that the total sign area on any one street frontage of any property in
single and separate ownership shall not exceed 35 square feet.
   J.   Directional signs advertising the location of charitable, religious or
educational organizations and service clubs , provided that the sign is not in
excess of five square feet, and provided further that no organization shall
erect and maintain signs in excess of five in number.
   K.   Construction sign during the period in which such work is being
performed, provided that the area of any one side of any such sign shall not
exceed 12 square feet, and provided that not more than one such sign shall be
erected on any property in single and separate ownership, and provided that
such sign shall be removed upon completion of the work.
   L.   For residential developments containing more than ten dwelling units ,
two monument signs on each street frontage external to the development , not
exceeding 20 square feet in area per sign .
   M.   Directional subdivision sign (off-premises), provided that the area of
any one side of any such sign shall not exceed six square feet, and provided
that such signs shall be spaced at intervals of not less than 500 feet of
street frontage. A maximum of three off-premises directional signs shall be
permitted for one development . Permission must be obtained in advance from the
property owner where the sign is to be placed. Signs shall not be erected more
than 60 days prior to the beginning of the actual construction of the project
and shall be removed within 10 days after the date of the sale or rental of the
final unit in such a development .
§ 255-153.1. RE Recreational Districts.
In the RE Recreational Districts, the following signs shall be permitted and no
other:
   A.   Signs permitted in §
255-152.2 of this article.
   B.   One freestanding sign per street frontage, provided that it relates to
a use located on the lot area , does not exceed 32 square feet and 10 feet in
height and does not exceed a total of three signs on each recreational
property.
§ 255-153.2. AHS Apartment House Special Districts.
In the AHS Apartment House Special Districts, the following signs shall be
permitted and no other:
   A.   Signs permitted in residential districts; provided, however, that a
larger sign may be permitted when granted by the Zoning Hearing Board as a
special exception .
   B.   One freestanding or parallel wall business sign per street frontage,
provided that it does not exceed 32 square feet and, in the case of a
freestanding sign , 10 feet in height.
§ 255-153.3.   MD Multi-Dwelling Districts.
In the MD Multi-Dwelling Districts, the following signs shall be permitted and
no other:
   A.   Signs permitted in residential districts; provided, however, that a
larger sign may be permitted when granted by the Zoning Hearing Board as a
special exception .
   B.   One freestanding or parallel wall business sign per street frontage,
provided that it does not exceed 32 square feet and, in the case of a
freestanding sign , 10 feet in height.
§ 255-153.4.   INST Institutional Districts.
In the INST Institutional District, the following signs shall be permitted and
no other:
   A.   A sign shall relate to a use located on the lot .
   B.   One freestanding or wall sign per street frontage, provided that it
does not exceed 32 square feet and, in the case of a freestanding sign , 10
feet in height.
§ 255-153.5.   DO Dresher Overlay Districts.
In the DO Dresher Overlay District, all signs shall be designed and constructed
to give the appearance of natural materials, shall be of muted color and shall
not be internally illuminated. A sign anchored in the ground may not exceed ten
feet in height from ground level and must be on the same lot as the use to
which it refers. For uses permitted in the underlying zoning district, the sign
regulations applicable to such uses shall apply. For all other uses the
following regulations shall apply:
   A.   For office, bed-and-breakfast inn and restaurant  use : one each of the
following types of business signs for each principal building , no single sign
to exceed 25 square feet in area:
      (1)   Identification sign .
      (2)   Awning sign .
      (3)   Freestanding sign .
      (4)   Parallel wall sign .
   B.   For child or adult day care , assisted living, personal care and/or
nursing facility, library, educational or religious facilities and all other
uses not specifically mentioned: one each of the following types of business
signs for each principal building , no single sign to exceed 35 square feet in
area:
      (1)   Identification sign .
      (2)   Freestanding sign .
      (3)   Parallel wall sign .
§ 255-153.6.   FW Ft. Washington Village District.
[Added 2-13-2007 by Ord. No. 1182, § 4; amended 12-9-2025 by Ord. No. 25-1408,
§ 5]
The location and design of signs in the FW Ft. Washington Village District
shall be approved by the Board of Commissioners in conjunction with the final
land development plan, or at a time otherwise provided in land development
approvals. The following regulations shall apply to all uses within this
district:
   A.   General provisions.
      (1)   Signs must:
         (a)   Maintain a style that is compatible with the historic nature of
the district and unify the streetscape within the FWVD.
         (b)   Be pedestrian oriented and be in proportion with the
architecture of the building , yet be sufficiently legible to a passing
motorist.
      (2)   Signs shall be designed and constructed to give the appearance of
natural materials and be complimentary in their use of shape.
      (3)   Signs shall not be internally illuminated or use neon lights.
      (4)   Signs anchored in the ground shall not exceed ten feet in height.
      (5)   Signs shall not hide architectural features.
      (6)   Signs shall use colors that are vivid, varied and interesting, and
legible, while compatible with the colors of the building .
      (7)   Signs hanging behind the store window shall not reduce the visual
permeability of street facing windows to less than the minimum clear window
requirement.
   B.   Permanent building  signs . Only two of the following four sign types
shall be permitted, per use , per building facade:
      (1)   Projecting signs . No portion of a projecting sign may extend more
than four feet from the building facade. A clear space of not less than eight
feet shall be provided below all parts of the projecting sign . The sign may be
no greater than six square feet.
      (2)   Signs painted on shop windows or other types of window graphics are
permitted, provided they do not take up more than 30% of the clear window
surface, and provided the minimum clear window requirement is met.
      (3)   Fire resistant canvas awnings may be used for signs provided the
text is located on the vertical face of the awning flap.
         (a)   Numbers and letters shall be no taller than six inches.
         (b)   Plastic, back lit awning signs are prohibited.
         (c)   Business logos or emblems are permitted on the top or angled
portion of the awning up to a maximum of three square feet. No more than one
emblem or logo is permitted on an awning.
      (4)   Wall signs are permitted, provided:
         (a)   They do not exceed 5% of the wall area.
         (b)   They do not extend past the roof eaves.
         (c)   They do not block windows or hide cornices and other trim.
   C.   Temporary signs . A sidewalk sandwich board shall be permitted in
addition to the above signs , provided:
      (1)   The sign face shall be no larger than four square feet per side.
      (2)   The sign shall be located directly in front of the store.
      (3)   The sign shall not create an obstruction to pedestrian traffic.
   D.   Free standing signs .
      (1)   Free standing signs are permitted by conditional use to identify an
individual building with a floor area greater than 4,000 square feet. However,
there shall be only one free standing sign for each property’s street frontage.
The area of a free standing sign shall be no larger than 25 square feet per
side, with a maximum height of 14 feet.
      (2)   Directory signs are permitted by conditional use . They may be
installed in lieu of a free standing  sign . These signs shall be a low
pedestrian oriented  monument sign no higher than 10 feet or with an area
greater than 25 square feet.
      (3)   Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, a vehicle
dealer storage lot shall be permitted to have one monument sign with a sign
area not in excess of 40 square feet, and one other sign  bearing a municipal
welcome (or similar) message. The monument sign shall be permitted to advertise
or direct attention to an activity on an adjacent lot containing a vehicle
dealer use. [Added 12-9-2025 by Ord. No. 25-1408, § 5]
§ 255-154.   CR Commercial Retail Districts; SC Shopping Center Districts. 
[Amended 4-10- 2012 by Ord. No. 12-1257, § 1]
In Commercial Districts and in SC Shopping Center Districts, the following
signs shall be permitted and no other:
   A.   Any sign permitted in any residential district, provided that the use
to which it refers is permitted in a commercial district or SC Shopping Center
District.
   B.   Signs in connection with tourist homes or rooming houses, on the same
lot therewith, provided that the area of any one side of such sign shall not
exceed six square feet, provided that not more than one such sign shall be
erected on any one street frontage of any property in single and separate
ownership.
   C.   Business or commercial sign on the same lot as the use to which it
refers, subject to the following regulations:
      (1)   One or more business signs of the following types, not to exceed a
total of 35 square feet or 12 feet in height for each side of a building ,
which faces a street or a parking lot, located on the same property.
         (a)   Identification sign .
         (b)   Awning sign .
         (c)   Marquee sign .
         (d)   Parallel wall sign .
         (e)   Permanent window sign .
         (f)   Projecting sign .
      (2)   At gasoline stations, one additional freestanding sign per street
frontage shall be allowed for advertising gas prices only, not to exceed 16
square feet.
      (3)   Temporary special event signs , banners, portable signs or
commemorative flags for businesses announcing a grand opening, going out of
business sale or other special promotional event.
   D.   In an SC Shopping Center District, and in a CR Commercial Retail
District on a lot that is five acres or larger containing multiple commercial
uses , in addition to signs permitted for individual establishments, there
shall be permitted one freestanding sign or one parallel wall sign indicating
the name of the shopping center on up to two street frontages providing access
to the development , provided:
      (1)   As to any such sign , the sign area shall not exceed 75 square feet
and the sign height shall not exceed 25 feet.
      (2)   One monument sign may be substituted for a freestanding sign ,
provided the sign area does not exceed 75 square feet and the sign height does
not exceed 6 feet.
      (3)   Street address numbers. Just below or at the bottom of the primary
body of every sign on a street frontage, the property’s street address numbers
shall be displayed. Lettering shall have a minimum height of 6 inches and be
legible from the centerline of the adjacent street .
[Amended 4-10-2012 by Ord. No. 12-1257]
§ 255-155.   EC Employment Center District and GFW Greater Fort Washington
District.
[Amended 5-10-2011 by Ord. No. 11-1238, §4; 5-14-2019 by Ord. No. 19-1351, §§6,
7]
   A.   In the EC Employment Center District and the GFW Greater Fort
Washington District, for all uses other than those permitted under §
255-102(C) and §
255-295(E), Highway and Interchange Uses, the following signs shall be
permitted and no other: [Amended 5-14-2019 by Ord. No. 19-1351, §6]
   (1)   Any sign permitted in any other district, provided that the use to
which it refers is permitted in the EC Employment Center District or the GFW
Greater Fort Washington District and is conducted on the same lot where the
sign is located. [Amended 5-14-2019 by Ord. No. 19-1351, §6]
      (2)   For any commercial, industrial or office use , a maximum of two
business signs are permitted, provided that the sign area of each sign shall
not exceed 200 square feet or the sign height exceed 10 feet.
      (3)   Freestanding off-premises signs are permitted as a special
exception pursuant to the special exception regulations of this article and the
following:
         (a)   If the provisions with respect to location, use , size or height
of signs are more restrictive in the Building Code adopted by Upper Dublin
Township or any state or federal statute or regulation, those restrictions
shall take precedence over the regulations and restrictions set forth in this
article.
         (b)   A freestanding off-premises sign shall be single-faced but may
have two back-to- back advertising surfaces. However, both surfaces shall be
the same size and shape, the total length of the sign structure shall not
exceed 50 feet, and the sign height shall not exceed 35 feet, with a total copy
area not exceeding 675 square feet.
         (c)   Freestanding off-premises signs having a sign area greater than
25 square feet shall be located only adjacent to a limited access highway on
property having frontage on a limited access highway, at a distance of not less
than 25 feet from the ultimate right-of-way , and at a distance of not less
than 100 feet from any property line. Freestanding off-premises signs having a
sign area of 25 square feet or less shall be located no less than 50 feet from
the ultimate right-of-way of any public street , and at a distance of not less
than 100 feet from any property line.
         (d)   Except for freestanding off-premises signs having a sign area of
25 square feet or less, an open space of not less than four feet shall be
maintained between the lower edge of the freestanding off-premises sign display
surface and the ground
         (e)   No portion of the supporting structure shall be visible above
any advertising display area.
         (f)   No freestanding off-premises sign shall be located closer than
750 feet to the nearest freestanding off-premises sign on the same side of the
highway, regardless of the size of the sign .
         (g)   No freestanding off-premises sign shall be allowed within 500
feet of a public or private elementary, middle or high school , religious
institution or single-family residential zoning district.
         (h)   All freestanding off-premises signs shall be erected on
permanent footings or support structures designed by a registered structural
engineer.
         (i)   The owner or applicant, at his sole expense, will remove any
freestanding off-premises sign if the sign remains without bona fide
advertisement, which shall not include rental of the sign space, for 90 days,
or if the right to use the property has expired for any reason whatsoever.
         (j)   On a lot where an off-premises sign is erected, no more than two
signs of any type shall be permitted.
         (k)   Except for freestanding off-premises signs having a sign area of
25 square feet or less, externally illuminated signs shall be lighted by
fixtures mounted at the bottom of the sign and aimed upward. The lighting of
all freestanding off-premises signs shall be automatically extinguished between
the hours of 11:00 p m and dawn and shall be so designed or fitted with
fixtures to concentrate the light output onto and not beyond the sign .
   B.   In the EC Employment Center District and the GFW Greater Fort
Washington District, for any freestanding retail sales use permitted under §
255-102(C) and §
255-295(E), Highway and Interchange Uses, the following signs, and no others,
shall be permitted: [Amended 5-14-2019 by Ord. No. 19-1351, §7]
      (1)   A maximum of one freestanding sign may be installed to be visible
for motorists traveling on limited access highways not exceeding 200 square
feet or a measured height of 20 feet.
         (a)   In determining this freestanding sign ’s regulated height the
measurement shall begin as if the base of the support pole was at the same
elevation as the edge of the travel lane on the limited access highway closest
to the subject property.
            [1]   For example, if the ground where the freestanding sign is
placed is 15 feet below the elevation of the closest travel lane, then the
actual height of the freestanding sign may not exceed 35 feet.
            [2]   Or, for example, if the ground where the freestanding sign is
placed is five feet above the elevation of the closest travel lane, then the
actual height of the freestanding sign may not exceed 15 feet.
            [3]   In no case may the actual height of this freestanding sign
exceed 40 feet.
         (b)   The support pole for the sign may be no further than 20 feet
from the property line abutting the limited access highway or, if applicable,
the interchange access ramp.
         (c)   The name of the retail use shall be shown on the sign . Fuel
prices, if that use is provided, may be noted on the sign and presented
digitally.
      (2)   A maximum of one freestanding sign may be installed to be visible
to motorist traveling on adjacent local roads not exceeding 35 square feet nor
a height of 15 feet.
         (a)   The name of the retail use shall be shown on the sign . Fuel
prices, if that use is provided, may be noted on the sign and presented
digitally.
         (b)   The sign may be located no closer than 15 feet to the property
line abutting the local roads or, if applicable, the interchange access ramp.
      (3)   A maximum of two wall signs , neither of which shall exceed 35
square feet.
         (a)   If the principal building upon which the wall sign is affixed is
further from the local road than the minimum front yard setback, then the size
of that wall sign may be increased one square foot for each additional five
feet the building is set back from the front yard setback.
      (4)   If canopies are provided over fueling positions, then there may be
a maximum of two signs displayed on each canopy, neither sign may exceed 15
square feet.
      (5)   A maximum of two directional signs may be provided at each
vehicular entrance. No individual sign may exceed two square feet.
      (6)   Fuel pump informational signs may be provided at each dispensing
point provided each sign is double faced and does not exceed two square feet.
      (7)   All signs may be internally illuminated, subject to all applicable
Township standards.
§ 255-155.1.   M Motel - Motor Inn - Motor Lodge Districts.
In M Motel - Motor Inn - Motor Lodge Districts, the following signs shall be
permitted and no other:
   A.   A sign shall relate to a use located on the lot . No more than five
signs shall be permitted on a lot .
   B.   Freestanding signs . Not more than one freestanding sign shall be
permitted on each street or controlled highway frontage, provided the total
area of all freestanding signs shall not exceed 200 square feet. No
freestanding sign shall exceed 35 feet in height.
   C.   No sign other than a freestanding sign may exceed 35 square feet.
§ 255-155.2.   OC Office Center Districts.
In OC Office Center Districts, the following signs shall be permitted and no
other:
   A.   Signs permitted in §
255-152.2 of this article.
   B.   A sign shall relate to the use located on the lot .
   C.   One freestanding sign shall be permitted for each access driveway from
a public street .
   D.   One parallel wall sign shall be permitted for each building .
   E.   One freestanding sign or one parallel wall sign shall be permitted for
each controlled highway frontage.
   F.   One freestanding directory sign for personal service and/or
convenience-type commercial facilities as allowed in this section shall be
permitted.
   G.   No sign in excess of 10 feet in height, 50 feet in length or 200 square
feet in size shall be permitted.
   H.   In conjunction with a Mixed Use Development any combination of the
following types of signs shall be permitted:
      (1)   Freestanding signs . One freestanding sign shall be permitted for
every 450 feet of property frontage along Welsh Road. Such freestanding signs
shall be of a complimentary architectural style to the buildings of the Mixed
Use Development , shall not exceed 25 feet in height, nor contain more than 200
square feet of sign area per side (maximum two sides).
      (2)   Monument signs . One monument sign shall be permitted for every 500
feet of property frontage along Dreshertown Road. Such monument signs shall be
of a complimentary architectural style to the buildings of the Mixed Use
Development , shall not exceed six feet in height, nor contain more than 120
square feet of sign area per side (maximum two sides).
      (3)   Wall signs .
         (a)   Individual retail or commercial establishments within a Mixed
Use Development shall be permitted signs on each exterior wall facing a public
street or a private street or driveway. Such signs shall not exceed 10% of the
facade on which the signs are located or 200 square feet, whichever is less.
         (b)   Residential identification signage shall be permitted on each
exterior wall facing a public street or private street or driveway. Such
identification signage shall not exceed two hundred square feet per facade.
      (4)   Directional signs . Directional signs within the Mixed Use
Development shall be permitted, either freestanding or building mounted. Such
signs may contain the names of specific tenants as well as other public
information to direct both pedestrians and motorists through the site to the
location of various uses including but not limited to general tenant parking
areas, residential parking structures, parks, exits and entrances to the
development . Signs shall be sized appropriately to be visible to pedestrians,
motorist or both depending on location, but in no event shall any one sign be
larger than 32 square feet in area. The total number of directional signs and
their location shall be determined by the Board of Commissioners.
      (5)   Project identification signs. Project identification signs
containing the project name or other identifying feature, but no other tenant
advertising shall be permitted within the development which also may be visible
outside the development. Such signage shall be of a complimentary style to the
development and shall be no larger than 200 square feet in area. The total
number of project identification signs and their location shall be determined
by the Board of Commissioners. [Added 12-6-2016 by Ord. No. 16-1326]
§ 255-156.   Nonconforming signs.
   A.   Signs legally in existence at the time of the adoption of this article
that do not conform to the requirements of this article shall be considered
nonconforming  signs .
   B.   All such nonconforming  signs shall be removed or altered so as to be
in conformity with the standards contained in this Code at such time when:
      (1)   Upper Dublin Township approves an application for a sign  permit in
cases where more than 50% of the structure of the nonconforming  sign is to be
significantly altered. Changes to the sign copy or the replacement of a sign
panel of an existing establishment's nonconforming  sign shall not be
considered a significant alteration. If more than 50% of the structure of a
sign is damaged, it shall be repaired to conform to this article.
      (2)   An application requiring municipal review and approval for a
subdivision or land development is submitted for property on which the
nonconforming  sign is located.
   C.   To determine the legal status of existing signs , in each of the two
cases listed in §
255-156B, the applicant shall submit the following information to the Township
Director of Code Enforcement:
      (1)   Type(s) of existing sign (s) located on the property.
      (2)   The area and height of all signs .
      (3)   For freestanding signs , the distance the outer most portion of the
sign is set back from the curbline or shoulder.
      (4)   Type of sign illumination.
      (5)   The material of which the sign is constructed.
      (6)   The building length along public street frontage.
   D.   Prior to the events listed in §
255-156B, nonconforming  signs may be repainted, repaired up to 50% of the
structure of the sign , the sign copy may be changed or sign panels may be
replaced, provided that such actions do not increase the dimensions of the
existing sign nor in any way increase the extent of the sign's nonconformity.
   E.   Under the following conditions, nonconforming  signs shall be exempt
from the provisions of §
255-156B:
      (1)   The nonconforming  sign possesses documented historic value.
      (2)   The nonconforming  sign is of an unique nature or type by virtue of
its architectural value or design.
§ 255-157.   (Reserved)
§ 255-158.   (Reserved)
§ 255-159.   (Reserved)
ARTICLE XXII
Floodplain Conservation District
[Added 2-9-2016 by Ord. No. 16-1313]
§ 255-160.   Intent.
   A.   In addition to the purpose and statement of community development
objectives found in Article I, §
255-2, of this chapter, the specific intent of the Floodplain Conservation
District shall be to:
      (1)   Protect areas of the floodplain necessary to contain floodwaters.
      (2)   Permit only those uses in the floodplain that are compatible with
preserving natural conditions and stream flow.
      (3)   Promote the general safety, health and welfare of the Township by
regulating development in areas prone to flooding.
      (4)   Encourage the utilization of appropriate construction practices in
order to prevent or minimize flood damage in the future.
      (5)   Minimize danger to public health and safety by protecting water
supply and natural drainage.
      (6)   Reduce financial burdens imposed on the Township, its governmental
units, and its residents, by preventing excessive development in areas subject
to flooding.
      (7)   Comply with federal and state floodplain management requirements.
   B.   In light of the Township’s certification as eligible for federal flood
insurance, it is the intent of the Floodplain Conservation District to provide
adequate protection for flood -prone properties within Upper Dublin Township.
In advancing these principles and the general purpose of this chapter, the
following shall be the specific objectives of the Floodplain Conservation
District:
      (1)   Combine with present zoning requirements, certain restrictions made
necessary for flood -prone areas to promote the general health, safety and
welfare and safety of the Township.
      (2)   Prevent the erection of structures in areas subject to flooding to
minimize danger from flooding, unsanitary conditions, or other hazards.
      (3)   Minimize danger to public health and safety by protecting the
quality and quantity of surface and subsurface water supplies adjacent to and
underlying areas subject to flooding and to promote safe and sanitary drainage.
      (4)   Permit only those uses which can be appropriately located in a
floodplain area as herein defined and which will not impede the flow or storage
of floodwaters or otherwise cause danger to life and property at, above or
below their locations along the floodplain .
      (5)   Protect adjacent landowners and those both upstream and downstream
from damages resulting from development within a floodplain and the consequent
obstruction or increase in flow of floodwaters.
      (6)   Protect the entire Township from individual uses of land in a
floodplain area which may have an effect upon subsequent expenditures for
public works and disaster relief and adversely affect the economic well-being
of the Township.
      (7)   Protect those elements of the natural environment, including
wildlife, vegetation and marine life, dependent upon watercourses and water
areas.
      (8)   Protect other municipalities within the same watershed from the
impact of improper development and the consequent increased potential for
flooding.
      (9)   Provide areas for the deposition of flood -borne sediment.
      (10)   Require that uses vulnerable to floods be developed so as to be
protected from flood damage in accordance with the requirements of the Federal
Flood Insurance Program.
§ 255-161.   Overlay district.
   A.   The Floodplain Conservation District (also referred to as “Floodplain
District”) as defined and described by this chapter shall be deemed an overlay
district where applicable on any zoning district now or hereafter delineated on
the Township Zoning Map.
   B.   Should the Floodplain Conservation District (“FCD”) be declared
inapplicable to any parcel of land by reason of action by the Township Zoning
Officer, the Zoning Hearing Board, or any court of competent jurisdiction, the
zoning applicable to such parcel shall be deemed to be the district in which
the parcel is located, without consideration of the Floodplain Conservation
District.
   C.   Should the zoning of any parcel or any part thereof over which the
Floodplain Conservation District is located be changed through any legislative
or administrative actions or judicial discretion, such change shall have no
effect on the Floodplain Conservation District unless such change was made with
respect to the Floodplain Conservation District.
   D.   It shall be unlawful for any person , partnership, business or
corporation to undertake, or cause to be undertaken, any construction or
development anywhere within Upper Dublin Township unless the proposed work has
been reviewed for compliance by the Floodplain Administrator.
   E.   A compliance review shall not be required for minor repairs to existing
buildings or structures .
§ 255-162.   Establishment; boundaries.
[Amended 7-13-2021 by Ord. No. 21-1371, § 2]
   A.   The Floodplain Conservation District is established as those areas of
the Township subject to flooding as defined in the following enumerated
subsections, with the most extensive of those areas described in the following
subsections determining the outermost boundary of the Floodplain Conservation
District:
      (1)   Floodplain Area. Those areas of the Township classified as Special
Flood Hazard Areas (SFHAs) and subject to inundation by the waters of the one-
hundred-year flood as identified in the Flood Insurance Study (FIS) and
delineated on the accompanying Flood Insurance Rate Maps (FIRMs) for Upper
Dublin Township and Montgomery County, Pennsylvania, dated March 2, 2016,
prepared by the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA), and all subsequent
revisions thereto, including all digital data developed as part of the Flood
Insurance Study (FIS) . Said floodplain areas shall be comprised of
subdistricts as follows:
         (a)   Floodway (FW). That portion of the Floodplain Conservation
District identified as “Floodway” in the AE Zone in the Flood Insurance Study
prepared by FEMA. The Floodway Area shall be those areas identified as Floodway
on the FIRM as well as those floodway areas which have been identified in other
available studies or sources of information for those special floodplain areas
where no floodway has been identified in the FIS. The floodway represents the
channel of a watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be preserved to
discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface
elevation by more than one foot at any point.
            (i)   Within any floodway area, no encroachments, including fill,
new construction , substantial improvements , or other development shall be
permitted unless it has been demonstrated through hydrologic and hydraulic
analysis performed in accordance with standard engineering practice that the
proposed encroachment would not result in any increase in flood levels within
the community during the occurrence of the base flood discharge.
            (ii)   Within any floodway area, no new construction or development
shall be allowed unless a permit is obtained from the Pennsylvania Department
of Environmental Protection.
         (b)   Floodway Fringe (FF). Those portions of land within the
Floodplain Conservation District subject to inundation by the 100-year flood ,
lying beyond the floodway in areas where detailed study data and profiles are
available.
         (c)   Approximated Floodplain (FA). Those portions of land within the
Floodplain Conservation District subject to inundation by the 100-year flood ,
where a detailed study has not been performed, but where a 100-year floodplain
boundary has been approximated. When available, information from other federal,
state and other acceptable sources shall be used to determine the 100-year-
flood elevation, as well as a floodway area, if possible. When no other
information is available, the 100-year elevation shall be determined by using a
point on the boundary of the identified floodplain area which is nearest the
construction site in question.
      (2)   The AE Area/District without floodway consists of those areas
identified as an AE Zone on the FIRM included in the FIS prepared by FEMA and
for which base flood elevations have been provided in the FIS but no floodway
has been delineated.
         (a)   In the AE Area/District without floodway , no new construction ,
development , use or activity shall be permitted unless it can be demonstrated
that the cumulative effect of all past and projected development will not
increase the Base Flood Elevation (BFE) by more than one foot.
         (b)   No permit shall be granted for any construction , development ,
use , or activity within any AE Area/District without floodway unless it is
demonstrated that the cumulative effect of the proposed development would not,
together with all other existing and anticipated development , increase the BFE
more than one foot.
         (c)   No new construction or development shall be located within the
area measured 50 feet landward from the top-of-bank of any watercourse , unless
the appropriate permits are obtained from the Pennsylvania Department of
Environmental Protection.
      (3)   The A Area/District shall be the areas identified as an A Zone on
the FIRM included in the FIS prepared by FEMA and for which no 1% annual chance
flood elevations have been provided. For these areas, elevation and floodway
information from other federal, state, or other acceptable source shall be used
when available. Where other acceptable information is not available, the
elevation shall be determined by using the elevation of a point on the boundary
of the Floodplain Conservation District which is nearest the construction site.
      (4)   The Shallow Flooding Area District shall be those areas identified
as Zones AO and AH on the FIRM and in the FIS. These areas are subject to
inundation by 1%-annual chance of shallow flooding where average depths are
between one and three feet. In Zones AO and AH, drainage paths shall be
established to guide floodwaters around and away from structures on slopes.
      (5)   Areas containing soils with a frequency of flooding of 1% or
greater per year, as determined by the Natural Resources Conservation Service,
United States Department of Agriculture Web-Based Soil Survey (available online
at http://websoilsurvey.nrcs.usda.gov), including the following soils:
         (a)   Bowmansville-Knauers (Bo)
         (b)   Buckingham Silt Loam (BwA)
         (c)   Cordorus (Ch)
         (d)   Hatboro (Ha)
         (e)   Rowland (Rt)
         (f)   Rowland (RwA)
         (g)   Rowland (RwB)
         (h)   Urban Land (UgB)
      (6)   Areas containing hydric soils as determined by the following Hydric
Soil Boundary Short Procedure. A landowner, upon executing an agreement with
the Township Board of Commissioners, may submit detailed soil profiles and a
report to the Township Engineer for purposes of determining hydric soil
classification and the boundary of the Floodplain Conservation District. If the
Township Engineer and the landowner agree that the site specific information
supplied by the landowner indicates an accurate classification of the soils,
then the Township Board of Commissioners will accept the extent of hydric soil
as the boundary of the Floodplain Conversation District if not in conflict with
the Floodplain Area and the Community Identified Flood Hazard Areas.
      (7)   Community Identified Flood Hazard Areas shall be those areas where
Upper Dublin Township has identified local flood hazard or ponding areas, as
delineated and adopted on a “Local Flood Hazard Map” using best available
topographic data and locally derived information such as floods of record,
historic high water marks, soils or approximate study methodologies.
      (8)   Areas not reflected above, but which may be subject to inundation.
These areas shall be identified by field survey and by hydrologic and hydraulic
calculation and shall be subject to the review and approval of the Township
Engineer, who shall make the determination as to the outermost boundary.
Hydrologic and hydraulic analyses shall be undertaken only by professional
engineers or others of demonstrated qualifications, who shall certify that the
technical methods used correctly reflect currently accepted technical concepts.
Studies, analyses, computations, etc., shall be submitted in sufficient detail
to allow a thorough technical review by the Township.
   B.   The boundaries of the Floodplain Conservation District may be revised
or modified by the Board of Commissioners from time to time upon recommendation
by the Township Engineer after application and presentation of detailed
engineering studies where studies or information provided by a qualified agency
or person documents the need for such revision. However, prior to any such
change, approval must be obtained from FEMA. Additionally, as soon as
practicable, but not later than six months after the date such information
becomes available, the Township will notify FEMA of the changes by submitting
technical or scientific data.
   C.   The Flood Insurance Studies (FISs) used to establish the boundaries of
the Floodplain Conservation District and the Flood Insurance Rate Maps (FIRMs)
will be available in the Township Municipal Building for review and reference.
    D.   Whenever there is a difference between any map setting forth the
Floodplain Conservation District or a portion thereof and the data contained in
the studies, the data contained in the studies shall determine the boundary of
the Floodplain Conservation District.
§ 255-163.   Boundary disputes.
   A.   Should a dispute with respect to the boundaries of the Floodplain
Conservation District arise, an initial determination of the boundaries shall
be made by the Township Zoning Officer after review and comment on the boundary
dispute by the Township Engineer.
   B.   Any party aggrieved by a decision of the Township Zoning Officer as to
the boundaries of the Floodplain Conservation District may appeal the decision
to the Zoning Hearing Board as provided by this chapter. The burden of proof in
such an appeal shall be on the appellant.
   C.   Insofar as various natural conditions, including the Floodplain
Conservation District, may change, such changes may be determined by detailed
on-site survey techniques and hydrologic and hydraulic studies. The Zoning
Hearing Board shall determine whether a proposed use is within the Floodplain
Conservation District upon appeal from a decision of the Township Zoning
Officer. The Zoning Hearing Board may consider the findings of a detailed on-
site survey and hydrologic and hydraulic studies presented by the landowner
and/or applicant, and other evidence presented by the landowner and/or
applicant and other parties recognized by the Zoning Hearing Board who may
support or oppose the decision of the Township Zoning Officer.
   D.   All changes to the boundaries of the Floodplain Conservation District
are subject to the review and approval of the Federal Insurance Administrator.
§ 255-164.   Permitted uses.
   A.   The following uses shall be permitted in the Floodplain Conservation
District provided disturbance to any existing woodlands and degradation of
water quality are minimized to the greatest extent practicable:
      (1)   Agricultural uses conducted in compliance with methods prescribed
in the latest version of the Department of Environmental Protection’s Erosion
and Sediment Pollution Control Manual.
      (2)   Agricultural crossings by farm vehicles and livestock.
      (3)   Open space uses that are primarily passive in character, including
wildlife sanctuary, woodland preserve, arboretum; and passive recreation use or
parks, including hiking, bicycle or bridle trails, but excluding facilities
subject to damage by flooding.
      (4)   Forestry, lumbering and reforestation in accordance with recognized
natural resource conservation practices and subject to review by the Montgomery
County Conservation District.
      (5)   Utility transmission lines, including public sewer and/or water
lines and public utility transmission lines running along the corridor with
review and comment by the Township Engineer, and approval by the Township
Zoning Officer based on a determination of minimal to no disturbance to
existing woodlands and minimal to no degradation of water quality.
      (6)   Sealed public water supply wells with review and comment by the
Township Engineer, and approval by the Township Zoning Officer based on a
determination of minimal to no disturbance to existing woodlands and minimal to
no degradation of water quality.
      (7)   Maintenance, testing, repair, rehabilitation or replacement of
existing, currently serviceable, water obstructions or encroachments, including
bridges and culverts, subject to review by the Township Engineer and approval
by the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection.
      (8)   Front, side or rear yards and required lot area for any district,
provided that such yards are not to be used for on-site sewage disposal systems
or for nonwire fences or any other structure ; however, no more than half of
any required yard setback area on a lot may extend into the Floodplain
Conservation District.
      (9)   Roadways serving as corridor crossings, and recreational trails.
   B.   All permitted uses are subject to applicable fioodproofing regulations.
§ 255-165.   Prohibited uses.
   A.   Any use or activity not specifically permitted herein shall be
prohibited within the Floodplain Conservation District.
   B.   The following uses and activities are specifically prohibited in the
Floodplain Conservation District and no variance shall be granted because the
uses and activities have been identified as being dangerous to human life or
posing a special hazard in a floodplain :
      (1)   Any new or substantially improved structure intended for the
production or storage of any of the following dangerous materials or
substances, or which will be used for any activity requiring the maintenance of
more than 55 gallons or other comparable volume of any of the following
dangerous materials or substances on the premises:
         (a)   Acetone.
         (b)   Ammonia.
         (c)   Calcium carbide.
         (d)   Benzene.
         (e)   Carbon disulfide.
         (f)   Celluloid.
         (g)   Chlorine.
         (h)   Hydrochloric acid.
         (i)   Hydrocyanic acid.
         (j)   Magnesium.
         (k)   Nitric acid and oxides of nitrogen.
         (l)   Petroleum products (gasoline, fuel oil, etc.).
         (m)   Phosphorus.
         (n)   Potassium.
         (o)   Sodium.
         (p)   Sulphur and sulphur products.
         (q)   Pesticides (including insecticides, fungicides and
rodenticides).
         (r)   Radioactive substances, insofar as such substances are not
otherwise regulated.
      (2)   The construction , enlargement or expansion of any structure used
or intended to be used for any of the following:
         (a)   Hospital.
         (b)   Nursing home.
         (c)   Jail or prison.
         (d)   School .
      (3)   The construction , enlargement or expansion of any sanitary
landfill, dump, junkyard , or outdoor storage of vehicles and materials.
      (4)   The commencement of or any construction of a new manufactured home
park or manufactured home subdivision , or a substantial improvement to an
existing manufactured home park or manufactured home subdivision .
      (5)   On-site sewage disposal systems.
      (6)   Any construction , development , use or activity that has the
potential to trap or catch debris and exacerbate flood events.
      (7)   Any construction , development , use or activity within any
floodway that would cause any increase in the base flood elevation (BFE) .
      (8)   Any construction , development , use or activity within any AE
Area/District without floodway that would, together with all other existing and
anticipated development , increase the base flood elevation (BFE) more than one
foot at any point.
   C.   The following uses are specifically prohibited in the Floodplain
Conservation District although a variance may be granted by the Zoning Hearing
Board for any of these uses in accordance with the requirements and provisions
of this chapter and Pennsylvania law; and upon review and comment on the
variance application by the Township Planning Commission and the Township
Engineer.
      (1)   Construction , enlargement or expansion of all freestanding
structures and buildings , with the exception of flood retention dams, culverts
and bridges as approved by the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental
Protection.
      (2)   The alteration or relocation of the course of flow of any
watercourse , with the exception of stream channel improvements approved by the
Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection and the Township Board of
Commissioners through conditional use approval. A variance may be granted by
the Zoning Hearing Board to alter or relocate a watercourse after review and
comment on the variance application by the Township Planning Commission and the
Township Engineer, and the approval of the alteration or relocation by the
Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection and any other governmental
agency with applicable jurisdiction. In addition, all adjacent municipalities
shall be notified prior to the alteration or relocation of a watercourse .
Copies of such notification shall be sent to the Federal Insurance
Administration. The flood -carrying capacity within the altered or relocated
portion shall be maintained.
      (3)   Private water supply wells.
      (4)   Placement of fill, including the deposit of topsoil and the grading
thereof; excavation of soil and rock; grading or regrading of land; and the
construction of retaining walls. A variance application for such use shall be
accompanied by a plan indicating the fill or material proposed to be deposited
and how such fill or other materials will be protected against erosion by the
use of riprap, vegetation or bulkheads.
      (5)   Encroachment upon any watercourse , with the exception of dams,
bridges and culverts as approved by the Pennsylvania Department of
Environmental Protection and the Board of Commissioners through conditional use
approval.
      (6)   Clearing of all existing vegetation, except where such clearing is
necessary to prepare land for an approved use and where the effects of these
actions are mitigated by the establishment of cover vegetation.
      (7)   Application of fertilizers, pesticides, herbicides, and/or other
chemicals in excess of prescribed industry standards.
      (8)   Roads or driveways, except where permitted as corridor crossings
and for access to single-family detached dwelling units .
      (9)   More than half of any required yard setback area on an individual
residential lot .
      (10)   Motor or wheeled vehicle traffic in any area not designed to
adequately accommodate the type and volume of traffic.
      (11)   Parking lots.
      (12)   Subsurface sewage disposal areas.
      (13)   Sod farming.
      (14)   Storm water management facilities.
§ 255-166.   Conditional uses.
   A.   The following conditional uses in the Floodplain Conservation District
may be approved by the Board of Commissioners upon application, review and
comment by the Township Engineer, and hearing:
      (1)   Game farm, fish hatchery or hunting and fishing preserve for the
protection or propagation of wildlife, but permitting no buildings .
      (2)   Commercial recreation use , whether open to the public or
restricted to private membership, such as parks, camps, picnic areas, golf
courses, fishing, sport or boating clubs ; but not to include buildings , but
permitting piers, docks, floats or shelters usually found in developed outdoor
recreation areas.
      (3)   Storm sewers subject to the applicable floodproofing regulations.
      (4)   Outlet installations for sewage treatment plants and sewage pumping
stations, with the approval of the appropriate sewer authorities.
      (5)   Dams, bridges and culverts as approved by the Pennsylvania
Department of Environmental Protection.
      (6)   Stream channel improvements approved by the Pennsylvania Department
of Environmental Protection.
      (7)   Driveways serving single-family detached dwelling units .
      (8)   Wind energy facilities and solar energy facilities when permitted
by the underlying zoning district, and when situated outside of the Floodway ,
and subject to applicable floodproofing measures.
      (9)   Development of elevated and floodproofed structures on sites which
have received final approval of a remedial action plan by the Pennsylvania
Department of Environmental Protection pursuant to requirements of the Land
Recycling and Remediation Standards Act (Act 2 of 1995), 35 P.S. § 6026.101 et
seq. and, to the extent applicable, are in compliance with the Uniform
Environmental Covenants Act (Act 68 of 2007), 27 P.S. § 6501, et seq.
   B.   Other uses similar to the above.
§ 255-167.   Application zoning permit, conditional use, or variance.
   A.   Zoning permits .
      (1)   In the Floodplain Conservation District, a zoning permit shall be
required for any new or change of land use , including but not limited to
construction or alteration of buildings and structures for which a building
 permit is required, subdivision and land development , streets and other
paving, utilities, mining, dredging, filling, grading, excavating or drilling
operations, and the storage of materials and equipment.
      (2)   A zoning permit may be issued in the form of a building  permit ,
use and occupancy permit , zoning certification, or other final approval as
determined by the Zoning Officer.
   B.   Application for a zoning permit :
      (1)   Application for a zoning permit shall be filed with the Zoning
Officer, who shall make an initial determination with respect to the
application and whether a variance or conditional use approval is required. If
a variance or conditional use approval is required, then the Zoning Officer
will provide the applicant with a determination of the zoning relief required
and advise the applicant of the following requirements:
         (a)   An application for a variance shall be forwarded to the Zoning
Hearing Board, along with required studies or information and the findings of
the Zoning Officer.
         (b)   An application for a conditional use approval shall be forwarded
to the Board of Commissioners, along with required studies or information and
the findings of the Zoning Officer.
      (2)   The Township Zoning Officer and Building Code Official shall review
applications and may consult with the Township Engineer to determine if all
other necessary governmental permits such as those required by state and
federal laws have been obtained.
   C.   Content of application for a zoning permit .
      (1)   Applications shall include five copies of all required information
plus any other pertinent information as may be required by the Zoning Officer.
      (2)   Applications shall be made on forms supplied by the Township and
shall contain the following:
         (a)   Name and address of applicant.
          (b)   Name and address of owner of land on which proposed
construction is to occur.
         (c)   Name and address of contractor.
         (d)   Site location including address.
         (e)   Listing of other permits or relief required.
         (f)   Brief description of proposed work and estimated cost, including
a breakout of flood -related cost and the market value of the building before
flood damage occurred as applicable.
      (3)   If any proposed construction or development is located entirely or
partially within the Floodplain Conservation District, applicants shall provide
all the necessary information in sufficient detail and clarity to enable the
Zoning Officer to determine that:
         (a)   The proposed use is consistent with the need to minimize flood
damage and conform with the requirements of this and all other applicable laws
and regulations.
         (b)   Utilities and facilities, such as sewer, gas, electrical and
water systems are located and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood
damage.
         (c)   Adequate drainage is provided so as to reduce exposure to flood
hazards.
         (d)   Structures will be anchored to prevent floatation, collapse, or
lateral movement.
         (e)   Building materials are flood -resistant.
         (f)   Appropriate practices to minimize flood damage have been used.
         (g)   Electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, air conditioning
equipment, and other service facilities have been designed and/or located to
prevent water entry or accumulation.
      (4)   Applications shall include a plan of the entire site, clearly and
legibly drawn at a scale of one inch being equal to 50 feet or less, showing
the following:
         (a)   North arrow, scale, and date.
         (b)   Topographic contour lines based upon the North American Vertical
Datum (NAVD) of 1988, showing existing and proposed contours at intervals of
one foot.
         (c)   For all watercourses , the centerline and bottom of stream and
top of bank elevations.
         (d)   The location the finish floor elevation of all existing and
proposed buildings , structures , and other improvements , including the
location of any existing or proposed subdivision and development , and
including all property and lot lines including dimensions, and the size and the
site expressed in acres or square feet.
         (e)   The location and elevation of all existing streets , drives, and
other access ways, and the location of all existing streets , drives, other
access ways, and parking areas, with information concerning widths, pavement
types and construction , and elevations.
         (f)   The location and elevation of any existing bodies of water or
watercourses , buildings , structures and other public or private facilities,
including railroad tracks and facilities, and any other natural and man-made
features affecting, or affected by, the proposed activity or development .
         (g)   The location and elevation of the Floodplain Conservation
District boundaries, information and spot elevations concerning the base flood
elevation , and information concerning the flow of water including direction
and velocities.
         (h)   The location and elevation of all proposed buildings ,
structures , utilities, and any other improvements .
         (i)   Any other information which the Township considers necessary for
adequate review of the application, including but not limited to site cross
sections.
      (5)   Applications shall include plans of all proposed buildings ,
structures and other improvements , drawn at a scale of one inch being equal to
50 feet or less showing the following:
         (a)   The proposed lowest floor elevation of any proposed building
based upon North American Vertical Datum of 1988.
         (b)   The elevation of the base flood .
         (c)   Supplemental information as may be necessary under the Uniform
Construction Code .
         (d)   Sufficiently detailed architectural or engineering drawings,
including floor plans, sections, and exterior building elevations, as
appropriate.
         (e)   For any proposed building , the elevation of the lowest floor
(including basement ) and, as required, the elevation of any other floor.
         (f)   Complete information concerning flood depths, pressures,
velocities, impact and uplift forces, and other factors associated with the
base flood elevation .
         (g)   Detailed information concerning any proposed floodproofing
measures.
         (h)   Cross section drawings for all proposed streets , drives, other
access ways, and parking areas, showing all rights-of-way and pavement widths.
         (i)   Profile drawings for all proposed streets , drives, and
vehicular access ways including existing and proposed grades.
         (j)   Plans and profiles of all proposed sanitary and storm sewer
systems, water supply systems, and any other utilities and facilities.
      (6)   Applications shall include the following additional data and
documentation:
         (a)   When required by the Zoning Officer, information concerning
flood depths, pressures, velocities, impact and uplift forces and other factors
associated with a base flood elevation ; and detailed information concerning
any proposed floodproofing measures and corresponding elevations.
         (b)   Documentation, certified by a registered professional engineer
to show that the cumulative effect of any proposed development when combined
with all other existing and anticipated development , will not increase the
base flood elevation .
         (c)   Documentation, certified by a registered professional engineer
or architect, which states that the proposed construction or development has
been adequately designed to withstand the pressures, velocities, impact and
uplift forces associated with the base flood elevation . Such statement shall
include a description of the type and extent of flood proofing measures which
have been incorporated into the design of the structure and/or the development
.
   `      (d)   Detailed information needed to determine compliance with
safeguards with respect to development which may endanger human life,
including:
            (i)   The amount, location and purpose of any dangerous materials
or substances which are intended to be used, produced, stored or otherwise
maintained on site.
            (ii)   A description of the safeguards incorporated into the design
of the proposed structure to prevent leaks or spills of the dangerous materials
or substances during a base flood .
            (iii)   A statement, certified by a registered professional
engineer, which contains a complete and accurate description of the nature and
extent of pollution that might possibly occur from the development during the
course of a base flood elevation , including a statement concerning the effects
such pollution may have on human life.
            (iv)   A statement certified by a registered professional engineer,
which contains a complete and accurate description of the effects the proposed
development will have on base flood elevation elevations and flows.
            (v)   A statement, certified by a registered professional engineer,
which contains a complete and accurate description of the kinds and amounts of
any loose buoyant materials or debris that may possibly exist or be located on
the site below the base flood elevation and the effects such materials and
debris may have on base flood elevation elevations and flows.
            (vi)   Where any excavation or grading is proposed, a plan to
implement and maintain erosion and sedimentation control.
            (vii)   An evacuation plan which fully explains the manner in which
the site will be safely evacuated before or during the course of a base flood .
         (e)   The appropriate component of the Pennsylvania Department of
Environmental Protection’s “Planning Module for Land Development.”
         (f)   Where any excavation or grading is proposed, a plan meeting the
requirements of the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection to
implement and maintain erosion and sedimentation control.
      (7)   Applications shall be accompanied by the prescribed fee, payable to
the Township.
   D.   Conditional Use and Variances. In addition to the information required
for a zoning permit application, an application for conditional use approval or
a variance shall be accompanied by the following:
      (1)   Detailed engineering studies indicating the effects on drainage and
streams on all affected or adjacent properties as well as the subject property.
      (2)   An application for amending the boundaries of the Floodplain
Conservation District if the boundaries will be affected by the proposed
conditional use or variance.
      (3)   A FEMA Elevation Certificate with a determination of elevations of
the existing grade, proposed finished grade, base flood elevation and lowest
floor (including basement ) certified by a registered professional engineer.
§ 255-168.   Standards for conditional use or variance review and approval.
   A.   The Board of Commissioners or Zoning Hearing Board, as the case may be,
may request the review and recommendations of the Township Engineer, Upper
Dublin Township Planning Commission, Montgomery County Planning Commission,
and/or the Montgomery County Conservation District at least 30 days prior to
the hearing on the application for conditional use or variance.
   B.   The Board of Commissioners and Zoning Hearing Board shall exercise
discretion in allowing only those uses which are substantially in accord with
the stated intent of this chapter and Article. An applicant shall demonstrate
to the Board of Commissioners, in considering conditional uses , and the Zoning
Hearing Board, in considering variance applications, the following:
      (1)   The effect of the use shall not substantially alter the cross-
section profile of the watercourse and floodplain at the location of the
proposed use .
      (2)   Lands abutting the watercourse , both upstream and downstream,
shall not be unreasonably adversely affected by the proposed use .
      (3)   The general welfare or public interest of Upper Dublin Township or
other municipalities in the same watershed shall not be adversely affected.
      (4)   With respect to variance applications, the strict enforcement of
this Article would create undue hardship by denying a reasonable use of an
existing lot which is situated either wholly or partially in the Floodplain
Conservation District.
   C.   An affirmative decision shall not be issued by the Board of
Commissioners or the Zoning Hearing Board for an application within the
designated floodway unless the effect of such proposed activity on flood
heights is fully offset by accompanying stream improvements .
   D.   The Board of Commissioners or the Zoning Hearing Board shall notify the
applicant, in writing, that the issuance of a decision to allow construction of
a structure below the base flood elevation will result in increased premium
rates for flood insurance, and such construction below the base flood elevation
increases risk to life and property.
   E.   The Township shall maintain a record of all decisions and
notifications, including jurisdiction for their issuance and the Township shall
report such decisions to the appropriate agencies.
   F.   Elevation and floodproofing of structures .
      (1)   Any new structures permitted by conditional use or by variance
shall be constructed and placed on the land so as to offer the minimum
obstruction to the flow of water and shall be designed to have a minimum effect
upon the watercourse flow and base flood elevation . Such structures shall be
elevated in accordance with the provisions contained in this Article, and
Chapter 73, Building Construction, as amended.
      (2)   Any new structure permitted as a conditional use or by variance
shall be floodproofed in accordance with the provisions contained in this
Article, and
Chapter 73, Building Construction, as amended.
         (a)   All new structures shall be firmly anchored in accordance with
accepted engineering practices to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral
movement.
         (b)   All new structures shall be constructed so as to prevent the
entrance of floodwaters into the water supply and waste treatment systems as
well as other utility and facility systems. In addition, waste treatment
systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate discharges from the systems
into the floodwaters.
      (3)   Any additions to existing structures permitted as a conditional use
or by variance shall be elevated to the greatest extent possible according to
the provisions contained in this Article, and Chapter 73, Building
Construction, as amended. However, any portion of the structure not so elevated
shall be floodproofed in accordance with the provisions contained in this
Article, and
Chapter 73, Building Construction, as amended.
      (4)   Any new structure permitted as a conditional use or by variance
shall be provided with two means of access across the property to the structure
, one of which shall serve as an alternate vehicle access outside of the
Floodplain Conservation District.
      (5)   For any new structure permitted as a conditional use or by variance
shall have filed with the Township Fire Services Department and other
appropriate disaster preparedness authorities an evacuation plan indicating
alternate vehicular access to and escape routes from the structure .
§ 255-169.   Variances.
   A.   If compliance with the elevation or floodproofing requirements stated
in this chapter would result in an exceptional hardship for a prospective
builder, developer or landowner, the Zoning Hearing Board may, upon request,
grant relief from the strict application of the requirement. Relief issued
shall conform to the following conditions:
      (1)   If granted, a variance shall involve only the least modification
necessary to provide relief.
      (2)   In granting any variance, the Zoning Hearing Board shall attach
reasonable conditions and safeguards necessary to protect the public health,
safety, and welfare of the Township and to achieve the objectives of this
Article.
      (3)   Whenever a variance is granted, the Zoning Hearing Board shall
notify the applicant in writing that:
         (a)   The variance may result in increased premium rates for flood
insurance.
         (b)   The variance may increase risks to life and property.
      (4)   In considering any request for a variance, the Zoning Hearing Board
shall consider, at a minimum, the following:
         (a)   That there is good and sufficient cause for the variance,
including:
            (i)   That there are unique physical circumstances or conditions,
including irregularity, narrowness, or shallowness of lot size or shape, or
exceptional topographical or other physical conditions peculiar to the
particular property and that the unnecessary hardship is due to such conditions
and not the circumstances or conditions generally created by the provisions of
the zoning ordinance in the neighborhood or district in which the property is
located.
            (ii)   That because of such physical circumstances or conditions,
there is no possibility that the property can be developed in strict conformity
with the provisions of the zoning ordinance and that the authorization of a
variance is therefore necessary to enable the reasonable use of the property.
            (iii)   That such unnecessary hardship has not been created by the
appellant.
            (iv)   That the variance, if authorized, will not alter the
essential character of the neighborhood or district in which the property is
located, nor substantially or permanently impair the appropriate use or
development of adjacent property, nor be detrimental to the public welfare.
         (b)   That failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional
hardship to the applicant.
         (c)   That the granting of the variance will:
            (i)   Neither result in an unacceptable or prohibited increase in
flood heights, additional threats to public safety, or extraordinary public
expense;
            (ii)   Nor create nuisances, cause fraud on, or victimize the
public, or conflict with any other applicable state or local ordinances and
regulations.
      (5)   A complete record of all variance requests and related actions
shall be maintained by the Township. In addition, a report of all variances
granted shall be submitted as required by FEMA.
      (6)   Any new residential structure or substantial improvement of a
residential structure which cannot be elevated to two feet above the base flood
elevation shall be floodproofed as specified herein and in accordance with the
requirements established for the Wl-W2 classes by the Office of the Chief of
Engineers, United States Army, publication No. EP 1165 2 314, June, 1972, as
amended.
      (7)   Any modification, alteration, reconstruction or improvement of any
kind to an existing residential structure , to an extent or amount of less than
50% of its market value, which cannot be elevated or floodproofed to the base
flood elevation shall be elevated to the maximum extent possible or
floodproofed for the remaining height to the base flood elevation .
      (8)   Any new nonresidential structure or substantial improvement of a
nonresidential structure which cannot be elevated or floodproofed to at least
two feet above the base flood elevation shall be elevated to the maximum extent
possible or floodproofed for the remaining height to at least two feet above
the base flood elevation .
      (9)   Any modification, alteration, reconstruction or improvement of any
kind to an existing nonresidential structure , to an extent or amount of less
than 50% of its market value, which cannot be elevated or floodproofed to the
base flood elevation shall be elevated to the maximum extent possible and
floodproofed for the remaining height to the base flood elevation .
      (10)   Alteration or relocation of watercourse .
         (a)   No encroachment, alteration, or improvement of any kind shall be
made to any watercourse until all adjacent municipalities which may be affected
by such action have been notified by the Township, and until all required
permits or approvals have been first obtained from the Pennsylvania Department
of Environmental Protection.
         (b)   No encroachment, alteration, or improvement of any kind shall be
made to any watercourse unless it can be shown that the activity will not
reduce or impede the flood carrying capacity of the watercourse in any way.
         (c)   FEMA, the Pennsylvania Department of Community and Economic
Development, and the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection shall
be notified prior to any alteration or relocation of any watercourse .
   B.   Technical or scientific data shall be submitted to FEMA for a Letter of
Map Revision (LOMR) within six months of the completion of any new construction
, development , or other activity resulting in changes in the BFE. A LOMR or
Conditional Letter of Map Revision (CLOMR) is required for:
      (1)   Any development that causes a rise in the base flood elevations
within the floodway ; or
      (2)   Any development occurring in an area without a designated floodway
, which will cause a rise of more than one foot in the base flood elevation ;
or
      (3)   Alteration or relocation of a stream, including but not limited to
installing culverts and bridges.
   C.   Any new construction , development , uses or activities allowed by
variance within the Floodplain Conservation District shall be undertaken in
strict compliance with the provisions contained in the Township Code and any
other applicable codes, ordinances and regulations. In addition, when such
development is proposed within the area measured 50 feet landward from the top
of bank of any watercourse , a permit shall be obtained from the Pennsylvania
Department of Environmental Protection.
§ 255-170.   Nonconforming structures and uses.
The provisions of this Article do not require any changes or improvements to be
made to lawfully existing structures . However, when an improvement is made to
any existing structure , the provisions of §
255-171 of this Article, and the provisions of this chapter with respect to
nonconforming uses shall apply.
§ 255-171.   Improvement and reconstruction of existing structures.
   The following provisions shall apply whenever any expansion, enlargement, or
substantial improvement is made to an existing structure located within the
Floodplain Conservation District, or an existing structure within the
Floodplain Conservation District is reconstructed:
   A.   Any modification, alteration, or improvement , of any kind to an
existing structure , to an extent or amount of 50% or more of its market value,
shall constitute a substantial improvement and shall be undertaken only in full
compliance with the provisions of this Article.
   B.   No expansion, enlargement, substantial improvement , or reconstruction
of an existing structure shall be allowed within any floodway area that would
cause any increase in the elevation of the base flood elevation .
   C.   No expansion, enlargement, substantial improvement , or reconstruction
of an existing structure shall be allowed within any AE Area/District with
floodway that would, together with all other existing and anticipated
development , increase the BFE more than one foot at any point.
   D.   No expansion, enlargement, substantial improvement , or reconstruction
of an existing structure shall be undertaken in the direction of the nearest
watercourse on the property.
   E.   No expansion, enlargement, substantial improvement , or reconstruction
of an existing structure shall be permitted unless two means of access are
provided across the property to the existing structure , and an evacuation plan
indicating alternate vehicular access and escape routes is prepared and
submitted to the Township Fire Services Department and other appropriate
disaster preparedness authorities.
   F.   Historic resources undergoing repair or rehabilitation that would
constitute a substantial improvement as defined in this Article must comply
with all requirements that do not preclude the structure ’s continued
designation as an historic resource . Any variance from the requirements of
this Article will be the minimum necessary to preserve the historic character
and design of the historic resource .
   G.   Any modification, alteration, reconstruction, or improvement of any
kind that meets the definition of “repetitive loss ” shall be undertaken only
in full compliance with the provisions of this Article.
§ 255-171.1.   Damaged existing structures.
Structures located within the Floodplain Conservation District may be rebuilt
if destroyed by fire or other catastrophe, provided that the reconstruction
shall be in compliance with the floodproofing or elevation requirements of this
Article and, if located in the floodway , shall not result in an increase in
the base flood elevation . If fill is used to raise the finished surface of the
lowest floor two feet above the base flood elevation , the fill shall be placed
as specified by this Article.
§ 255-171.2.   Special requirements for subdivisions and developments.
All subdivision and development applications containing at least 50 lots or at
least five acres, whichever is the lesser, in flood hazard areas where base
flood elevation data are not available, shall be supported by hydrologic and
hydraulic engineering analyses that determine base flood elevations and
floodway information. The analyses shall be prepared by a licensed professional
engineer in a format required by FEMA for a Conditional Letter of Map Revisions
or Letter of Map Revision.
§ 255-171.3.   Special requirements for manufactured homes.
   A.   Within the Floodplain Conservation District, manufactured homes shall
be prohibited within the area measured 50 feet landward from the top-of-bank of
any watercourse or floodplain deliniation, whichever is the more restrictive.
   B.   Where permitted within the Floodplain Conservation District,
manufactured homes, and any improvements thereto, shall be:
      (1)   Placed on a permanent foundation.
      (2)   Elevated so that the lowest floor of the manufactured home is at
least two feet above the Base Flood Elevation .
      (3)   Anchored to resist flotation, collapse, or lateral movement.
   C.   Installation of manufactured homes shall be done in accordance with the
manufacturer’s installation instructions as provided by the manufacturer.
   D.   All manufactured homes and any improvements thereto shall be anchored
to resist flotation, collapse or lateral movement by providing over-the-top and
frame ties to ground anchors in accordance with the following:
      (1)   Over-the-top ties shall be provided at each of the four corners of
the manufactured home, with two additional ties per side at intermediate
locations for units 50 feet or more in length, and one additional tie per side
for units less than 50 feet in length.
      (2)   Frame ties shall be provided at each corner of the manufactured
home, with five additional ties per side at intermediate locations for units 50
feet or more in length, and four additional ties per side for units less than
50 feet in length.
      (3)   All components of the anchoring system shall be capable of carrying
a force of 4,800 pounds and resisting a minimum wind velocity of 90 miles per
hour.
   E.   All manufactured homes and any improvements thereto shall be elevated
in accordance with the following requirements:
      (1)   The stands or lots shall be elevated on compacted fill or on
pilings so that the lowest floor of the manufactured home will be at least two
feet above the base flood elevation .
      (2)   Adequate surface drainage shall be provided as required in
Chapter 212, Subdivision and Land Development.
      (3)   Adequate access for a hauler shall be provided.
      (4)   Where pilings are used for elevation, the lot shall be large enough
to permit steps; piling foundations shall be placed in stable soil not more
than ten feet apart; reinforcement shall be provided for pilings that will
extend for six feet or more above the ground level.
   F.   An evacuation plan indicating alternate vehicular access and escape
routes shall be filed with the Township Fire Services Department and other
appropriate disaster preparedness authorities for manufactured home
subdivisions .
   G.   Placement of a manufactured home on a lot shall require a building
 permit under
Chapter 73, Building Construction.
§ 255-171.4.   Special requirements for recreational vehicles.
   Except for storage facilities for which a variance has been granted by the
Zoning Hearing Board, recreational vehicles in the Floodplain Conservation
District shall:
   A.   Be on the site for fewer than 180 consecutive days; and
   B.   Be fully licensed and ready for highway use .
§ 255-171.5.   Design and construction standards.
   A.   Placement of buildings and structures .
      (1)   All buildings and structures shall be designed, located, and
constructed so as to offer the minimum obstruction to the flow of water and
shall be designed to have a minimum effect upon the flow and height of flood
water.
      (2)   All buildings and structures shall be firmly anchored in accordance
with accepted engineering practices to prevent floatation, collapse, or lateral
movement.
   B.   Elevation and floodproofing requirements.
      (1)   Residential structures .
         (a)   All new construction and substantial improvements of residential
structures shall have the lowest floor (including basement ) elevated to at
least two feet above the base flood elevation .
         (b)   Any modification, alteration, reconstruction or improvement of
any kind to an existing residential structure to an extent or amount of less
than 50% of its market value shall be elevated or floodproofed to the base
flood elevation .
         (c)   Existing residential structures located in a designated floodway
shall not be expanded or enlarged unless the effect of the proposed expansion
or enlargement on flood heights is fully offset by accompanying stream
improvements .
      (2)   Nonresidential structures .
         (a)   All new construction and substantial improvements of
nonresidential structures shall have the lowest floor (including basement )
elevated or floodproofed to at least two feet above the base flood elevation .
The floodproofing measures shall ensure that the structure is watertight with
walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water and has structural
components with the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads
and effects of buoyancy. All plans and specifications for such floodproofing
shall be accompanied by a statement certified by a registered professional
engineer or architect which states that the proposed design and methods of
construction are in conformance with the above referenced standards.
         (b)   Any modification, alteration, reconstruction or improvement of
any kind to an existing nonresidential structure to an extent or amount of less
than 50% of its market value shall be elevated or floodproofed to the base
flood elevation .
         (c)   Existing nonresidential structures located in a designated
floodway shall not be expanded or enlarged unless the effect of the proposed
expansion or enlargement on flood heights is fully offset by accompanying
stream improvements .
      (3)   Space below the lowest floor .
         (a)   Fully enclosed space below the lowest floor (including basement
) is prohibited.
         (b)   Partially enclosed space below the lowest floor (including
basement ) that will be used solely for the parking of a vehicle, building
access or incidental storage in an area other than a basement shall be designed
and constructed to allow for the automatic entry and exit of floodwaters for
the purpose of equalizing hydrostatic forces on exterior walls. The term
“partially enclosed space” also includes crawl spaces. Designs for meeting this
requirement must either be certified by a registered professional engineer or
architect, or meet or exceed the following minimum criteria:
            (i)   A minimum of two openings having a net total area of not less
than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed space.
            (ii)   The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot
above grade.
            (iii)   Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers or other
coverings or devices, provided that they permit the automatic entry and exit of
floodwaters.
      (4)   Accessory structures .
         (a)   Structures accessory to a principal building or use need not be
elevated or floodproofed to remain dry, but shall comply, at a minimum, with
the following requirements:
            (i)   The structure shall not be designed or used for human
habitation, but shall be limited to the parking of vehicles or the storage or
support of tools, material or equipment related to the principal use or
activity.
            (ii)   Floor area shall not exceed 100 square feet.
            (iii)   The structure will have a low damage potential.
            (iv)   The structure will be located on the site so as to cause the
least obstruction to the flow of floodwaters.
            (v)   Power lines, wiring and outlets will be at least one and one-
half feet above the 100-year flood elevation.
            (vi)   With the exception of alternative energy generation or
conversion equipment, permanently affixed utility equipment and appliances,
including but not limited to furnaces, heaters, washers and dryers are
permitted only at elevations above the base flood elevation .
            (vii)   Sanitary facilities are prohibited.
            (viii)   The structure shall be adequately anchored to prevent
flotation or movement and shall be designed to automatically provide for the
entry and exit of floodwaters for the purpose of equalizing hydrostatic forces
on the walls. Designs for meeting this requirement must either be certified by
a registered professional engineer or architect or meet or exceed the following
minimum criteria:
               a.   A minimum of two openings having a net total area of not
less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed space.
               b.   The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot
above grade.
               c.   Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers or other
coverings or devices, provided that they permit the automatic entry and exit of
floodwaters.
   C.   Fill. If fill is used to raise the finished surface of the lowest floor
two feet above the base flood elevation , the fill shall be placed as follows:
      (1)   Fill shall extend beyond a structure for a sufficient distance to
provide acceptable access for the intended use of the structure .
      (2)   Fill shall extend laterally 15 feet beyond the building line from
all points of a residential structure .
      (3)   Fill shall extend laterally 15 feet beyond the building line , at a
minimum of 25% of the perimeter of a nonresidential structure .
      (4)   Fill material shall consist of soil or rock materials only.
      (5)   Fill material shall be compacted to provide the necessary stability
and resistance to erosion, scouring or settling.
      (6)   Fill slopes shall be no steeper than one vertical to two
horizontal, unless substantiating data justifying steeper slopes are submitted
to and approved by the Township Engineer.
      (7)   Fill shall be used only to the extent to which it does not
adversely affect adjacent properties.
   D.   Drainage Facilities. Storm drainage facilities shall be designed to
convey the flow of stormwater runoff in a safe and efficient manner. The system
shall insure proper drainage along streets , and provide positive drainage away
from buildings . The system shall also be designed to prevent the discharge of
excess runoff onto adjacent properties.
   E.   Utility, electrical, and mechanical systems.
      (1)   Water and sanitary sewer facilities and systems.
         (a)   All new or replacement water supply and sanitary sewer
facilities and systems shall be located, designed and constructed to minimize
or eliminate flood damages and the infiltration of flood waters.
         (b)   Sanitary sewer facilities and systems shall be designed to
prevent the discharge of untreated sewage into flood waters.
         (c)   On-site sewer disposal systems are prohibited in a floodplain .
      (2)   Equipment. Water heaters, furnaces, air conditioning and
ventilating units, and other electrical, mechanical or utility equipment or
apparatus shall be located above the base flood elevation .
      (3)   Fuel Supply Systems. All gas and oil supply systems shall be
designed to prevent the infiltration of flood waters into the system and
discharges from the system into flood waters. Additional provisions shall be
made for the drainage of these systems in the event that flood water
infiltration occurs.
      (4)   All other utilities such as gas lines, electrical and telephone
systems shall be located, elevated (where possible) and constructed to minimize
the chance of impairment during a flood .
      (5)   All air ducts, large pipes, storage tanks, and other similar
objects or components located below the flood elevation shall be securely
anchored or affixed in accordance with accepted engineering practices to
prevent floatation.
   F.   Streets . The finished elevation of all new streets shall be no more
than one foot below the base flood elevation .
   G.   Storage. No materials that are buoyant, flammable, explosive or in time
of flooding could be injurious to human, animal or plant life shall be stored
below the base flood elevation .
   H.   Electrical components.
      (1)   Electrical distribution panels shall be at least three feet above
the base flood elevation .
      (2)   Separate electrical circuits shall serve lower levels and shall be
dropped from above.
      (3)   All electric water heaters, electric furnaces, electric air-
conditioning and ventilating systems and other electrical equipment or
apparatus shall be permitted only at elevations at least three feet above the
base flood elevation .
   I.   Floors, walls and ceilings.
      (1)   Wood flooring used at or below the base flood elevation shall be
installed to accommodate a lateral expansion of the flooring, perpendicular to
the flooring grain without causing structural damage to the building .
      (2)   Plywood used at or below the base flood elevation shall be of a
“marine” or “water-resistant” variety.
      (3)   Walls and ceilings at or below the base flood elevation shall be
designed and constructed of materials that are “water-resistant” and will
withstand inundation.
      (4)   Windows, doors, and other components at or below the base flood
elevation shall be made of metal or other “water-resistant” material.
   J.   Paints and adhesives.
      (1)   Paints and other finishes used at or below the base flood elevation
shall be of “marine” or “water-resistant” quality.
      (2)   Adhesives used at or below the base flood elevation shall have a
bonding strength that is unaffected by inundation (i.e. marine or water-
resistant quality).
      (3)   All wooden components (doors, trim, cabinets, etc.) shall be sealed
with a marine or water-resistant quality or similar product.
   K.   Uniform Construction Code Coordination. The standards and
specifications contained in the Uniform Construction Code as adopted in
Pennsylvania shall apply to construction in the Floodplain Conservation
District, to the extent that they are more restrictive and/or supplement the
requirements of this Article.
§ 255-171.6.   Additional permit requirements.
   A.   In addition to the permit application requirements normally required
under
Chapter 73, Building Construction, the Township Building Code Official shall
require the following specific information to be included as part of an
application for a building  permit in the Floodplain Conservation District:
      (1)   For structures to be elevated:
         (a)   A plan showing the size of the proposed structure and its
relation to the lot where it is to be constructed.
         (b)   A determination of elevations of the existing grade, proposed
finished grade and lowest floors certified by a registered professional
engineer.
         (c)   Plans showing the method of elevating the proposed structure ,
including details of proposed fills, pile structures , retaining walls,
foundations, erosion protection measures, etc. When required by the Building
Code Official, these plans shall be prepared by a registered professional
engineer or architect.
         (d)   Plans showing the methods used to protect utilities (including
sewer, water, telephone, electric, gas, etc.) from flooding to an elevation at
least one and one-half feet above the base flood elevation at the building
site.
      (2)   For structures to be floodproofed:
         (a)   Plans showing details of all floodproofing measures, prepared by
a registered professional engineer and showing the size of the proposed
structure and its relation to the lot where it is to be constructed.
         (b)   A determination of elevations of existing grades, proposed
finished grades, lowest floors and floodproofing limits; certified by a
registered professional engineer.
         (c)   A certificate prepared by a registered professional engineer who
prepared the plans that the structure in question, together with attendant
utility and sanitary facilities, is designated so that:
            (i)   Below an elevation two feet above the base flood elevation
the structure is watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage
of water.
            (ii)   The structure will withstand the hydrostatic, hydrodynamic,
buoyant, impact and other forces resulting from the flood depths, velocities,
pressures and other factors associated with the base flood elevation .
§ 255-171.7.   Designation of the Floodplain Administrator.
The Township Zoning Officer is hereby appointed to administer and enforce this
Article and may be referred to as the Floodplain Administrator.
§ 255-171.8.   Duties and responsibilities of the Floodplain Administrator.
   A.   To ensure that flood damage controls are being employed in all new
construction and improvements within the Floodplain Conservation District, the
Township Zoning Officer shall provide an applicant information concerning the
location of the district boundaries relative to the proposed construction ,
improvements , or use and the water surface elevation of the 100-year flood at
the proposed site. The source of the information concerning the district
boundary shall be the Flood Insurance Study for Upper Dublin Township as
prepared by the Federal Emergency Management Agency, Federal Insurance
Administration, and other sources as appropriate according to those cited in
this Article regarding the Floodplain Conservation District for Upper Dublin
Township. The source for the information concerning the base flood elevation
shall be the Flood Insurance Study .
   B.   The Floodplain Administrator shall issue a zoning permit only after it
has been determined that the proposed work or use to be undertaken will be in
conformance with the requirements of this Article and all other applicable
laws, regulations, codes and ordinances.
   C.   Prior to the issuance of any permit , the Floodplain Administrator
shall review an application for a permit to determine if all other necessary
government permits required by state and federal laws have been obtained. No
permit shall be issued until this determination has been made.
   D.   In the case of existing structures , prior to the issuance of any
permit , the Floodplain Administrator shall review the history of repairs to
the subject structure , so that any repetitive loss issues can be addressed
before a permit is issued.
   E.   During the construction period, the Floodplain Administrator or other
authorized official shall inspect the premises to determine that the work is
progressing in compliance with the information provided on the permit
application and with all applicable laws and regulations. The Floodplain
Administrator shall make as many inspections during and upon completion of the
work as are necessary.
   F.   In the discharge of his or her duties, the Floodplain Administrator
shall have the authority to enter any building , structure , premises or
development in the Floodplain Conservation District, upon presentation of
proper credentials, at any reasonable hour to enforce the provisions of this
Article.
   G.   In the event the Floodplain Administrator discovers that the work or
use does not comply with the permit application or any applicable laws and
ordinances, or that there has been a false statement or misrepresentation by
any applicant, the Floodplain Administrator shall revoke the applicable permits
and report such fact to the Board of Commissioners for whatever action it
considers necessary.
   H.   The Floodplain Administrator shall maintain in perpetuity all records
associated with the requirements of this Article including, but not limited to,
finished construction elevation data, permitting, inspection and enforcement.
   I.   The Floodplain Administration shall be responsible for submitting a
biannual report to the Federal Emergency Management Agency concerning community
participation in the National Flood Insurance Program.
   J.   The responsibility, authority and means to implement the commitments of
the Floodplain Administrator can be delegated, however the ultimate
responsibility lies within the Township Zoning Officer.
§ 255-171.9.   Review by County Conservation District.
A copy of all applications and plans for any proposed construction or
development in any Floodplain Conservation District shall be submitted by the
Floodplain Administrator to the Montgomery County Conservation District for
review and comment prior to the issuance of a permit . The recommendations of
the Conservation District shall be considered by the Floodplain Administrator
for possible incorporation into the proposed plan of work or use .
§ 255-171.10. Review of application by others.
A copy of all plans and applications for any proposed construction or
development in the Floodplain Conservation District to be considered for
approval may be submitted by the Floodplain Administrator to any other
appropriate agencies and/or individuals (e.g. planning commission, municipal
engineer, etc.) for review and comment.
§ 255-171.11. Changes.
After the issuance of a permit by the Floodplain Administrator, no changes of
any kind shall be made to the application, permit or any of the plans,
specifications or other documents submitted with the application without the
written consent or approval of the Floodplain Administrator. Requests for any
such change shall be in writing, and shall be submitted by the applicant to
Floodplain Administrator for consideration.
§ 255-171.12. Placards.
In addition to a permit , the Floodplain Administrator shall issue a placard
which shall be displayed on the premises during the time construction is in
progress. This placard shall show the number of the permit , the date of its
issuance, and the name and signature of the Floodplain Administrator.
§ 255-171.13. Start of construction.
Work on proposed construction shall begin within 180 days after the date of
permit issuance and shall be completed within 12 months after the date of
permit issuance or the permit shall expire unless a time extension is granted,
in writing, by the Floodplain Administrator. Time extensions shall be granted
only if a written request is submitted by the applicant, which sets forth
sufficient and reasonable cause for the Floodplain Administrator to approve
such a request.
§ 255-171.14. Enforcement.
   A.   Notices. Whenever the Floodplain Administrator or other authorized
municipal representative determines that there are reasonable grounds to
believe that there has been a violation of any provisions of this Article, or
of any regulations adopted pursuant thereto, the Floodplain Administrator shall
give notice of such alleged violation as hereinafter provided.
      (1)   All notices shall be in writing.
      (2)   A notice shall include a statement of the reasons for its issuance.
      (3)   A notice shall allow a reasonable time not to exceed a period of 30
days for the performance of any act required for compliance.
      (4)   A notice shall be served upon the property owner or his agent as
the case may require; provided, however, that such notice or order shall be
deemed to have been properly served upon such owner or agent when a copy
thereof has been served with such notice by any other method authorized by the
laws of this Commonwealth.
      (5)   A notice shall contain an outline of remedial action which, if
taken, will effect compliance with the provisions of this Article.
   B.   Penalties and remedies.
      (1)   Any person who fails to comply with any or all of the requirements
or provisions of this Article or who fails or refuses to comply with any
notice, order or directive of the Floodplain Administrator or any other
authorized employee of Upper Dublin Township:
         (a)   Shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction shall pay a
find to Upper Dublin Township of not less than $25 nor more than $600, plus
costs of prosecution; and,
         (b)   Shall be subject to the penalties specified by Article XXVI of
this chapter.
      (2)   In addition to the above penalties all other actions are hereby
reserved including an action in equity for the proper enforcement of this
Article.
      (3)   The imposition of a fine or penalty for any violation of, or
noncompliance with, this Article shall not excuse the violation or
noncompliance or permit it to continue and all such persons shall be required
to correct or remedy such violations and noncompliance within a reasonable
time.
      (4)   Any development initiated or any structure or building constructed,
reconstructed, enlarged, altered, or relocated, in noncompliance with this
Article may be declared by the Board of Commissioners to be a public nuisance
and abatable as such.
§ 255-171.15. Appeals.
Any person aggrieved by any action or decision of the Floodplain Administrator
concerning the administration of the provisions of this Article may appeal to
the Zoning Hearing Board as provided by this chapter for Zoning Hearing Board
appeals.
§ 255-171.16. Abrogation and greater restrictions.
This Article supersedes any other conflicting provisions which may be in effect
in the Floodplain Conservation District. However, any other ordinance
provisions shall remain in full force and effect to the extent that those
provisions are more restrictive. If there is any conflict between any of the
provisions of this Article, the more restrictive shall apply.
§ 255-171.17. Warning and disclaimer of liability.
The degree of flood protection required by this Article is considered
reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on accepted engineering methods
of study. Larger floods may occur or flood heights may be increased by man-made
or natural causes, such as bridge openings restricted by debris and ice jams.
In such instances, areas outside Floodplain Conservation District or land uses
permitted within the district may be subject to flooding or flood damage. The
granting of a zoning permit , conditional use , variance or other approval
pursuant to this Article shall not constitute a representation, guarantee or
warranty of any kind by Upper Dublin Township, or by any officer or employee of
the Township, of the practicability or safety of any structure , use or other
plan proposed, and shall create no liability upon or cause of action against
the Township, or against any officer or employee of the Township, for any
damage that may result pursuant thereto; nor shall this Article create any
liability on the part of Upper Dublin Township or any officer or employee of
the Township for any flood damages that result from reliance on this Article or
any administrative or quasi-judicial decision lawfully made hereunder.
ARTICLE XXIII
Zoning Hearing Board
§ 255-172.   Membership; terms; vacancies; alternates. [Amended 1-10-1995 by
Ord. No. 879; 12-9-1997 by Ord. No. 962; 11-10-1998 by Ord. No. 978; 7-8-2025
by Ord. No. 25-1406]
   A.   The membership of the Board shall consist of five residents of the
Township appointed by resolution by the Board of Commissioners. The terms of
the office of the Zoning Hearing Board shall be five years and shall be so
fixed that the term of office of at least one member shall expire each year.
The Board shall promptly notify the Board of Commissioners of any vacancies
which occur. Appointments to fill vacancies shall be only for the unexpired
portion of the term. Members of the Board shall hold no other office in the
Township.
   B.   The Board of Commissioners shall appoint by resolution one resident of
the Township to serve as an alternate member of the Board. The term of office
of an alternate member shall be three years. When seated pursuant to the
provisions of 53 P.S. § 10906, an alternate shall be entitled to participate in
all proceedings and discussions of the Board to the same and full extent as
provided by law for Board members, including specifically the right to cast a
vote as a voting member during the proceedings, and shall have all the powers
and duties set forth in this Act and as otherwise provided by law. Alternates
shall hold no other office in the Township, including membership on the
Planning Commission and Zoning Officer. Any alternate may participate in any
proceeding or discussion of the Board but shall not be entitled to vote as a
member of the Board nor be compensated pursuant to 53 P.S. § 10907 unless
designated as a voting alternate member pursuant to 53 P.S. § 10906.
§ 255-173.   Powers and duties.
The Board shall have the following powers:
   A.   Appeals and interpretations. To hear and decide appeals where it is
alleged that there is an error in any order, requirement, decision or
determination made by any administrative official in the enforcement of said
Act or of this chapter adopted pursuant thereto. To interpret upon the words,
terms, rules, regulations, provisions and restrictions of this chapter where
there is doubt as to the meaning thereof, including determination in specific
instances whether questionable uses are permitted by virtue of being similar to
or customarily incidental to permitted uses as provided by this chapter.
   B.   Special exceptions . To hear and decide special exceptions to the terms
of this chapter in such cases as are herein expressly provided for, in harmony
with the general purpose and intent of this chapter with power to impose
appropriate conditions and safeguards.
   C.   Variances. To authorize, upon appeal, in special cases such variance
from the terms of this chapter as the Board shall feel will not be contrary to
the public interest, where, owing to special conditions, a literal enforcement
of the provisions of this chapter will result in unnecessary hardship and so
that the spirit of this chapter shall be observed and justice done. The special
circumstances requiring a variance shall be fully set forth in the minutes of
the Board, which shall show the vote of each member upon each question.
§ 255-174.   Standards for actions.
   A.   In any instance where the Zoning Hearing Board is required to consider
a variance, special exception or any other challenge brought before it in
accordance with this chapter or the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code,
40 the Board shall, among other things: [Amended 1-10-1995 by Ord. No. 879]
      (1)   Consider the suitability of the property for the use desired;
assure itself that the proposed change is consistent with the spirit, purpose
and intent of this chapter.
      (2)   Determine that the proposed change will not substantially injure or
detract from the use of neighboring property or from the character of the
neighborhood and that the use of the property adjacent to the area included in
the proposed change or plan is adequately safeguarded.
      (3)   Determine that the proposed change will serve the best interests of
the Township, the convenience of the community (where applicable) and the
public welfare.
      (4)   Consider the effect of the proposed change upon the logical,
efficient and economical extension of the public service and facilities such as
public water, sewers, police and fire protection and public schools .
      (5)   Consider the suitability of the proposed location of an industrial
or commercial use with respect to the probable effects upon highway traffic and
assure adequate access arrangements in order to protect major streets from
undue congestion and hazard.
      (6)   Be guided in its study, review and recommendation by sound
standards of subdivision practice, where applicable.
      (7)   Determine that there are special circumstances or conditions fully
described in the findings applying to the land or buildings for which the
variance is sought, which circumstances or conditions are such that the
application of the provisions of this chapter should deprive the applicant of
the reasonable use of such land or building .
      (8)   Determine that the unique circumstances for which the variance is
sought were neither created by the owner of the property nor were due to or the
result of general conditions in the district in which the property is located.
   B.   Conditions should be increased greatly in detail, especially when
reviewing special exceptions . The Board should state the methods of plan
preparation, review and approval (Planning Commission and Commissioners) and
what zoning ordinances and/or subdivision regulations apply and impose such
conditions, in addition to those required, as are necessary to assure that the
intent of this chapter is complied with, which conditions may include but are
not limited to harmonious design of buildings , planting and its maintenance as
a sign or sound screen, the minimizing of noxious, offensive or hazardous
elements and adequate standards of parking and sanitation.
40. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 255-175.   Modification of orders.
In exercising the above-mentioned powers, the Board may reverse or affirm,
wholly or in part, or may modify the order, requirement, decision or
determination appealed from and may make such additional order, requirement,
decision or determination as ought to be made, and to that end shall have all
the powers of the officer from whom the appeal is taken.
§ 255-176.   Rules of procedure.
The Board shall adopt rules of procedure in accordance with the several
provisions of this chapter as to manner of filing appeals or applications for
special exceptions or for variance from the terms of this chapter. All appeals
and applications made to the Board shall be in writing, on forms prescribed by
the Board. Every appeal or application shall refer to the specific provision of
the ordinance involved and shall exactly set forth the interpretation that is
claimed, the use for which the special exception is sought, the details of the
variance that is applied for and the grounds on which it is claimed that the
variance should be granted, as the case may be.
§ 255-177.   Meetings.
Meetings of the Board shall be held at the call of the Chairman and at such
times as the Board may determine. The Chairman, or, in his absence, the acting
Chairman, may administer oaths and compel the attendance of witnesses. All
meetings of the Board shall be open to the public. The Board shall keep minutes
of its proceedings, showing the vote of each member upon each question or, if
absent or failing to vote, indicating such fact and keep records of its
examinations and other official actions, all of which shall be immediately
filed in the Office of the Board and shall be a public record. 41
41. Editor's Note: Former Sec. 16.06, Advisory review by Planning Commission,
which immediately followed this section, was deleted 1-10-1995 by Ord. No. 879.
§ 255-178.   Expert consultation.
The Zoning Hearing Board, in considering any matter within its jurisdiction,
may consult with the Upper Dublin Township Planning Commission, the Montgomery
County Planning Commission or any other specialist or groups of specialists
having expert knowledge of the matter under consideration.
§ 255-179.   Hearings.
   A.   Upon the filing with the Board of an application for a special
exception or for variance or an interpretation from the terms of this chapter,
the Board shall fix a reasonable time and place for a public hearing thereon
and shall give notice as follows:
      (1)   By publishing once each week for two successive weeks in a
newspaper of general circulation in the municipality. Such notice shall state
the time and place of the hearing and the particular nature of the matter to be
considered at the hearing. The first publication shall not be more than 30 days
and the second publication shall not be less than seven days from the date of
the hearing. [Amended 1-10-1995 by Ord. No. 879]
      (2)   At the discretion of the Board, by mailing a notice to all property
owners within 500 feet, if only a particular area is involved. If the owners of
the property or their respective addresses are known to the Board, it may
direct the posting of the notice upon the dwelling , if one exists; otherwise,
at a conspicuous place upon the property.
   B.   The notice shall state the general nature of the proposed amendment and
that full opportunity to be heard will be given to any citizen and all parties
in interest attending such hearing. The notices herein required shall state the
location of the building or lot and the general nature of the question
involved.
   C.   Hearings shall be held in accordance with 53 P.S. § 10908. [Added 1-10-
1995 by Ord. No. 879]
§ 255-180.   Expiration of special exception or variance.
[Amended 9-14-1993 by Ord. No. 853; 7-10-2001 by Ord. No. 1065]
A special exception or variance shall expire 12 months after being granted,
unless the applicant obtains one of the following, if applicable:
   A.   A use and occupancy permit from the Township Code Enforcement
Department relative to the special exception or variance.
   B.   A building  permit from the Township Code Enforcement Department
relative to the special exception or variance.
   C.   An extension of the grant of the special exception or variance from the
Zoning Hearing Board.
   D.   Final plan approval relative to the special exception or variance, in
which case, the special exception or variance shall expire at such time as the
final plan approval expires.
§ 255-181.   Appeals.
Any persons aggrieved by the decision of the Board may within 30 days
thereafter appeal to the Court of Common Pleas of Montgomery County by petition
duly verified, setting forth the grounds upon which said appeal is taken.
§ 255-182.   Fees.
[Amended 1-10-1995 by Ord. No. 879]
Application before the Zoning Hearing Board as is provided in Article XXIII
shall be accompanied by a cash payment to the Township in accordance with a fee
schedule adopted by resolution of the Board of Commissioners following the
enactment of this chapter or as such schedule may be amended by resolution of
the Board of Commissioners. 42
42. Editor's Note: See fee schedule.
§ 255-183.   Plot or lot plan required.
[Amended 10-12-1993 by Ord. No. 857]
   A.   A plot or lot plan or survey drawn to scale and prepared by a
registered engineer or land surveyor is required for every appeal to the Zoning
Hearing Board seeking a variance, a special exception or an interpretation
where a building or addition is built or proposed up to or beyond a required
yard , or where there is no readily available method to determine where the
property boundary is, or where the Director of Code Enforcement otherwise deems
it necessary to determine if the proposed application is in compliance with the
Code.
   B.   Said plan shall show, among others, existing structures on the lot and
within 25 feet beyond the boundaries of said lot ; any proposed structure ;
distances between existing and proposed structures and the several boundary
lines of the lot on which the structure exists or is proposed; existing or
proposed easements or rights-of-way, streets or highways, both public and
private; the existing zoning district or districts; and the proposed use or
uses .
   C.   The Director of Code Enforcement may waive this requirement or modify
same upon request by the applicant.
§ 255-184.   Burden of proof.
[Amended 9-14-1993 by Ord. No. 852]
   A.   Specific code requirements.
      (1)   The applicant has the burden of persuasion and the duty to go
forward with evidence with respect to the specific requirements of the Township
Code, including:
         (a)   The requirement that the use be one permitted by special
exception .
         (b)   Specific requirements applicable to the special exception .
         (c)   General requirements of the Township Code, including but not
limited to lot areas and parking requirements.
         (d)   Specific public interest criteria listed in the Township Code.
      (2)   If the applicant meets this burden, a presumption will arise that
the proposed use is consistent with the health, safety and general welfare of
the community
   B.   General effect of the proposed use . Protestants, if they choose to
participate, have the burden to present evidence and to persuade the Board that
the proposed use has a generally detrimental effect on the health, safety and
welfare of the neighborhood or that it will conflict with the general policies
outlined in the Township Code. Protestants must raise specific issues and
establish a high degree of probability that the proposed use will have a
substantially detrimental effect on the health, safety and welfare of the
neighborhood . If protestants meet this burden, then the applicant must go
forward and meet its burden of persuasion with regard to criteria relating to
the general detrimental effect of the proposed use raised by the protestants.
   C.   General policy concerns. With regard to general policy concerns
outlined in the Township Code, including but not limited to whether the
application is in harmony with the spirit, intent and purpose of this chapter,
the burden of persuasion and duty to go forward fall on the protestants, if
any.
ARTICLE XXIV
Administration
§ 255-185.   Zoning Officer.
The provisions of this chapter shall be enforced by a Zoning Officer with the
aid of the Police Department and other municipal agencies. The Zoning Officer
shall be appointed at the first meeting of the Township Commissioners following
the adoption of this chapter, to serve until the first day of January next
following, and shall thereafter be appointed annually to serve a term of one
year and/or until his successor is appointed. The Zoning Officer may succeed
himself. He shall receive such compensation as the governing body by resolution
shall provide.
§ 255-186.   Powers and duties of Zoning Officer.
It shall be the duty of the Zoning Officer and he shall have power:
   A.   To keep a permanent record of all plans and applications for permits
and all permits issued with notations as to special conditions attached
thereto. All records shall be open for public inspection and shall be the
property of the Township.
   B.   To review applications for zoning permits for erections or alterations
of structures or changes of use and determine whether such construction or use
is in accordance with the general requirements of this chapter, all other
applicable ordinances and with the laws and regulations of the commonwealth.
   C.   To conduct inspections and surveys to determine compliance or
noncompliance with the terms of this chapter. In carrying out such surveys, the
Zoning Officer or his representative may enter upon any land or buildings .
   D.   To make written orders requiring compliance with the provisions of this
chapter to be served personally or by certified, registered or first class
mail. [Amended 2-8-2000 by Ord. No. 1021]
   E.   To institute proceedings in courts of proper jurisdiction for the
enforcement of provisions of this chapter.
   F.   To maintain a map showing the current zoning classification of all
land.
   G.   To maintain a map and register showing the registration, identity,
location and type of all nonconforming uses .
   H.   To participate in all proceedings before the Zoning Hearing Board,
present facts and information to assist the Board in reaching a decision,
resist and oppose any deviations from the standard provisions of this chapter
and have decisions of the Board reviewed in a court of proper jurisdiction
when, in the judgment of the Zoning Officer, such review is desirable.
   I.   At the request of any individual, to certify as to the zoning of a
particular property and/or determine whether the existing uses of the property
comply with the Township Zoning Code. [Added 3-9-1999 by Ord. No. 989]
§ 255-187.   Permits.
   A.   No building or structure shall be constructed or altered in the
Township, nor shall the use of any building , structure or land be changed
until a permit has been secured from the Zoning Officer. [Amended 2-13-1996 by
Ord. No. 904]
   B.   Upon receipt of the permit (issued under this chapter or
Chapter 73, Building Construction, of the Township) the permittee shall post
the notice as supplied by the Zoning Officer or Building Inspector on a
conspicuous place on the property described in said notice. Posting will be
considered adequate when laced securely on a stake or structure located
adjacent to the street upon which the property abuts, provided that the
location shall be such as to permit the notice to be visible and readable from
said abutting street . Posting of a single notice on the builder's shanty or on
a sample house of a development involving three or more lots for which permits
issued at one time shall be acceptable.
   C.   No permit shall be valid beyond one year from the date of issuance,
unless extended by the Zoning Officer or Building Inspector; provided, however,
that no permit shall be valid beyond 18 months from its issuance.
§ 255-188.   Permit applications.
[Amended 10-12-1993 by Ord. No. 857]
   A.   All applications for permits shall be made in writing by the owner or
tenants or authorized agent and shall be filed with the Zoning Officer. Unless
any of the following requirements are waived by the Director of Code
Enforcement, upon request, the application shall:
      (1)   Include a statement as to the proposed use of the building and/or
land.
      (2)   Be accompanied by working plans, drawn to scale, showing the
location of the building in relation to property and road lines.
      (3)   Include a statement that the side lines of all roads shown on the
plan have been located and staked on the premises by a surveyor or other person
competent to give such location.
      (4)   Give the name and address of the person who has so located and
staked the road lines.
   B.   If the applicant desires the Zoning Hearing Board to grant a special
exception , then, in addition, the applications shall set forth the nature of
the special exception and shall state briefly the reasons why such special
exception should be granted.
§ 255-189.   Appeals.
Appeals from the decision of a Zoning Officer shall be taken within 30 days.
Where the decision includes the issuance of a permit , under the provisions of
this chapter and/or
Chapter 73, Building Construction, of the Township, the time for the taking of
an appeal can be extended upon the presentation to the Zoning Hearing Board of:
   A.   Proof that notice of the permit had not been posted as required under §
255-187B; or
   B.   Proof that no visible work was performed or use was made of the
property so as to bring knowledge to the aggrieved party of the issuance of a
permit . No appeal shall be taken beyond six months of the date of issuance of
the permit .
§ 255-190.   Fees.
The applicant for a permit shall, at the time of making the application, pay to
the Zoning Officer for the use of the Township, a fee in accordance with a fee
schedule adopted by resolution of the Board of Commissioners upon the enactment
of this chapter or as such schedule may be amended by resolution of the Board
of Commissioners. 43
43. Editor’s Note: See fee schedule.
ARTICLE XXV
Conditional Use by Board of Commissioners
§ 255-191.   Review procedure.
[Amended 11-13-2007 by Ord. No. 1187]
An application for a conditional use shall be considered by the Board of
Commissioners according to the procedures in this article and as provided by
the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code. Following commencement of
hearings, and until final decision on a conditional use application, neither
any Board member nor the hearing officer shall communicate, directly or
indirectly, with any party or his representatives in connection with any issue
involved, nor shall any party or his representative communicate with any Board
member or the hearing officer, except upon notice and opportunity for all
parties and all Board members to participate. The Board of Commissioners shall
not take notice of any communication, reports, memoranda, or other materials
presented after commencement of the hearings, except advice from their
solicitor, unless the parties are afforded an opportunity to contest the
material so noticed and shall not inspect the site or its surroundings after
the commencement of hearings with any party or his representative unless all
parties and all Board members are given an opportunity to be present.
Communication with any Board member by an applicant or an applicant’s
representative in violation of the restrictions of this paragraph shall be the
basis for dismissing the conditional use application.
§ 255-192.   Conditional use application.
An application shall be submitted in writing to the Township. It shall include,
as a minimum, a tentative sketch plan indicating basically how the applicant
intends to develop the property and sufficient data to document compliance with
applicable standards of this chapter. The Board of Commissioners shall schedule
a public hearing on said applicant within 60 days unless the time limit is
waived in writing by the applicant.
§ 255-193.   Public hearing.
Prior to deciding to approve or deny the use of a tract for the proposed use ,
the Board of Commissioners shall hold a public hearing pursuant to public
notice . At least 45 days prior to the date of the hearing, one copy of the
development proposal and all additional submitted information shall be
transmitted to the Township planning agency and the Montgomery County Planning
Commission, together with a request that these agencies submit recommendations
regarding said use .
§ 255-194.   Standards and criteria for approval of use.
[Amended 9-14-1993 by Ord. No. 851]
The Board of Commissioners may grant approval of a listed conditional use under
any district, provided that the following standards and criteria are complied
with by the applicant for the conditional use . The burden of proving
compliance with such standards and criteria shall be on the applicant.
   A.   The applicant shall establish by credible evidence that the proposed
use or other subject of consideration for approval complies with the
declaration of legislative intent that may appear at the beginning of the
applicable district under which approval is sought.
   B.   The applicant shall establish by credible evidence that the proposed
use or other subject of consideration for approval complies with the conditions
enumerated in that section of this chapter which gives the applicant the right
to seek a conditional use .
   C.   The applicant shall establish by credible evidence that the proposed
use or other subject of consideration for approval shall preserve the
environmental and physical assets of the neighborhood , including but not
limited to parking, traffic movement, noise, landscaping, buffering and
lighting.
   D.   The applicant shall establish by credible evidence that the proposed
use or other subject of consideration for approval shall be properly serviced
by all existing public service systems.
   E.   The applicant shall establish by credible evidence that the proposed
use or other subject of consideration for approval shall make accommodation for
peak traffic generated by the proposed use .
   F.   The applicant shall establish by credible evidence that the proposed
use or other subject of consideration for approval is designed in accordance
with the Township Code with regard to internal traffic circulation, parking,
buffering, grading, stormwater management, erosion control and all other
elements of proper land planning
   G.   The Board of Commissioners shall impose such reasonable conditions and
safeguards as are advisable to ensure compliance with the purpose and intent of
this chapter, which may include, without limitation, planting and buffers,
special yards and spaces, construction of fences and walls, special parking
and/or loading and drop-off provisions, together with control of vehicles’
egress and ingress, harmonious design of buildings , protection of watercourses
, the protection of environmental amenities and the elimination of noxious,
offensive or hazardous elements.
   H.   The applicant shall establish by credible evidence that the proposed
use or other subject of consideration for approval will not adversely affect
the health, safety and welfare of the neighborhood and community.
§ 255-195.   Burden of proof.
[Added 9-14-1993 by Ord. No. 851]
   A.   Specific code requirements.
      (1)   The applicant has the burden of persuasion and the duty to go
forward with evidence with respect to the specific requirements of the Township
Code, including:
         (a)   The requirement that the use be one permitted by conditional use
.
         (b)   Specific requirements applicable to the conditional use .
         (c)   General requirements of the Township Code, including but not
limited to lot areas and parking requirements.
         (d)   Specific public interest criteria listed in the Township Code.
      (2)   If the applicant meets this burden, a presumption will arise that
the proposed use is consistent with the health, safety and general welfare of
the community.
   B.   General effect of the proposed use . Protestants (to include all
persons presenting opposing testimony), if they choose to participate, have the
burden to present evidence and to persuade the Board that the proposed use has
a generally detrimental effect on the health, safety and welfare of the
neighborhood or that it will conflict with the general policies outlined in the
Township Code. Protestants must raise specific issues and establish a high
degree of probability that the proposed use will have a substantially
detrimental effect on the health, safety and welfare of the neighborhood . If
protestants meet this burden, then the applicant must go forward and meet its
burden of persuasion with regard to criteria relating to the general
detrimental effect of the proposed use raised by the protestants. [Amended 11-
14-2006 by Ord. No. 1174]
   C.   General policy concerns. With regard to general policy concerns
outlined in the Township Code, including but not limited to whether the
application is in harmony with the spirit, intent and purpose of this chapter,
the burden of persuasion and duty to go forward fall on the protestants, if
any.
§ 255-196.   Expiration of conditional use.
[Amended 9-14-1993 by Ord. No. 851; 7-10-2001 by Ord. No. 1065]
Conditional use approvals shall expire 12 months after being granted, unless
the applicant obtains one of the following:
   A.   A use and occupancy permit from the Township Code Enforcement
Department relative to the conditional use .
   B.   A building  permit from the Township Code Enforcement Department
relative to the conditional use .
   C.   An extension of the grant of the conditional use from the Board of
Commissioners.
   D.   Final plan approval relative to the conditional use , in which case,
the conditional use approval shall expire at such time as the final plan
approval expires.
ARTICLE XXVI
Enforcement; Violations and Penalties
§ 255-197.   Enforcement.
[Amended 2-8-2000 by Ord. No. 1021]
It shall be the duty of the Zoning Officer to take cognizance of violations of
this chapter. He shall investigate each violation which comes to his attention,
whether by observation or communication. He shall promptly give notice, in
writing, of a violation of any of the provisions of this chapter, and, when
notice of a violation of any provision of this chapter has been served by the
Zoning Officer, such violation shall be discontinued immediately. Notice, as
aforesaid, shall be considered served when delivered in person or sent by
certified, registered or first class mail to the owner, agent, occupant,
contractor or builder, if known, and, if not known, posted upon a conspicuous
place on the property upon which the violation exists. Failure to secure a
zoning permit or Zoning Hearing Board certificate, when required, previous to
the erection, construction , extension or addition to a building or failure to
secure a use and/or occupancy permit shall be a violation of this chapter, and
prosecution for a violation may follow, without notice.
§ 255-198.   Violations and penalties.
[Amended 8-9-1988 by Ord. No. 753; 9-14-1993 by Ord. No. 850]
For any and every violation of the provisions of this chapter, the person ,
partnership or corporation who or which has violated or permitted the violation
of the provisions of this chapter, upon being found liable therefor in a civil
enforcement proceeding commenced by the Township, shall pay a judgment of not
more than $500 plus all court costs, including reasonable attorney fees
incurred by the Township as a result thereof, for each offense. Whenever such
person shall have been notified by the Zoning Officer or by service of warrant
in its prosecution or in any other way that he is committing such violation of
this chapter, each day that he shall continue shall constitute a separate
offense.
§ 255-199.   Costs and charges.
Every applicant before the Zoning Hearing Board of Upper Dublin Township shall
be responsible for all costs incidental to such application, including costs of
advertising and public notice of a hearing, stenographic costs of recording and
transcribing the record before the Zoning Hearing Board of Upper Dublin
Township, engineering fees and all other fees and expenses incidental to such
hearing. Every person petitioning for a change in this chapter or the Zoning
Map of Upper Dublin Township will be responsible for costs incidental to a
hearing or hearings upon such petition, including the costs of advertising the
public notice of hearing, stenographic costs of recording and transcribing the
testimony before the Board of Commissioners of Upper Dublin Township,
engineering fees and all other fees and expenses incidental to the petition.
The applicant shall make a payment of a fee in accordance with a fee schedule
adopted by the Board of Commissioners and set forth in the Township fee
schedule.
ARTICLE XXVII
Amendments
[Added 6-14-1994 by Ord. No. 867]
§ 255-200.   Amendment by governing body.
The Board of Commissioners of Upper Dublin Township may, from time to time,
amend, supplement, change, modify or repeal this chapter, including the Zoning
Map, by proceeding in the following manner.
§ 255-201.   Public hearing and notice.
[Amended 9-10-1996 by Ord. No. 917]
Before voting on the enactment of an amendment to this chapter, the Board of
Commissioners shall hold a public hearing thereon, pursuant to public notice .
In addition, if the. proposed amendment involves a Zoning Map change, notice of
said public hearing shall be conspicuously posted by the Township at points
deemed sufficient by the Township along the tract to notify potentially
interested citizens. The affected tract or area should be posted at least one
week prior to the date of the hearing.
§ 255-202.   Revision after public hearing.
If, after any public hearing held upon an amendment, the proposed amendment is
changed substantially or is revised to include land previously not affected by
it, the Board of Commissioners shall hold another public hearing, pursuant to
public notice , before proceeding to vote on the amendment.
§ 255-203.   Enactment of amendment.
The vote on the enactment by the Board of Commissioners shall be within 90 days
after the last public hearing.
§ 255-204.   Fees.
Applications for amendments shall be accompanied by cash payments to the
Township in accordance with a fee schedule adopted by resolution of the Board
of Commissioners.
ARTICLE XXVIII
Open Space Preservation District
[Added 8-12-1997 by Ord. No. 947; amended 5-11-2004 by Ord. No. 1127; 11-14-
2006 by Ord. No. 1173]
§ 255-205.   Legislative intent.
In the interest of the public health, safety and welfare, the provisions of
this article are intended to:
   A.   Permit residential development in an open space setting, located and
designed to reduce the perceived intensity of development , preserve natural
features and open land and provide privacy and neighborhood identity.
   B.   Preserve open land , including those areas containing unique and
sensitive natural features such as woodlands, steep slopes, streams, floodplain
and wetlands, by setting them aside from development .
   C.   Preserve scenic views and minimize perceived density , by minimizing
views of new development from existing roads .
   D.   Provide greater design flexibility and efficiency in the siting of
services and infrastructure by reducing the length and width of roads , utility
runs and the amount of impervious cover required for residential development .
   E.   Create neighborhoods with direct visual and physical access to open
land , with amenities in the form of neighborhood open space, and with a strong
neighborhood identity.
   F.   Reduce erosion and sedimentation by the retention of existing
vegetation and the minimization of development on steep slopes.
   G.   Create new woodlands through natural succession and reforestation where
appropriate and to encourage the preservation and improvement of habitat for
various forms of wildlife.
   H.   Provide for the creation, retention and protection of open land areas
within the Township.
   I.   Provide for the preservation and maintenance of open land within the
Township to achieve the above-mentioned goals and for active or passive
recreational use by residents.
   J.   Implement the goals of the Township's 2005 Open Space Environmental
Resource Protection Plan.
§ 255-206.   District established.
   A.   The Open Space Preservation District is an overlay district on those
parcels in the A Residential, A-1 Residential and A-2 Residential zoning
districts that are five acres or larger.
   B.   All property within the above-referenced districts used or intended to
be developed for residential purposes may comply with the provisions of this
article, rather than that of the underlying zoning district.
   C.   A tract of land to be developed shall be in single ownership or shall
be the subject of an application filed jointly by all the owners of the entire
tract , who shall stipulate that the entire tract will be developed in
accordance with the approved plan.
§ 255-207.   Permitted uses.
A building may be erected or used and a lot may be used or occupied only for
the following uses :
   A.   Single-family detached dwellings .
   B.   The following multiple dwellings :
      (1)   Twin dwelling .
      (2)   Duplex dwelling .
      (3)   Townhouse dwelling .
   C.   Apartment and other multifamily dwellings , as conversions of
structures built prior to 1940
   D.   Open land comprising a portion of a residential development , as
specified below and according to the requirements of §
255-210.
   E.   Open land  uses , primarily passive in nature, including wildlife
sanctuary, forest preserve, meadow, nature center and similar uses .
   F.   Parks and recreation areas for nonintensive uses , including golf
course (excluding driving range or miniature golf), picnic areas, playing
fields and similar uses .
   G.   Agriculture , including pasture for grazing
   H.   Accessory uses on the same lot with and customarily incidental to any
permitted use .
§ 255-208.   Application submission.
The initial application for a subdivision under the Open Space Preservation
District shall meet the Township's requirements for preliminary plans, as found
in the Subdivision and Land Development chapter. 41 The application shall also
document and provide the following:
   A.   Scenic road corridors. The plan shall graphically identify those road
corridors identified in the 2005 Open Space and Environmental Resource
Protection Plan that define the community's character and add visual diversity
and interest in the Township.
   B.   Yield map . A plan prepared in accordance with and in compliance with
the underlying zoning and subdivision regulations. This plan will document and
quantify the maximum permitted density on the tract . The level of detail
required for the yield plan shall be no more than would be required for a
tentative sketch plan submission.
§ 255-209.   General development standards.
The following standards shall apply to development in this district:
   A.   Density . The maximum number of lots and/or dwelling units developed in
an Open Space Preservation development shall be the density demonstrated on the
yield map plus 10%.
   B.   Natural features . The applicant shall establish that development
including site improvements , lot design and preservation area configuration,
protects natural features and environmentally sensitive areas in accordance
with applicable sections in
Chapter 206, Stormwater Management,
Chapter 212, Subdivision and Land Development, Article IV, Design Standards,
Chapter 240, Watercourses and
Chapter 255, Zoning, Article V, Steep Slope and Impervious Surfaces and Article
XXII, Floodplain Conservation District.
   C.   Perimeter setback. Structures shall be situated so as to maintain a
minimum setback from any tract property line of:
      (1)   Seventy-five feet for multiple-dwelling type developments or for
development applications with a mixture of dwelling types. This setback may be
reduced to 60 feet from the ultimate right-of-way of an adjoining street where
the setback area conserved is added to the area of the open space otherwise
required hereunder.
      (2)   Fifty feet for single-family detached dwellings .
   D.   Lot area ; setbacks; lot width. The applicant may, but shall not be
required to construct residential units on individual lots . Where residential
units are developed on individual lots , minimum lot areas , setbacks and lot
width shall not be required, provided that the minimum standards set forth
herein are met.
   E.   Building separation. Individual structures must have sufficient
separation to meet applicable fire protection codes, but in no case shall that
distance be less than 15 feet.
   F.   Floodplains , wetlands, and riparian corridors. No structure shall be
situated within 40 feet of a floodplain , wetland and/or riparian corridor,
except as permitted by
Chapter 255, Article XXII, Floodplain Conservation District.
   G.   Building length or depth. The greatest dimension in length or depth of
a new structure containing three or more dwelling units shall not exceed 120
feet. No more than four units shall be allowed in a new structure .
   H.   Access to common open space and preservation areas . All dwelling units
shall have access to common open space and preservation areas without the
obstruction of intervening lots , structures , fences or other impediments to
pedestrians.
   I.   A declaration of covenants shall be offered in recordable form, subject
to the approval of the Township Solicitor, binding all of the lots in the
development to the development limitations of this subsection and prohibiting
the subdivision of the tract into a greater number of lots .
   J.   Buffer requirements. Natural areas or buffers shall be required for all
proposed development in accordance with the requirements of §
212-32.
   K.   Detention, retention. Detention or retention areas, holding and
settlement ponds, and utility easements may be included as part of the common
open space but not counted towards the minimum required amount of preservation
area . Easements satisfactory to the Board of Commissioners shall be
established to enable maintenance of such facilities by the appropriate
parties.
§ 255-210.   Preservation area standards.
   A.   Each tract shall contain a preservation area to be included as part of
the common open space which shall meet the following minimum net area
requirements:
      (1)   Fifty percent when the preservation area is entirely contained on a
separate lot (s) not intended for residential development or on a single tract
containing the entire residential development .
      (2)   Sixty percent in all other cases.
   B.   Land designated as preservation area shall conform to the following:
      (1)   Preservation areas shall preserve and protect the tract's
significant natural features .
      (2)   No more than 75% of the preservation area shall be comprised of
designated flood hazard districts, wetlands or slopes of 25% or greater.
      (3)   Any area designated as a preservation area shall be no less than
one acre or less than 75 feet in width or have a ratio of the longest to
shortest dimension exceeding four to one, except areas which serve as public
pedestrian links. No structures or impervious surface shall be counted towards
the preservation area requirements.
      (4)   There shall be no more than three noncontiguous preservation areas
. (5) Preservation areas may be used for the following:
         (a)   Conservation of open land in its natural state (for example,
woodland, land under natural succession, fallow field or managed meadow).
         (b)   Passive recreation including, but not limited to, trails, picnic
areas, community gardens and lawn areas.
   C.   Design standards. Preservation areas shall be located and designed to:
      (1)   Protect natural features in compliance with the intent of this
article.
      (2)   Maximize common boundaries with open land on adjacent tracts .
   D.   Prohibited uses . The following are prohibited in open land areas:
      (1)   Use of motor vehicles except within approved driveways and parking
areas. Maintenance, law enforcement, and emergency vehicles are permitted, as
needed.
      (2)   Cutting of healthy trees, regrading, topsoil removal, altering,
diverting or modifying watercourses or bodies, except in compliance with a land
management plan for the tract in question conforming to customary and
applicable Township standards of forestry, erosion control and engineering.
   E.   Modification of natural features . Natural features shall generally be
maintained in their natural condition, but may be modified to improve their
appearance, functioning or overall condition, as recommended by experts in the
particular area being modified. Permitted modifications may include:
      (1)   Reforestation.
      (2)   Woodland management.
      (3)   Meadow management.
      (4)   Buffer area landscaping.
      (5)   Stream bank protections.
      (6)   Wetlands management.
§ 255-211.   Ownership and maintenance of common facilities and open land.
   A.   Purpose. To ensure adequate planning for operation and maintenance of
open land , recreation facilities, sewage facilities, water supply facilities,
stormwater management facilities, common parking areas and driveways, private
streets , and any other common or community facilities (hereinafter referred to
as common facilities ).
   B.   Ownership. The following methods may be used, either individually or in
combination, to own common facilities ; however, open land must be initially
offered for dedication to the Township. Common facilities shall not be
transferred to another entity except for transfer to another method of
ownership permitted under this section and then only when there is no change in
the common facilities or in the open space ratio of the overall development .
Ownership methods shall conform to the following:
      (1)   Fee simple dedication to the Township. Upper Dublin Township may,
but shall not be required to, accept any portion of the common facilities ,
provided that:
         (a)   Any common facilities shall be freely accessible to the
residents of the Township.
         (b)   There shall be no cost to the Township involved.
         (c)   The Township agrees to and has access to maintain such
facilities.
      (2)   Dedication of easements to the Township or County. Upper Dublin
Township or Montgomery County may, but shall not be required to, accept
easements for public use of any portion of the common facilities . In such
cases, the facility remains in the ownership of the individual or homeowners'
association while the easements are held in public ownership. The county shall
accept such easements only in accordance with Act 442, The Open Space
Acquisition Act or Act 992, Open Space Lands Act, and county plans. In
addition, the following regulations shall apply:
         (a)   There shall be no cost of acquisition to the Township or the
county.
         (b)   Any such easements for public benefit shall be accessible to the
residents of the Township.
         (c)   A satisfactory maintenance agreement shall be reached between
the owner and the Township or the county.
      (3)   Homeowners' association . Common facilities may be held in common
ownership by a homeowners' association , subject to all of the provisions for
homeowners' associations set forth in Article VII of the Pennsylvania
Municipalities Planning Code (Planned Residential Development). In addition,
the following regulations shall be met:
         (a)   The applicant shall provide to the Township a description of the
organization, including its bylaws, and all documents governing ownership,
maintenance and use restrictions for common facilities . These items must be
submitted to the Township prior to the issuance of any use and occupancy permit
.
         (b)   The homeowners' association shall be established by the owner or
applicant and shall be operating, with financial subsidization by the owner or
applicant, if necessary, before the sale of any dwelling units in the
development .
         (c)   Membership in the homeowners' association shall be mandatory for
all purchasers of dwelling units in the development and theft successors and
assigns.
         (d)   The homeowners' association shall be responsible for maintenance
and insurance of common facilities .
         (e)   Written notice of any proposed transfer of common facilities by
the homeowners' association or the assumption of maintenance for common
facilities must be given to all members of the homeowners' association and to
the Township no less than 30 days prior to such event.
         (f)   The homeowners' association shall have or hire adequate staff to
administer, maintain and operate such common facilities .
      (4)   Transfer to a private conservation organization. With permission of
the Township, an owner may transfer either the fee simple title, with
appropriate deed restrictions running in favor of the Township, or easements to
a private nonprofit conservation organization, provided that:
         (a)   The organization is acceptable to the Township and is a bona
fide conservation organization with perpetual existence;
         (b)   The conveyance contains appropriate provisions for proper
reverter or retransfer in the event that the organization becomes unwilling or
unable to continue carrying out its functions;
         (c)   A maintenance agreement acceptable to the Township is
established between the owner and the organization.
   C.   Maintenance and operation of common facilities .
      (1)   The applicant shall, at the time of preliminary plan submission,
provide a plan for maintenance and operation of common facilities . Such plan
shall:
         (a)   Define ownership.
         (b)   Establish necessary regular and periodic operation and
maintenance responsibilities.
         (c)   Estimate staffing needs, insurance requirements, and associated
costs and define the means for funding on an ongoing basis from year to year.
Such funding plan shall include means for funding long-term capital
improvements as well as regular yearly operating and maintenance costs.
         (d)   At the Township’s discretion, the applicant may be required to
escrow sufficient funds for the maintenance and operation costs of common
facilities for up to one year.
      (2)   Failure to maintain; corrective action.
         (a)   In the event that the organization established to maintain
common facilities , or any successor organization thereto, fails to maintain
all or any portion of the common facilities in reasonable order and condition,
the Township may, in accordance with Article VII of the Pennsylvania
Municipalities Planning Code (Planned Residential Development), assume
responsibility of maintenance, in which case any escrow funds may be forfeited
and any permits may be revoked or suspended.
         (b)   The Township may enter the premises and take corrective action.
The costs of such corrective action may be charged to the property owner or
homeowners' association and may include administrative costs and penalties as
stipulated in Article XXVI of this chapter. Such costs shall become a lien on
said properties. Notice of such lien shall be filed by the Township in the
office of the Prothonotary of Montgomery County.
§ 255-212.   Sewage and water facilities.
All development within the Open Space Preservation District shall be provided
with public water and sewage treatment services.
§ 255-213.   (Reserved)
§ 255-214.   (Reserved)
§ 255-215.   (Reserved)
ARTICLE XXIX
DO Dresher Overlay District
[Added 6-13-2000 by Ord. No. 1034; Amended 5-14-2013 by Ord. No. 13-1273, § 3]
§ 255-216.   Declaration of legislative intent.
The DO Dresher Overlay District is intended and designed to:
   A.   Provide the Dresher Triangle area of the Township with the ability to
incorporate a mix of new suitable land uses , for which the area is not
currently zoned.
   B.   Permit new development on vacant land and encourage the redevelopment
of existing structures in such a way as to create a transition in intensity
between existing residential and commercial uses .
   C.   Encourage development and redevelopment that can be accommodated by
existing structures , lot sizes, and other physical attributes of properties in
the district while preserving existing historic houses.
   D.   Incorporate architectural and site features such as central spaces in
the design that are pedestrian friendly and allow visitors to utilize and enjoy
the developed amenities and context of a village-like development . Features
that create a sense of place, focus, and organization to the development are
required.
   E.   Require that proposed structures relate harmoniously to one another,
the terrain, existing buildings , roads , and culturally significant features
on the site and in neighboring developments .
   F.   Encourage shared use of access driveways to reduce the number of
existing or future driveways and produce more efficient access.
   G.   Encourage parking in side or rear yard areas and encourage adjoining
properties to share parking.
   H.   Provide for sufficient and safe pedestrian access from street and
parking areas to various permitted uses , while striving to complete a
district-wide sidewalk network, it being the intent of this district to create
a pedestrian friendly area wherein all properties are accessible to one another
without the use of a motor vehicle.
   I.   Encourage attractive and appropriate landscaping throughout individual
parcels undergoing development and redevelopment, especially those bordering a
residential district.
§ 255-217.   Overlay.
The DO Dresher Overlay District shall be deemed an overlay on any zoning
district now or hereafter applicable to any lot located within the district.
The regulations, requirements and restrictions set forth in this article shall
apply to all uses and development in the DO Dresher Overlay District in
addition to those regulations, requirements and restrictions applicable to the
underlying zoning district. Where the provisions of this article and the
provisions in the underlying zoning district conflict, the provisions of this
article shall apply.
§ 255-218.   Uses.
In the DO Dresher Overlay District the following regulations shall apply:
   A.   Permitted uses . All uses permitted in the underlying districts shall
be permitted in accordance with the regulations of the underlying districts.
   B.   Conditional uses . A building may be erected, altered or used and a lot
or premises may be used for any of the following uses , in lieu of a use
permitted in the underlying district, when authorized by the Board of
Commissioners as a conditional use in accordance with all use and dimensional
regulations contained in this section and all other applicable zoning ordinance
requirements:
      (1)   Residential conversion .
      (2)   Bed and breakfast inn .
      (3)   Professional office or cultural studio .
      (4)   Child and/or adult day care facility.
      (5)   Senior assisted living or personal care facility .
      (6)   Library, educational or religious facility.
      (7)   Retail and commercial establishments to include the following and
no other:
         (a)   Retail sale of household merchandise and personal effects such
as dry goods, variety and general merchandise, clothing, prepared and packaged
food, flowers, beverages, pharmaceuticals and medical supplies, household
supplies and furnishings, jewelry, optical goods, small electronics, musical
items, and antiques. Grocery stores are permitted only in commercially-zoned
areas of the Dresher Overlay. Specialty food shops or delicatessens with some
grocery items are permitted.
         (b)   Restaurant , café, coffee shop, café, bakery, cheese shop,
confectionary or similar establishment for serving food and beverages. Outdoor
dining that does not reduce walkways, plazas, or parking spaces .
         (c)   Bank and financial institution (without drive-thru).
         (d)   Drive-thru lanes and windows for pick-up of prescription
medications and other medical supplies only.
         (e)   Personal care to include barber shop, hairdresser, clothes
cleaning, tailoring, nail care, and spa or personal fitness center, not to
exceed 7,500 sq. ft.
      (8)   Mixed uses in a building integrating one or more of those retail
and commercial uses set forth in paragraph (7) above on the first floor with
residential use or office use or a mix of them on the upper floors.
§ 255-219.   Use and dimensional requirements.
   A.   The following regulations shall be applicable to all uses and
development in the DO Dresher Overlay District, except if noted otherwise:
      (1)   All development must be served by public water and sewer service.
      (2)   All utility lines serving the proposed development must be placed
underground from the edge of the right-of-way to the place of service.
      (3)   Buffer requirements. Where any proposed development other than
single family detached dwelling or residential conversion abuts an existing
detached single family residential district or use outside of the Dresher
Overlay District, a screen buffer shall be provided that will be a minimum of
50 feet in width and shall include a mixture of deciduous trees and shrubs at a
ratio of no less than two trees and six shrubs per 100 feet of property
boundary opaque fences with landscape as specified above shall be permitted as
an element of the screen buffer. These shall be included in the landscape plan
submitted with the plan set.
      (4)   No individual building shall have a gross building area greater
than 15,000 square feet, except as noted in §
255-219C(8).
      (5)   Architectural guidelines. In consideration of the special nature of
that part of the Township encompassed within the Dresher Overlay District, the
following regulations shall apply to the erection, construction and alteration
of structures :
         (a)   The appearance of flat roofs shall be prohibited on one-story
buildings but are allowed on buildings of two stories or more, provided that
all visibly exposed walls have an articulated cornice that projects
horizontally from the vertical building wall plane. Architectural
embellishments that serve a function and add visual interest to roofs, such as
dormers, masonry chimneys, cupolas, towers, and other similar elements shall be
included in the design of buildings . Gable roofs shall have a minimum pitch of
9/12. Hipped roofs shall have a minimum pitch of 6/12. Both gable and hipped
roofs shall provide overhanging eaves on all sides extending a minimum of one
foot beyond the building wall. Roof top mechanical systems must be screened by
architectural features. Solar panels must be integrated into the building and
roof design.
         (b)   Facades. A building ’s primary front facade shall be located
along the main roadway frontage and designed with clear windows, public access
points and signage. Multi-story buildings shall articulate the line between the
ground and upper levels with a cornice, canopy, arcade, or other visual device.
         (c)   Fenestration shall be architecturally compatible with the style,
materials, colors, and details of the building . Windows shall be vertically
proportioned wherever possible. The ground floor of the primary front facade(s)
shall contain a minimum of 20% windows with a maximum of 60%; windows shall not
be tinted, unless for purposes of energy conservation, or be of reflective
glass.
         (d)   To the extent possible, upper story windows shall be vertically
aligned with the location of windows and doors on the ground level, including
storefront or display windows. Upper stories of a primary front facade, except
those floors used for residential purposes, shall contain a minimum of 20%
windows with a maximum of 40%; windows shall not be tinted unless for purposes
of energy conservation nor shall they be of reflective glass.
         (e)   Windowless walls, if visible from a right-of-way or vehicular or
pedestrian circulation area, are prohibited unless the construction of a blank
wall is necessitated by local building codes, in which case the wall should be
articulated by one or more of the following: details in masonry courses; the
provision of blank window openings trimmed with frames, sills, and lintels; or,
if the building is occupied by a commercial use , recessed or projecting
display window cases.
         (f)   Materials. Exterior wall material may be a combination of brick,
architectural or real stone, stucco, concrete and/or wood siding .
            1)   The following building materials are prohibited: exterior
insulation and finishing systems (EIFS), aluminum or vinyl siding; T-111 or
similar plywood siding.
            2)   Except on rear walls, not visible from any public way, all
forms of visible concrete masonry units shall be prohibited.
            3)   All exposed concrete walls shall be stuccoed or painted.
Painted concrete block may not exceed 36 inches in height above the ground.
         (g)   The maximum height of any building constructed under these
overlay regulations shall be 35 feet, except as noted in §
255-219C(8).
         (h)   Architectural embellishments that add interest to the side and
rear elevations of buildings shall be encouraged. To discourage long, straight
expanses of side and rear walls, buildings may encroach up to 25% of the
required rear or side yard so long as the average set back of that face of the
building is not less than the required set back for that yard .
         (i)   All ground-mounted exposed HVAC units or other utility equipment
shall be screened from view. This shall be done through the use of masonry
walls and landscaping.
         (j)   The Board of Commissioners may, by conditional use , approve the
use of architectural concepts and designs which differ from those set forth
above, if the applicant demonstrates to the satisfaction of the Board that such
concepts and designs are in furtherance of the legislative intent of this
article and the intent of this subsection.
      (6)   Signs . Signs shall be of muted color and shall not be internally
illuminated. Signs anchored in the ground shall not exceed 10 feet in height.
In all other respects, signs shall comply with uses identified in Article XXI.
      (7)   Bicycle storage. Sufficient area for the storage of bicycles shall
be provided as approved by the Township Engineer, including racks or other
permanently affixed storage devices to accommodate one bicycle for each five
required vehicular parking spaces , at a minimum. Bicycle storage facilities
may be held in reserve upon approval of the Township Engineer upon a finding
that the requirements set forth herein exceed the foreseeable need therefore.
   B.   Conditional use standards. All conditional use applications shall be
filed and processed in compliance with Article XXV. In addition, applicants
shall demonstrate compliance with the following:
      (1)   Retention and use of existing principal buildings constructed prior
to 1900:
         (a)   The proposed use shall retain and use the existing principal
building (s) on the lot when compatible with the use proposed, and shall retain
the general appearance, character, and types of building materials of the front
and side facades of the existing building , existing front and side porches,
and window openings.
         (b)   Expansion shall be permitted only to the sides and rear of the
existing principal building .
            1)   Expansion to the side or rear shall conform in general
appearance, scale, and building materials to the front facade of the existing
building .
            2)   Rooflines shall be similar or complimentary to those of the
existing building .
         (c)   The applicant shall submit architectural drawings for evaluation
of the proposed principal building expansion, including building elevations and
colored renderings. The Board of Commissioners may approve expansion different
from the existing building , provided that it complements the existing building
and does not detract from the intent of this article to enhance the district’s
appearance.
         (d)   Existing, healthy, mature trees shall be preserved in the front
and side yards unless they must be removed to provide vehicular access
appropriate for the proposed use .
      (2)   Traffic control. The conditional use application shall be
accompanied by a transportation impact study and parking analysis as provided
in §
212-35.1. The study shall set forth the improvements needed to provide for the
safe, efficient and orderly movement of traffic and shall be subject to the
approval of the Township Engineer.
         (a)   Uses conditionally permitted shall provide shared access, access
easements, cross easements, driveway interconnections, shared parking, and
parking easements with other uses on the same tract , and, where feasible on
adjoining tracts in order to facilitate the objectives of this district.
         (b)   Access easements and maintenance agreements or other suitable
legal mechanisms shall be provided, acceptable to the Board of Commissioners in
consultation with the Township Solicitor.
         (c)   When it is not yet appropriate to construct driveway
interconnections, shared access or shared parking, access easements shall be
set aside for future use.
      (3)   Applicant shall provide appropriate transit shelters for
integration with public or private transit services.
   C.   Regulations applicable to specific permitted conditional uses listed in
§
255-218. These regulations are in addition to those otherwise applicable to
such uses .
      (1)   Residential conversion . The conversion of a single-family dwelling
into a dwelling for a greater number of families shall be permitted by
conditional use , rather than special exception , subject to the requirements
of §
255-19(B)–(G).
      (2)   Bed and breakfast inn . The use of an existing detached dwelling
for the accommodation of transient guests shall be permitted subject to the
following requirements:
         (a)   The minimum lot area shall be 30,000 sq. ft.
         (b)   There shall be no external alteration of the building except as
may be necessary for safety considerations. Exterior stairways shall be
located, whenever practicable, to the rear of the building .
         (c)   There shall be no separate cooking facilities in any guest room.
      (3)   Professional office, cultural studio  uses . The professional
office of a practitioner licensed by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania as a
doctor, lawyer, dentist, psychologist, psychiatrist, engineer, architect,
accountant or a rabbi, priest or minister affiliated with a religious
institution or the cultural studio of an artist or musician shall be permitted
subject to the following regulations:
         (a)   The front yard shall have a minimum depth of 20 feet.
         (b)   Two side yards shall be provided, each of which shall have a
minimum width of 20 feet.
         (c)   The rear yard shall have a minimum depth of 50 feet.
         (d)   Maximum building coverage shall be 40%.
         (e)   Maximum impervious coverage shall be 60%.
         (f)   If an existing structure is being converted to professional
office or cultural studio  use , the character of the existing building shall
be maintained.
      (4)   Licensed day-care center shall be permitted subject to the
following regulations:
         (a)   The minimum lot area shall be 30,000 sq. ft.
         (b)   The front yard shall have a minimum depth of 20 feet.
         (c)   Two side yards shall be provided, each of which shall have a
minimum width of 20 feet.
         (d)   The rear yard shall have a minimum depth of 50 feet.
         (e)   Maximum building coverage shall be 40%.
         (f)   Maximum impervious coverage shall be 60%.
         (g)   An outdoor recreation area shall be provided with a minimum area
of 200 sq. ft. per child and 100 sq. ft. per disabled or elderly person . This
area shall be located to the side or rear of the lot and shall not include
parking or driveway areas. A softening buffer shall be maintained between the
recreational area and adjacent properties pursuant to §
212-32F(2).
         (h)   Sufficient facilities for the safe and orderly loading and
unloading of passengers as approved by the Township Engineer shall be provided.
      (5)   Senior assisted living residence or personal care facility . Either
is permitted, but both shall be subject to the parking, buffering, residence
regulations and general requirements of §
255-90.1, and subject to the following regulations:
         (a)   The minimum lot area shall be 40,000 sq. ft.
         (b)   The front yard shall have a minimum depth of 40 feet.
         (c)   Two side yards shall be provided, each of which shall have a
minimum width of 30 feet.
         (d)   The rear yard shall have a minimum depth of 50 feet.
         (e)   Maximum building coverage shall be 40%.
         (f)   Maximum impervious coverage shall be 60%.
         (g)   Up to 25% of the allowable density may be set aside for use as
nursing beds, when permitted by conditional use .
      (6)   Library, educational, or religious facility. Public libraries;
licensed public, private, or religious schools (excluding commercial trade
schools ); and places of worship or religious instruction are permitted subject
to the following regulations:
         (a)   The minimum lot area shall be 80,000 sq. ft., with a minimum lot
width of 200 feet.
         (b)   The front yard shall have a minimum depth of 60 feet.
         (c)   Two side yards shall be provided, each of which shall have a
minimum width of 50 feet.
         (d)   The rear yard shall have a minimum depth of 50 feet.
         (e)   The maximum building coverage shall be 40%.
         (f)   The maximum impervious coverage shall be 60%.
         (g)   Outdoor recreational areas for use by students shall be provided
on the same lot as the building housing the use . Any recreational structures
shall be set back a minimum of 50 feet from any property line. A softening
buffer shall be maintained between any recreational area and adjacent
properties pursuant to §
212-32F(2).
      (7)   Retail and commercial uses as defined in §
255-218 shall be permitted subject to the following regulations, except as
noted in §
255-219B(7)(g):
         (a)   The front yard shall have a minimum depth of 40 feet measured
from the ultimate right of way of every adjacent street (s) and from the curb
of every adjacent private street /driveway.
         (b)   Two side yards shall be provided, each of which shall have a
minimum width of 50 feet, except, where they abut an existing single-family
detached residential use outside the Dresher Overlay, they must be 75 feet.
         (c)   The rear yard shall have a minimum depth of 50 feet, except,
where the rear property line is shared with an existing single-family detached
residential use outside the Dresher Overlay, it must be 75 feet.
         (d)   Maximum building coverage shall be 10%, except in the case of a
mixed use  building (s).
         (e)   Maximum impervious coverage shall be 60%.
         (f)   Hours of operation open to the public shall be limited to a
period from 6:30 a.m. to 11:00 p.m. seven days per week.
         (g)   Hours of operation open to the public of a retail establishment
that sells pharmaceuticals, medical supplies and similar products shall be
limited to a period of 7:00 am to 10:00 pm seven days a week.
      (8)   Mixed use as defined in §
255-218 shall be permitted subject to the following regulations:
         (a)   The front yard shall have a minimum depth of 40 feet.
         (b)   Two side yards shall be provided, each of which shall have a
minimum width of 50 feet, except where they abut an existing single-family
detached residential use outside the Dresher Overlay they must be 75 feet.
         (c)   The rear yard shall have a minimum depth of 50 feet, except
where it abuts an existing single-family detached residential use outside the
Dresher Overlay it must be 75 feet.
         (d)   The maximum building coverage shall not exceed 17% of the lot
area . The commercial and retail component business establishment on the first
floor shall be limited to 15,000 sq. ft. The maximum building height shall not
exceed 39 feet and shall be limited to 3 stories. The maximum residential
density shall not exceed 10 dwelling units per acre. Such buildings that
incorporate a green roof on at least 50% of the roof area are permitted to add
building coverage up to 3% of the lot area , but not to exceed 20% total
building coverage . Any green roof installed under these provisions must be
fully functioning and may not be removed, as established by a covenant.
         (e)   The minimum dwelling unit sizes shall be:
 
One bedroom   1,000 sq. ft.
Two bedroom   1,500 sq. ft.
Three bedroom 2,000 sq. ft.
 
         (f)   Maximum impervious coverage shall be 60%.
§ 255-220.   Vehicular access.
   A.   Each lot shall not have more than one curb cut per street frontage for
a two-way driveway for vehicular access. If sufficient room is not available
for one two-way driveway, the Board of Commissioners may approve two curb cuts
for two one-way driveways, subject to approval by PennDOT where required.
   B.   Applicants shall seek agreements for shared vehicular access as the
preferred means for reducing the total number of curb cuts within the district
for traffic safety and congestion reasons.
      (1)   When two or more abutting lots share an access driveway, that
driveway shall be designed as the main access to those lots , and one or more
existing access driveways shall be closed.
      (2)   Where development of three or more adjoining parcels consolidates
vehicular access into one shared driveway, that driveway shall be upgraded into
a medium volume driveway according to PennDOT standards.
      (3)   Shared access may be located entirely on one lot or be split along
a common lot line .
   C.   Driveway widths, grades, and setbacks from intersections shall be
regulated by §
212-16 of the Subdivision and Land Development Code [
Chapter 212].
§ 255-221.   Parking.
   A.   Parking capacity shall comply with the standards of Article XIX.
   B.   Shared parking shall be utilized where feasible and where staggered
periods of use are achievable, thereby permitting the amount of unused
impervious surfaces to be reduced. Shared parking may be located along or
across a common lot line . The required aggregate parking capacity may be
reduced up to 50% by the Board of Commissioners and held in reserve, where
shared parking allows greater efficiency for the uses proposed, subject to
review and recommendation by the Township Engineer. Regardless of the number of
spaces actually developed, a parking area to accommodate the aggregate number
of parking spaces normally required shall be fully designed and the area which
is proposed to be eliminated shall be shown on the land development plan as
“parking reserve area.” The parking reserve area shall be planted with
vegetative cover and integrated into the site’s landscaping plan. Such area
shall be required to be developed as designed if and when the Zoning Officer
determines the need therefor. Storm sewer and stormwater management must be
based on the required parking per §
255-135 as if the reserve parking were constructed.
   C.   Parking is encouraged behind principal buildings where possible;
however, parking in the front yard setback shall be permitted only under the
following conditions:
      (1)   Parking shall be set back a minimum of 15 feet from the street
curb, and a maximum of two parallel rows of parking may be provided.
      (2)   Parking is partially screened by dense landscaping, such as hedges
that do not block sight distance at the driveway entrance.
   D.   Parking spaces and driveways shall be set back a minimum of five feet
from rear and side property lines abutting nonresidential uses within the DO
Dresher Overlay District unless parking is shared with an abutting lot , in
which case parking may abut or cross the property lines shared by the common
users.
   E.   Parking spaces and driveways within the DO Dresher Overlay District
shall be set back a minimum of 50 feet from rear and side property lines
abutting existing detached single-family residential uses or districts, except
when the abutting properties are located within the Dresher Overlay District.
   F.   Parking spaces shall be set back a minimum of five feet from all
buildings .
§ 255-222.   Landscaping and buffer requirements.
   A.   Landscaping. All areas of a developed or redeveloped lot not covered by
building and/or impervious paving materials shall be maintained as landscaped
areas containing trees, shrubs and ground cover materials.
      (1)   Buffers. A softening buffer shall be maintained between parking
lots and side and rear property lines pursuant to §
212-32.F(2), except as follows:
         (a)   Along side or rear property lines the buffer shall be a minimum
width equal to the required parking setback from the property line.
         (b)   Buffer planting is not required along those segments of lot
lines where shared access and/or shared parking are located.
   B.   All other landscaping and buffering standards shall be satisfied in
accordance with §
212-32 of the Subdivision and Land Development Code [
Chapter 212], except as noted herein.
§ 255-223.   Lighting.
Lighting shall comply with the provisions of §
158-14, as well as the following:
   A.   Lighting facilities shall not produce any glare, or hazardous
interference on abutting properties or highway.
   B.   Glare control shall be accomplished through the selection and
application of lighting equipment, including shields.
   C.   All lighting shall be directed away from residential properties.
   D.   Light fixtures shall be located at least twenty feet from a residential
district.
   E.   Light fixtures shall not be located higher than 12 feet above grade.
   F.   Light fixtures in parking lots shall be installed within a raised
landscape island.
   G.   Lighting shall be on timers, sensor and/or motion detectors to allow
parking lot lighting in all or portions of the parking lots to be turned off or
reduced as required.
§ 255-224.   Refuse disposal areas.
   A.   Trash and refuse shall be stored inside the building or within a
secured, enclosed, opaque screened area. Such screening shall be at least six
feet in height to shield the use .
   B.   Screened refuse areas shall be located a minimum of 25 feet from all
property lines and at least 75 feet from the property line of a detached
single-family residential use located outside of the Dresher Overlay District.
   C.   Where possible, refuse areas shall be centrally located for the joint
use of tenants.
ARTICLE XXX
EC Overlay District
[Added 4-9-2002 by Ord. No. 1082]
§ 255-225.   Declaration of legislative intent.
The EC Overlay District is intended and designed to provide for the inclusion
of those lawful land uses in the Township not otherwise provided for in the
Zoning Code.
§ 255-226.   Overlay.
The EC Overlay District shall be deemed an overlay on any zoning district now
or hereafter applicable to any lot located within the District. The
regulations, requirements and restrictions set forth in this article shall
apply to all uses and development in the EC Overlay District in addition to
those regulations, requirements and restrictions applicable to the underlying
zoning district. Where the provisions of this article and the provisions in the
underlying zoning district conflict, the more restrictive provisions shall
apply.
§ 255-227.   Uses.
In the EC Overlay District, the following regulations shall apply:
   A.   Permitted uses . All uses permitted in the underlying district shall be
permitted in accordance with the regulations of the underlying district.
   B.   Conditional uses . A building may be erected, altered or used and a lot
or premises may be used for any lawful nonresidential purpose not otherwise
permitted in the Township pursuant to this chapter, and not specifically
prohibited in the underlying zoning district, in lieu of a use permitted in the
underlying district, when authorized by the Board of Commissioners as a
conditional use in accordance with all use and dimensional regulations
contained in the underlying district and all other applicable requirements of
this Code.
§ 255-228.   Use and dimensional requirements.
   A.   The following regulations shall be applicable to all uses and
development in the EC Overlay District:
      (1)   All development must be served by public water and sewer service.
      (2)   All utility lines serving the proposed development must be placed
underground from the edge of the right-of-way to the place of service.
   B.   Conditional use applications. All conditional use applications shall be
filed and processed in compliance with Article XXV. In addition, applicants
shall submit the following information at the time conditional use application
is made:
      (1)   A transportation impact study and parking analysis as provided in §
212-35.1. The study shall set forth the improvements needed to provide for the
safe, efficient and orderly movement of traffic, including ingress and egress
to and from the site, and shall be subject to the approval of the Township
Engineer.
      (2)   A community impact analysis shall be submitted containing the
following information:
         (a)   The compatibility of the proposed development with land uses
that are adjacent to the site.
         (b)   The impact of the proposed development on sensitive natural
areas, including floodplains , steep slopes, woodlands, recreational areas and
conservation areas.
         (c)   The impact of the development on public utilities, including
sewage disposal, storm drainage and electrical utilities and the provision of
police and fire protection.
         (d)   Documentation of on-site or off-site improvements proposed to
alleviate any projected negative impacts of the development .
      (3)   A tentative sketch plan with sufficient data to document compliance
with the standards and criteria of the applicable Township codes.
   C.   Conditional use standards. Applicants shall have the burden to prove
the following to the satisfaction of the Board of Commissioners:
      (1)   That satisfactory provisions will be made to prevent traffic
congestion on surrounding streets from which access to the site will be gained.
Provisions shall be made which will assure the safe and efficient ingress and
egress to and from the development .
      (2)   That the applicant has provided for adequate parking facilities to
accommodate 125% of the largest number of anticipated vehicles that will occupy
the site at any one time, regardless of the specific provisions of the parking
requirements of this chapter. The Board of Commissioners may require a number
of spaces equal to 15% of such requirement to be held in reserve for future
improvement , provided such spaces are set forth on applicant's development
plan. The location and design of parking areas shall be in harmony with
preserving the general appearance and character of the area.
      (3)   That the use will not generate excessive noise, noxious odors, air
pollution, light pollution or glare, or result in pedestrian-vehicular conflict
or other safety hazards to people or property. Artificial light shall be
directed away from adjacent property, buildings and streets . Outdoor
recreation facilities shall only be permitted where the noise generated by the
use will have a minimal impact on adjacent properties and where no hazards will
be caused that will impact adjacent properties.
      (4)   Outdoor storage, waste disposal and loading areas shall be screened
from streets and adjacent uses . All such activities must be located to the
rear of any structures on the property.
      (5)   That the scale, form and appearance of any structures on the
property and the open space associated with such structures will be compatible
with the general character of the structures in the underlying zoning district.
      (6)   That no signage or lighting will be permitted which will distract
drivers on adjacent streets .
      (7)   That appropriate transit shelters will be provided to integrate
with public or private transit services.
      (8)   That the proposed use of the property will not add to the volume or
intensity of stormwater leaving the site.
      (9)   That an emergency evacuation plan designed by the applicant will be
adequate to enable all persons who may be using the site at a given time to
vacate the property in an orderly manner should a one-hundred-fifty-year-rated
storm occur.
§ 255-229.   (Reserved)
ARTICLE XXXI
MG Maple Glen Overlay District
[Added 9-14-2004 by Ord. No. 1136]
§ 255-230.   Legislative intent.
The MG Maple Glen Overlay District is intended and designed to:
   A.   Create a center for Maple Glen by enhancing and improving the
pedestrian-friendly streetscape image of the village center through roadway
improvements , sidewalk improvements , landscaping, building facade
enhancements, and new infill buildings .
   B.   Provide the Maple Glen area of the Township the ability to incorporate
new suitable land uses , for which the area is not currently zoned.
   C.   Promote new development on vacant land and encourage the redevelopment
of existing structures to create a traditional village town center with
development patterns that maintain the adjacent neighborhood  building scale ,
are pedestrian-oriented, compact in size and are sensitive to placement that
will encourage customers to park once and walk to multiple businesses.
   D.   Promote development and redevelopment that creates links to adjacent
residential neighborhoods with pedestrian paths, focal points, gathering places
and inviting green areas that provide visual and environmental amenities for
the community
   E.   Require the shared use of access driveways to reduce the number of
existing or future driveways and their related congestion.
   F.   Encourage parking in the side or rear yard areas and shared parking
facilities. Permit off-site parking to count towards a development's minimum
parking requirement.
   G.   Require sufficient, safe and inviting pedestrian access from the street
to the various uses and their related parking, while striving to create a
district-wide streetscape character. Establish a pedestrian-friendly village
setting where all properties arc accessible to each other without the need of a
motor vehicle.
   H.   Require architectural and landscape design, standards that develop a
village theme for the Maple Glen Village District and ensure that there is an
appropriate transition between development in accordance with the provisions of
this overlay and surrounding residential neighborhoods .
§ 255-231.   Applicability.
The MG Maple Glen Overlay District shall be deemed an overlay on any zoning
district now or hereafter applicable to any lot located within the District.
Property may be developed either under the provisions of the underlying
district or under the provisions of the MG Maple Glen Overlay District except
for the design regulations, which shall be applicable to all nonresidential
development in this District. Where the provisions of this article and the
provisions in the underlying zoning district conflict, the provisions of this
article shall apply.
§ 255-232.   Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
   ACCESSWAY — A formalized path, walkway or other physical connection that
allows pedestrians to directly reach destinations.
   BUFFER — A buffer is used for planting and screening between residential and
nonresidential zoning districts and it is also used to separate areas used by
pedestrians from those designed primarily for vehicular use . The buffer is a
also a shield to block light, noise and other nuisances.
   BUILDING SCALE — The relationship between the mass of a building and its
surroundings, including the width of street , nearby open space and the mass of
buildings on adjacent properties. Mass is determined by the three-dimensional
bulk of a structure : height, width and depth.
   CLEAR WINDOW — The amount of glass surface of a window that allows 100%
visual permeability .
   DRIVE-THROUGH FACILITY — Facilities allowing transactions for goods or
services without leaving a motor vehicle.
   FALSE ELEMENTS — Design features that are decorative and serve no functional
purpose.
   FITNESS CENTER — A place, building or portion of a building where passive or
active exercises and related activities are performed for the purpose of
physical fitness, improved circulation or flexibility and/or weight control.
The activities shall be conducted entirely within an enclosed building and be
operated for profit or not for profit and which can be open only to bona fide
members and guests of the organization or open to the public for a fee.
   LOGGIA — A roofed, but open arcade along the front or side of a building on
an upper story .
   MIXED USE — Development contained within a single parcel or within a master
plan development (horizontally or vertically), which contains different land
use categories. No one use may utilize more than 66% of the building area , and
the uses shall provide a variety of peak hour pedestrian and vehicular activity
times.
   PARKING, OFF-STREET — Marked or unmarked parking located within a parcel and
outside a private or public right-of-way .
   PARKING, ON-STREET — Marked or unmarked parking located outside of a parcel
and within a private or public right-of-way .
   PEDESTRIAN-ORIENTED DESIGN — The design of communities, neighborhoods ,
streetscapes, sites and buildings that emphasizes pedestrian access, comfort
and visual interest.
   PEDESTRIAN-ORIENTED STREET — A street where adjacent uses generate and
encourage foot traffic.
   PEDESTRIAN SCALE — The size and proportion of a physical element that
closely relates to the human body, e.g., a sixteen-foot lamppost vs. a thirty-
foot lamppost, and a facade with vertically oriented framed windows vs. a
facade with a continuous and unarticulated window wall.
   PEDESTRIANWAY — A linear space or an area where the primary users are
pedestrians and that may also accommodate bicyclists.
   PRIMARY FRONT FACADE — The facade of a building facing onto a public or
private street or pedestrian accessway .
   REDEVELOPMENT — The improvement of a building and/or parcel requiring land
development approval.
   SHARED PARKING — Parking that is utilized by two or more uses taking into
account the variable peak demand times of each use ; the uses can be located on
more than one parcel.
   STORY — The distance in a structure between the upper surface of a floor and
the upper surface of the floor or roof next above, generally between 10 feet
and 14 feet.
   VISUAL PERMEABILITY — The ability of vertical surfaces to allow viewers to
see through to the other side, e.g., windows and open fences.
§ 255-233.   Uses.
In the MG Maple Glen Overlay District, the following uses and no other shall be
permitted as indicated, either as a single use within a building or as one of
several mixed uses within a building . Multiple buildings are permitted on a
single parcel.
   A.   Permitted uses , any floor:
      (1)   Retail sale/loan of dry goods, books, variety and general
merchandise, clothing, food, flowers, beverages, drugs, household supplies or
furnishings, antiques, art galleries and picture framing, sale or repair of
jewelry, watches, clocks, optical goods, musical, professional or scientific
products, small-scale hardware and any other use of the same general character;
      (2)   Restaurant , tearoom, cafe, taproom, confectionary, bakery or
similar establishment producing and serving food or beverages to be sold at
retail on the premises;
      (3)   The following personal service shops, dealing directly with retail
customers: barbershop, beauty parlor, cleaner (provided that no flammable
fluids are used), cobbler, millinery, seamstress, spa, tailor or upholstery
shop;
      (4)   Travel agent, real estate agency;
      (5)   Bank or financial institution;
      (6)   Exercise gym or fitness center; or
      (7)   Post office or municipal use .
   B.   Permitted uses , second floor and above:
      (1)   Residential units.
      (2)   Business or professional office, cultural studio and insurance
agencies.
      (3)   Club , fraternal organization or lodge.
      (4)   Billiard room or similar place of amusement.
      (5)   Educational, religious or philanthropic use .
   C.   Provided all other applicable regulations in this article have been
met, an individual structure with a building area greater than 8,000 square
feet must be reviewed and approved by the Board of Commissioners as a
conditional use .
§ 255-234.   Dimensional regulations.
   A.   Right-of-way . The ultimate right-of-way applicable to the Table of
Dimensional Regulations below shall be that set forth on the Township Street
Map. For primary access driveways, the right-of-way shall have a width of 58
feet.
   B.   Table of Dimensional Regulations
 
Minimum Net    Maximum         Maximum      Maximum        Minimum Yards
Lot Area       Building Height Impervious   Individual     Front  Side   Rear
(acres)        (7) (feet)      Surface      Building Area  (rear) (rear) (rear)
                               (percentage) (square feet)
less than 1    35              80%          6,000          0 (1)  0 (2)  0 (2)
1 - 2          35              75%          10,000         0 (1)  0 (2)  0 (2)
greater than 2 35              65%          14,000         0 (3)  0 (4)  0 (4)
- 5
greater than 5 35              55%          18,000         0 (5)  0 (6)  0 (6)
 
Footnotes to Table of Dimensional Regulations:
   (1)   A minimum of 90% of the building facade shall be located at the
ultimate right-of-way .
   (2)   When adjacent to a residentially zoned and used property, the minimum
setback shall be 35 feet.
   (3)   A minimum of 70% of the building facades shall be located within 10
feet of the ultimate right-of-way .
   (4)   When adjacent to a residentially zoned and used property, the minimum
setback shall be 45 feet.
   (5)   A minimum of 50% of the building facades shall be located within 10
feet of the ultimate right-of-way .
   (6)   When adjacent to a residentially zoned and used property, the minimum
setback shall be 55 feet.
   (7)   Two and one half stories are permitted, provided the building height
does not exceed 35 feet.
§ 255-235.   Design regulations.
The following design regulations shall apply to the construction and alteration
of any structure in the Maple Glen Overlay District:
   A.   Intent. It is the intent of this article to discourage the creation of
suburban strip commercial centers and to encourage the design and placement of
buildings providing an attractive and functional appearance that is inviting to
pedestrian use .
   B.   General standards. All new and rehabilitated buildings shall comply
with the following standards:
      (1)   All uses shall be served by public water and sewer service.
      (2)   All utility lines serving all uses shall be placed underground from
the edge of the right-of-way to the place of service.
      (3)   Drive-through windows are prohibited for all uses within the
District.
      (4)   A building's primary front facade shall be designed with clear
windows , public access points and signage.
      (5)   The facade treatment of walls facing residential uses or
residential zoning districts shall be similar to the primary front facade .
      (6)   All buildings shall provide clear windows along the ground floor of
the primary front facades .
         (a)   Required clear window areas must be designed to allow views into
working areas or lobbies, pedestrian entrances or merchandise display areas.
      (7)   A building's public access points shall be articulated and visible
from the street .
         (a)   Building entrances shall incorporate arcades, roofs, porches,
alcoves and awnings that protect pedestrians from the sun and rain.
         (b)   If the building has frontage on more than one street , the
building shall provide public access points oriented towards both streets or a
single access point to the corner where two streets intersect.
      (8)   Driveways, parking areas and traffic circulation patterns shall be
designed as shared facilities whenever feasible. The design of these elements
shall create a unified site plan between lots . The goal is to gain parking
efficiencies, reduce the number of access points and improve internal and
external vehicular circulation patterns.
   C.   Building design.
      (1)   Building placement. All buildings must be placed in accordance with
the minimum requirements of Subsection B above. All buildings must be placed to
encourage continuous uninterrupted pedestrian accessways that link windows and
doorways.
      (2)   Building frontages. Multistory buildings shall articulate the line
between the ground and upper levels with a cornice, canopy, balcony, arcade or
other visual device.
         (a)   The ground floor of the primary front facade (s) shall contain
an average of 60% clear windows and doors.
            [1]   The maximum sill height above the adjacent sidewalk elevation
shall be two feet or lower.
            [2]   Lintels shall be nine feet to 12 feet above sidewalk level.
            [3]   The top of the display window shall be at least as high as
door height.
         (b)   Blank walls, if visible from a right-of-way or accessway , shall
be articulated by one or more of the following:
            [1]   Details in masonry courses.
            [2]   The provision of blank window openings trimmed w/frames,
sills and lintels.
            [3]   If the building is occupied by a commercial use , recessed or
projecting display window cases.
         (c)   Upper stories of a primary front facade , except those floors
used for residential purposes, shall contain an average of 40% clear windows .
            [1]   Clear window openings shall be vertical, at least twice as
high as the width of those openings.
            [2]   To the extent possible, upper story windows shall be
vertically aligned with the location of windows and doors on the ground level,
including storefront or display windows.
      (3)   Building massing. The mass of a building or buildings shall be dc-
emphasized in a variety of ways, including the use of projecting and recessed
elements such as porches, windows and roof dormers, to reduce their apparent
overall bulk and volume, to enhance visual quality and contribute to human-
scaled development .
         Such breaks in the facades and rooflines shall occur not more
frequently than every 50 feet nor less frequently than every 100 feet.
         (a)   Building length. Multiple buildings fronting on a street shall
vary in building length. The maximum average building length shall not exceed
120 feet.
         (b)   Building forms. While architectural features are permitted,
structural building components shall have some use . False elements such as
empty gables, dormers or blank windows are prohibited.
            [1]   Where an existing building is to be reused and is
nonconforming to these design requirements, every effort shall be made to
change the detail of the roofline and to enhance canopy, window and door
treatments to achieve the design goals set forth in this section.
         (c)   Building area . Where there are multiple buildings on a site,
the average building area shall not exceed 8,000 square feet.
      (4)   Roof design. The roof shall be designed with either overhanging
eaves or cornices on all sides extending a minimum of 12 inches beyond the
building wall,
         (a)   A variety of ridge heights and/or dormers, masonry finished
chimneys and cupolas shall be included in the design of the buildings .
         (b)   Except for porch roofs, all gable roofs shall have a minimum
pitch of 9/12 (vertical/horizontal) and all hipped roofs shall have a minimum
pitch of 6/12.
         (c)   Roofing materials shall vary on buildings to feature porches,
cupolas or bay windows.
            [1]   Roof material may include fiberglass architectural shingles
that represent slate or wood, natural slate, shakes, shingle (either wood or
asphalt composition) and metal formed to resemble "standing seams."
Specifically prohibited are white, tan or blue shingles, red clay tiles and
corrugated plastic or metal.
            [2]   Fascias, dormers and gables or similar architectural features
shall be employed to provide visual interest.
         (d)   Flat roofs shall be prohibited.
      (5)   Awnings, canopy or porches. All buildings shall have any of the
following: permanent porches, canopy, arcade or retractable cloth awnings to
protect pedestrians along the fronting sidewalk. Awnings intended primarily as
signs are prohibited. No permanent porch or canopy shall be permitted to
encroach into a dedicated right-of-way .
         (a)   The farthest extension of a ground floor awning and/or canopy
shall be no less than three feet and no more that seven feet. The farthest edge
of the awning may be no closer than 12 inches to the curb.
         (b)   Ground floor awnings and canopies shall terminate no less than
18 inches below the second floor windowsills.
         (c)   The height of ground floor awnings and canopies shall not exceed
15 feet above pavement and shall be below the cornice or frieze.
         (d)   All ground floor awnings and/or canopies shall be retractable.
The minimum height from the bottom of the frame to the sidewalk is seven feet.
The minimum height from the bottom of the canvas awning valance to the sidewalk
shall be six feet nine inches.
         (e)   Fixed awnings may be used above the first story , provided they
project no more than four feet maximum.
         (f)   Awnings shall have side flaps.
      (6)   Building materials. Exterior wall material may be a combination of
split face aggregate block or brick of a consistent or complementary shape,
color and texture as that found within the adjacent neighborhood ,
architectural or real stone, stucco and concrete or wood siding. Windows shall
have detailed mullions and shutters with hardware when these architectural
features are employed.
         (a)   The following building materials are prohibited: exterior
insulation and finishing systems (Eifs); aluminum or vinyl siding and shutters;
white, tan or painted brick; T-111 or other similar plywood siding.
         (b)   Except on rear walls not visible from any public way, all forms
of concrete block shall be prohibited.
         (c)   Metal buildings are prohibited.
   D.   Signs . The provisions of Article XXI shall apply in the Maple Glen
Overlay District, except as set forth below.
      (1)   Intent.
         (a)   Signs must accomplish all of the following:
            [1]   They must be clearly visible to the pedestrian shopper;
            [2]   They must be sufficiently legible to the passing motorist;
and
            [3]   They must create, as a group, a vibrant and varied character
that complements and enhances the varied buildings and unifies the streetscape
within the village.
         (b)   Signs shall be designed to be complementary in their use of
color, shape, similar themes and/or logos to create an overall theme for the
Maple Glen village center and maintain continuity throughout the district.
         (c)   If signs are illuminated, only external lighting shall be
permitted.
         (d)   No sign shall be placed within a sight triangle area.
      (2)   The following standards apply to all uses within the overlay
district:
         (a)   Permitted permanent building  signs . Only one of the following
shall be permitted per use per building facade:
            [1]   Projecting signs . No portion of a projecting sign may extend
more than four feet from the building facade. A clear space of not less than
eight feet shall be provided below all parts of the projecting sign . The sign
may be no greater than six square feet.
            [2]   Signs painted on shop windows or other types of window
graphics are permitted, provided they do not take up more than 30% of the clear
window surface, and provided the minimum clear window requirement is met.
            [3]   Fire resistant cloth awnings may be used for signs , provided
the text is located on the vertical face of the awning flap.
               [a]   Numbers and letters shall be no taller than six inches.
               [b]   Plastic, backlit awning signs are prohibited.
               [c]   Business logos or emblems are permitted on the top or
angled portion of the awning up to a maximum of three square feet. No more than
one emblem or logo is permitted on an awning.
            [4]   Wall signs are permitted, provided:
               [a]   They do not exceed five percent of the wall area.
               [b]   They do not extend past the roof eaves.
               [c]   They do not block windows or hide cornices and other trim.
            [5]   Signs hanging behind the store window shall not reduce the
visual permeability of street-facing windows to less than the minimum clear
window requirement.
            [6]   Building  sign and location approval. All permanent building
 signs shall be approved by the Code Enforcement Official in accordance with
the above and following criteria:
               [a]   Signs shall not hide architectural features.
               [b]   Signs shall be in proportion with the architecture of the
building and the scale of the pedestrian shopping street , yet visible to a
passing motorist.
               [c]   Signs shall use colors that are vivid, varied and
interesting, and legible while compatible with the colors of the building .
         (b)   Permitted temporary signs . A sidewalk sandwich board shall be
permitted in addition to the above signs , provided
            [1]   The sign face is no larger than four square feet per side;
            [2]   It is located directly in front of the store; and
            [3]   It will not create an obstruction to pedestrian traffic.
         (c)   Permitted freestanding signs .
            [1]   Freestanding signs are permitted by conditional use to
identify an individual building with a building area greater than 10,000 square
feet. However, there shall be only one freestanding sign for each property's
street frontage. The area of a freestanding sign shall be no larger than 25
square feet per side, with a maximum height of 14 feet.
            [2]   Kiosk signs are permitted by conditional use . They shall
include an updated map of the Maple Glen shopping area and a directory of all
uses within the Maple Glen area. The sign shall be pedestrian oriented and
constructed in accordance with guidelines approved by the Township.
            [3]   Directory signs are permitted by conditional use . They may
be installed in lieu of a freestanding sign . These signs shall be a low
pedestrian-oriented monument sign no higher than 12 feet or an area no greater
than 25 square feet.
   E.   Accessibility standards.
      (1)   Pedestrian accessibility. Direct pedestrian access from the
adjoining residential neighborhoods and adjacent commercial sites shall be
provided by sidewalks built within the road rights-of-way and public access
easements.
      (2)   Pedestrian crosswalks shall be designed with curb bump outs to
facilitate nonvehicular movement, Crosswalks shall utilize differentiated
material from the cartway to alert drivers to pedestrians in the area.
   F.   Parking intent and standards. When there is more than one building on a
lot and/or within a development , the total amount of required parking shall be
divided into discrete sections. Smaller parking areas shall be located along
the side and/or behind individual buildings . The buildings shall be accessible
to pedestrians from all parking areas. Entrance drives and aisles within a
parking area may be multifunctional, serving for both pedestrian and vehicular
access and providing a limited amount of parking.
      (1)   Required parking. Minimum parking requirements shall be calculated
utilizing the standards set forth in Article XIX.
      (2)   Shared access. All developments shall provide for future access to
adjacent properties. Access agreements for shared vehicular access shall be
sought as the preferred means for reducing the total number of curb cuts within
the district. Documentation confirming the ownership and/or management
arrangement shall be submitted to the Board of Commissioners with the
application for land development approval.
      (3)   Parking setbacks.
         (a)   There shall be no minimum side or rear yard parking setback for
a parcel(s) being developed in accordance with these overlay provisions if that
parcel is adjacent to a nonresidentially zoned and/or used property.
         (b)   When a property being developed in accordance with these overlay
provisions is adjacent to a residentially zoned and/or used property, there
shall be a minimum setback of 35 feet from the residential property line.
         (c)   From the ultimate right-of-way the parking setback shall be 10
feet.
         (d)   Parking shall be set back a minimum of five feet from any
building . This area shall be used for pedestrian accessways and planting beds.
      (4)   Parking location. Surface parking lots shall be located behind or
to the side of the principal buildings to the greatest extent possible.
         (a)   If surface parking is visible from the street frontage, then a
fence, wall or plantings shall be provided to maintain the street edge and to
buffer views of the parked cars.
            [1]   In no case shall surface parking lots occupy more than 1/3 of
the parcel's frontage along a pedestrian-oriented street or street segment.
            [2]   Parking areas shall be buffered from any adjacent accessway
by street trees and by a four-foot-wide landscaped area with a continuous row
of two-to-three-foot-high shrubs, fence or seating wall.
      (5)   Shared parking . Required parking may be located along or across a
common lot line , provided both properties are commercially zoned and/or are
developed in accordance with the Maple Glen Overlay District regulations. The
Board of Commissioners may, by conditional use , reduce the total amount of
required parking by up to 25%, provided the applicant demonstrates that the
number of Code-required parking spaces exceeds the actual development needs
given the proposed mix of uses and varied peak activity times.
      (6)   On-Street parking . Provided the new or rehabilitated building or
buildings complies with the design standards included within the Maple Glen
Overlay District, legal on-street parking along the parcel's street frontage
may be counted towards the minimum required number of parking spaces . The
Township Traffic Engineer shall approve any on-street parking proposed for the
development .
   G.   Streetscape  improvements .
      (1)   Public street  improvements . All new developments and renovations
shall incorporate streetscape  improvements in accordance with the provisions
of §
212-15B, subject to the approval of PennDot.
      (2)   Sidewalks shall be designed in accordance with the provisions of §
212-18E, subject to the approval of PennDot.
      (3)   All driveways shall have concrete aprons to continue the sidewalk
across the driveway or nondedicated street onto a property.
      (4)   Pedestrian crosswalks shall be differentiated to stand out from the
vehicular cartway at all intersections by using a variety of materials,
including stamped concrete.
      (5)   Streetlights shall be placed at a minimum of 80 feet on center
along all sidewalks. Streetlight fixtures shall be as required in §
212-29, or an approved equal.
      (6)   The street furniture, such as receptacles, benches, bollards, etc.
shall be as required in §
212-29 or an approved equal.
   H.   Landscaping and buffering.
      (1)   Refuse facility. All trash refuse and recycling facilities shall be
indoors or maintained in a common trash facility that is totally screened with
masonry walls with wooden gates that are a minimum of eight feet in height.
Such refuse areas shall be located at least 100 feet from any adjacent
residential use , and they may not be located in front of the buildings .
      (2)   Buffer requirements. When any proposed mixed-use or nonresidential
development abuts a residential us; a screen buffer , as required in
Subdivision and Land Development Code, §
212-32F(3), shall be provided. In addition:
         (a)   There shall be a solid six-foot tall fence with a mixture of
evergreen landscaping to create a solid visual barrier that will grow to 12
feet high within three years.
         (b)   If required by the Board of Commissioners, safe, comfortable and
inviting access between the residential neighborhood and the development site
shall be created by providing a gate in the fence and an improved pathway
through the buffer plantings.
      (3)   Parking lot landscaping. Subdivision and Land Development Code §
212-32F(4) shall be met.
   I.   Loading.
      (1)   Areas used for loading or trash receptacle purposes proximate to
residential uses /zoning districts shall be screened from view. Noise, sound
and odors associated with these uses shall not be discernable at the property
line.
      (2)   Buildings and structures , excluding parking structures , must
provide adequate area for loading/unloading entirely within the property lines
of the premises.
§ 255-236.   Conditional use standards.
All conditional use applications shall be filed and processed in compliance
with Article XXV. In addition, applicants shall demonstrate compliance with the
following:
   A.   Existing conditions analysis. All existing trees over six inches in
caliper shall be shown on the plan.
   B.   Architectural characteristics. The applicant shall submit drawings to
demonstrate compliance with the standards, including building elevations,
colored renderings and signage.
   C.   Traffic control. The conditional use application shall be accompanied
by a transportation impact study, parking analysis and pedestrian analysis as
further provided in §
212-35.1.
      (1)   New applications shall provide shared access, access easements,
cross easements, driveway interconnections, shared parking and parking
easements with other properties in order to facilitate the objectives of this
District.
      (2)   Access easements and maintenance agreements or other suitable legal
mechanisms shall be provided, acceptable to the Board of Commissioners.
      (3)   When it is not yet appropriate to construct driveway
interconnections, shared access or shared parking , access easements shall be
set aside for future use .
ARTICLE XXXII
JT Jarrettown Village District
[Added 4-19-2005 by Ord. No. 1150]
§ 255-237.   Legislative intent.
The Jarrettown Village District is intended and designed to:
   A.   Apply only to properties that contain existing historic resources as
determined by the Board of Commissioners.
   B.   Require the preservation of existing historic buildings by permitting
their renovation and adaptive reuse for a variety of residential and
nonresidential uses and by providing a variety of incentives to preserve
existing historic buildings .
   C.   Provide for the creation of a pedestrian-friendly village center
composed of limited commercial and office uses as well as residential uses ,
all of which are compatible with the existing residential neighborhood .
   D.   Provide regulations that permit infill development at a scale and
intensity that is appropriate for surrounding neighborhoods , in an
architectural style that is compatible with existing historic buildings .
   E.   Require building additions to be to the rear or side of existing
structures and to reflect the design elements of existing structures with
respect to massing, texture, building materials, color, and fenestration.
   F.   Require buffering and landscaping to protect adjacent residential
neighborhoods .
§ 255-238.   Applicability.
   A.   The Jarrettown Village District shall be deemed an overlay on any
zoning district now or hereafter applicable to any lot located within the
District, provided that lot contains a historic resource , as determined by the
Board of Commissioners.
      (1)   The Jarrettown Hotel, situated at the intersection of Jarrettown
Road and Limekiln Pike, was built in 1847. It served the community as a hotel
for more than 125 years and currently operates as a restaurant . It is an
established and familiar visual feature within Jarrettown. This well known
landmark has significant character, interest and value as part of the
development , heritage and cultural character of Upper Dublin Township.
Therefore, the Board of Commissioners designates the Jarrettown Hotel as the
primary historic resource on North Limekiln Pike. As such, any development of
this parcel under the provisions of this overlay district must retain and
preserve this structure in its entirety.
      (2)   According to historic records, just east of the Jarrettown Hotel on
the same property there was barn barn or large shed. In 1896, a tornado
severely damaged the original structure , collapsing a wall and the roof. The
existing stone stable/barn is larger than the original structure and is
believed to have been rebuilt after that time. Therefore, the Board of
Commissioners designates the existing barn /stable as a contributing resource
on North Limekiln Pike. As such, any development of this parcel under the
provisions of this overlay district must retain and preserve the facade of the
structure visible from the public right-of-way , that being the northeast and
northwest facades.
   B.   Criteria for designation. A building , structure or site, or a complex
of the same, may be placed on the Historic Resource Inventory if it meets any
three or more of the following criteria:
      (1)   Has significant character, interest or value as part of the
development , heritage or cultural characteristics of the Township, county,
region, commonwealth or nation, or is associated with the life of a person
significant in the past;
      (2)   Is associated with an event of importance to the history of the
Township, county, region, commonwealth or nation;
      (3)   Embodies an icon associated with an era characterized by a
distinctive architectural style;
      (4)   Embodies distinguishing characteristics of an architectural style
or engineering specimen;
      (5)   Is the noteworthy work of a designer, architect, landscape
architect or designer, or engineer whose work has significantly influenced the
historical, architectural, economic, social, or cultural development of the
Township, county, region, commonwealth or nation
      (6)   Contains elements of design, detail, materials or craftsmanship
which represent a significant innovation;
      (7)   Is part of or related to a commercial center, park, community or
other distinctive area which should be preserved according to a historic,
cultural or architectural motif;
      (8)   Owing to its unique location or singular physical characteristic,
represents an established and familiar visual feature of the neighborhood ,
community or Township;
      (9)   Has yielded, or may be likely to yield, information important in
pre-history or history; or
      (10)   Exemplifies the cultural, political, economic, social or
historical heritage of the community.
   C.   Where the provisions of this article and the provisions in the
underlying zoning district conflict and the property owner has elected to
develop the property in accordance with the Village District requirements, the
provisions of this article shall apply.
§ 255-239.   Uses.
In the Jarrettown Village District, a property may be used as permitted in the
underlying zoning district. Alternatively, the following uses and no others
shall be permitted as indicated either as a single use within a building or as
one of several uses within a building . Multiple buildings are permitted on a
single parcel.
   A.   Permitted uses . The following uses are permitted on lots which have
existing historic buildings :
      (1)   Retail sale/loan of dry goods, books, variety and general
merchandise, clothing, food, flowers, beverages, drugs, household supplies or
furnishings, antiques, art galleries and picture framing, sale or repair of
jewelry, watches, clocks, optical goods, musical, professional or scientific
products, small scale hardware, and any other use of the same general
character.
      (2)   Restaurant , tearoom, cafe, taproom, confectionary, bakery, or
similar establishment producing or serving food or beverages.
      (3)   The following personal service shops dealing directly with retail
customers: barbershop, beauty parlor, cobbler, millinery, seamstress, spa,
tailor or upholstery shop.
      (4)   Travel agent, real estate agency, cultural studio , or professional
medical office.
      (5)   Business or professional office, or insurance agencies, but not on
the ground floor of any building .
      (6)   Exercise gym or yoga studio, provided it does not exceed 30% of the
ground floor area.
      (7)   Bed-and-breakfast inn .
      (8)   Multiple dwelling .
      (9)   Hotel with no more than 10 rooms.
§ 255-240.   Dimensional regulations.
   A.   Right-of-way . The ultimate right-of-way applicable to the Table of
Dimensional Regulations below shall be that set forth on the Township Street
Map.
   B.   Table of Dimensional Regulations.
 
                                    Maximum          Minimum Yards (feet)
Minimum Net Lot Maximum    Maximum  Individual
Area            Impervious Building Building         Front Side Rear
                Surface    Coverage Coverage (square
                                    feet)
Less than 1     75%        15%      5,000            15    10   20
acre
1 to 2 acres    70%        20%      8,000            15    10   25
Greater than 2  65%        25%      11,000           15    10   35
acres
 
   C.   Dimensional regulations for all lots .
      (1)   Maximum building height: Three stories are permitted, provided the
building height does not exceed 35 feet.
      (2)   The front yard setback shall be measured from the ultimate right-
of-way of the street .
      (3)   The maximum front yard setback shall be 25 feet.
      (4)   When a side or rear lot line abuts a property that is in
residential use , that side or rear yard setback shall be increased by 10 feet.
      (5)   The maximum impervious surface coverage may be increased by 5% over
the square footage otherwise permitted on any lot in this District, provided
that 100% of the stormwater generated by the additional impervious surface
during a one-hundred-year storm is recharged.
§ 255-241.   Design regulations.
The following design regulations shall apply to the construction of new
structures and alterations to any existing structure in the Jarrettown Village
District:
   A.   General standards. All new and rehabilitated buildings shall comply
with the following standards:
      (1)   All uses shall be served by public water and sewer service.
      (2)   All utility lines serving all uses shall be placed underground from
the edge of the right-of-way to the place of service.
      (3)   Drive-through windows or uses are prohibited.
      (4)   A buildings primary front facade shall contain window space, public
access points and signage. Windows shall be vertically proportioned wherever
possible. To the extent possible, upper-story windows shall be vertically
aligned with the location of windows and doors on the ground level, including
storefront or display windows.
      (5)   The facade treatment of walls facing residential uses or
residential zoning districts shall contain windows. The walls and fenestration
shall be architecturally compatible with the style, materials, colors and
details of the building .
      (6)   A building's public access points shall be articulated and visible
from the street . If the building has frontage on more than one street , the
building shall provide public access points oriented towards both streets or a
single access point to the corner where two streets intersect.
      (7)   Driveways, parking areas and traffic circulation patterns shall be
designed as shared facilities whenever feasible, in order to reduce the total
number of curb cuts within the District.
         (a)   All developments shall provide for future access to adjacent
properties.
         (b)   Documentation confirming the ownership and/or maintenance
arrangements shall be submitted to the Township with the application for land
development approval.
         (c)   The design of these elements shall create a unified site plan
between lots .
      (8)   Exterior site lighting shall be designed to prevent glare onto
adjacent properties and onto roadways and shall minimize the view of lights and
fixtures from adjacent properties and roadways.
         (a)   Lighting shall be designed to limit both light trespass onto
adjacent residential properties and light pollution into the sky.
         (b)   The illumination level shall be no more than 0.3 footcandle
measured either vertically or horizontally at a height of five feet above grade
from adjacent residential properties.
         (c)   Lighting shall be designed to shield the source of illumination
and to prevent glare on adjacent residential properties through the use of
either cutoff- or full cutoff-type luminaries and low brightness light sources.
   B.   Building design. The following provisions apply to additions to
existing buildings and to new construction .
      (1)   Building placement: All buildings must be placed to encourage
continuous uninterrupted pedestrian accessways that link windows and doorways.
      (2)   Building frontages: Multistory buildings shall articulate the line
between the ground and upper levels with a cornice, canopy, balcony, arcade, or
other visual device.
         (a)   The ground floor of a primary front facade are recommended to
contain between 40 and 75% clear windows and doors.
         (b)   Windowless walls, if visible from a right-of-way or accessway,
are prohibited unless the construction of a blank wall is necessitated by local
building codes, in which case the wall shall be articulated by one or more of
the following: details in exterior materials such as masonry courses, scoring
in stucco, blank window openings, etc., or recessed or projecting display
cases.
      (3)   Building massing: The mass of a building or buildings shall be
deemphasized in a variety of ways, including the use of projecting and recessed
elements such as porches, windows and roof dormers, to reduce their apparent
overall bulk and volume, to enhance visual quality and contribute to human-
scaled development .
         (a)   Such breaks in the facades and rooflines are recommended to
occur no more frequently than every 25 feet, nor less frequently than every 100
feet.
         (b)   Building length: Multiple buildings fronting on a street shall
vary in building length. The maximum average building length shall not exceed
150 feet on each lot .
      (4)   Roof design:
         (a)   The roof shall be designed with either overhanging eaves,
bargeboards or cornices on all sides, or other architectural elements
appropriate to the period of the historic resource .
         (b)   Roofing materials shall vary on buildings so that porches,
cupolas, or bay windows are featured.
         (c)   Roof material may include fiberglass architectural shingles that
represent slate or wood, natural slate, shakes, shingle (either wood or asphalt
composition) and metal formed to resemble "standing seams." Specifically
prohibited are white, tan or blue shingles, red clay tiles, and corrugated
plastic or metal.
         (d)   Flat roofs shall be prohibited from the main massing of one-
story buildings .
         (e)   Flat roofs may be used on buildings of two or more stories. In
these instances, all visibly exposed walls shall have parapet walls or
articulated cornices that project horizontally from the vertical building wall
plane.
      (5)   Awnings, canopy or porches: All buildings are encouraged to have
permanent porches, canopies, arcades or retractable cloth awnings to protect
pedestrians along the fronting sidewalk.
         (a)   Awnings intended primarily as signs are prohibited. However,
signs are permitted as accessory to the awning when located on the valance and/
or sides of the awning.
         (b)   No permanent porch or canopy shall be permitted to encroach into
a dedicated right-of-way .
         (c)   No canopy or awning shall interfere with the function of any
pedestrian or vehicular accessway.
      (6)   Building materials: Exterior wall material shall be of a consistent
or complementary material, shape, color and texture as that of the historic
resource on the property.
   C.   Signs . The provisions of Article XXI shall apply in the JT Jarrettown
Village District, except as set forth below.
      (1)   General standards.
         (a)   Signs shall be designed to be complementary in their use of
color, shape, similar themes and/or logos to create an overall theme for the
Jarrettown Village District and maintain continuity throughout the District.
         (b)   If signs are illuminated, only external lighting shall be
permitted.
         (c)   No sign shall be placed within a sight triangle area.
         (d)   Signs shall not hide architectural features of buildings , nor
shall they interfere with pedestrian or vehicular access on the site or within
the right-of-way .
         (e)   Signs shall be in proportion with the architecture of the
building and the scale of the pedestrian, yet visible to a passing motorist.
      (2)   The following standards apply to all uses within the overlay
district:
         (a)   Permitted permanent building  signs : Only one of the following
sign types shall be permitted per use on a building :
            [1]   Projecting signs . No portion of a projecting sign may extend
more than four feet from the building facade. A clear space of not less than
eight feet shall be provided below all parts of the projecting sign . The sign
may be no greater than 15 square feet.
            [2]   Signs painted on shop windows or other types of window
graphics are permitted, up to 30% of the clear window surface.
            [3]   Fire-resistant cloth awnings may be used for signs , provided
the text is located on the vertical face of the awning flap. Business logos or
emblems are permitted on the top or angled portion of the awning up to a
maximum of eight square feet. One emblem or logo is permitted per awning.
            [4]   Wall signs are permitted, provided they do not exceed 10% of
the wall
area, do not extend past the roof eaves and do not block windows.
         (b)   Building  sign and location approval: All permanent building
 signs shall be approved by the Code Enforcement Official in accordance with
the criteria of this District.
         (c)   Permitted temporary signs : A sidewalk sandwich board shall be
permitted in addition to the above signs , provided the sign face is no larger
than four square feet per side and it is located directly in front of the
store.
         (d)   Permitted freestanding signs .
            [1]   Kiosk signs are permitted in multitenanted buildings . They
shall include an updated map of the Jarrettown area and a directory of all uses
. The sign shall be pedestrian-oriented.
            [2]   One freestanding sign and one directory sign per lot are
permitted. Such freestanding or directory signs shall be monument signs no
higher than 10 feet nor greater than 40 square feet.
   D.   Pedestrian accessibility standards.
      (1)   Pedestrian accessibility: Sidewalks shall be constructed along all
street frontages and across major access driveways.
      (2)   Pedestrian crosswalks across public streets shall be designed with
curb bump outs to facilitate nonvehicular movement.
      (3)   Crosswalks across public streets and major access driveways shall
utilize differentiated material or color and texture from the cartway as well
as appropriate signage and other pavement markings to alert drivers to
pedestrians.
      (4)   Parking areas shall contain dedicated and articulated pedestrian
accessways.
   E.   Parking intent and standards.
      (1)   Required parking: All buildings and uses shall comply with the
parking requirements of Article XIX of this chapter.
      (2)   Parking setbacks:
         (a)   Parking shall be set back a minimum of 10 feet from all property
lines and the ultimate right-of-way line . This setback may be eliminated in
the case of shared parking between two adjacent properties developed in
accordance with this District. When the side or rear lot line abuts a property
that is in single-family detached residential use , a six-foot privacy fence
and a substantial vegetated buffer shall be provided, designed to create a
visual shield between the properties.
         (b)   Parking shall be set back a minimum of five feet from any
building .
         (c)   The area between parking and lot lines , right-of-way lines, and
buildings shall be used for pedestrian accessways and planting beds.
      (3)   Parking location and design.
         (a)   Large parking areas shall be divided into smaller sections.
         (b)   Surface parking lots shall be located behind or to the side of
the principal buildings to the greatest extent possible.
         (c)   If surface parking is visible from the street frontage, then
plantings shall be provided to maintain the street edge and to buffer views of
the parking.
         (d)   Parking areas shall be buffered from any adjacent accessway by
street trees and by a four foot wide landscaped area with a continuous row of
two- to three-foot-high shrubs, fence or seating wall.
         (e)   The buildings shall be directly accessible to pedestrians from
all parking areas.
         (f)   Entrance drives and aisles within a parking area may be
multifunctional, serving for both pedestrian and vehicular access and providing
a limited amount of parking.
      (4)   On-street parking. For new or rehabilitated buildings in compliance
with the design standards of this District, legal on-street parking along the
property frontage may be counted toward the minimum required number of parking
spaces , subject to the approval of the Township Traffic Engineer.
   F.   Streetscape  improvements :
      (1)   Public street  improvements : All new developments and renovations
shall incorporate streetscape  improvements , including sidewalks, in
accordance with the Township Subdivision and Land Development Code. 48
      (2)   Crosswalks at all public intersections shall be installed using
stamped concrete or some other construction materials to differentiate them
from the road and drive aisles.
      (3)   Streetlights shall be placed at a minimum of 80 feet on center
along all sidewalks and shall use fixtures that are compatible with the
historic character of Jarrettown. In addition, pedestrian light fixtures shall
be installed along all pedestrian facilities, including sidewalks, internal
walkways, stairways, etc.
      (4)   Street furniture, such as benches, receptacles, and bollards, etc.,
shall comply with the standards contained in the Township Subdivision and Land
Development Code, §
212-29.
   G.   Landscaping and buffering.
      (1)   Refuse facility: All trash refuse and recycling facilities shall be
indoors or maintained in a common trash facility that is totally screened with
masonry walls with wooden gates. Such refuse areas shall be located at least 25
feet from any adjacent property that is residentially used and may not be
located in front of the buildings .
      (2)   Buffer requirements: When any proposed mixed-use or nonresidential
development abuts a lot containing a residential use , a screen buffer, as
required in §
212-32F(3) of the Township Subdivision and Land Development Code shall be
provided, with the following exceptions:
         (a)   A screen buffer shall not be required along a common property
line if the two properties have a shared access driveway, shared parking, or
other shared facilities.
         (b)   A screen buffer shall be 10 feet in width.
         (c)   If required by the Board of Commissioners, safe, comfortable and
inviting access between the adjacent residential neighborhood and the
development site shall be created by providing an improved pathway through the
buffer plantings.
   H.   Loading:
      (1)   All buildings and uses shall provide adequate areas for loading and
unloading entirely within the lot lines .
      (2)   Loading areas near residential uses and/or zoning districts shall
be screened from view in compliance with the provisions of this chapter and the
Township Subdivision and Land Development Code.
48. Editor's Note: See
Ch. 212, Subdivision and Land Development.
§ 255-242.   Development standards.
All applications shall be filed and processed in compliance with Article XXV.
In addition, applicants shall demonstrate compliance with the following:
   A.   Existing conditions analysis: All existing trees over six inches in
caliper shall be shown on the plan. Healthy mature trees shall be preserved to
the greatest extent possible and incorporated into the development's site plan.
   B.   Architectural characteristics: The applicant shall submit drawings with
the application to demonstrate compliance with the standards, including
building elevations, colored renderings, and signage.
   C.   Traffic control: The preliminary land development application shall be
accompanied by a transportation impact study, parking analysis, and pedestrian
analysis as further provided in §
212-35.1 of the Township Subdivision and Land Development Code.
      (1)   New applications shall provide shared access, cross-access
easements, driveway interconnections, shared parking and parking easements with
other properties in order to facilitate the legislative intent of this
District.
      (2)   Access easements and maintenance agreements or other suitable legal
mechanisms shall be provided, acceptable to the Board of Commissioners.
      (3)   When it is not yet appropriate to construct driveway
interconnections, shared access or shared parking, access easements shall be
set aside for future use .
      (4)   The number of vehicle trips shall be limited to 750 per day for
each driveway. If a driveway serves two or more properties, the number of
vehicle trips shall be limited to 750 per day times the number of properties
served. If a driveway intersects with a public street at a signalized
intersection, the limitation on the number of vehicle trips per day shall be
increased by 375 vehicle trips for each additional use category on a lot .
   D.   Village characteristics. The design of any development proposed for the
Jarrettown Village District shall have a compact building and site layout that
has a pedestrian orientation (i.e., the mass, scale and placement of buildings
, pathways and gathering spaces is such that people perceive themselves to be
in an outdoor "room").
      (1)   Pedestrian spaces, including gathering areas and linkages, shall be
physically and/or visually separated and differentiated from vehicular spaces
to create a feeling of comfort and perception of safety.
      (2)   The site layout shall provide direct, convenient and safe
pedestrian access to the lot and to and between uses on the lot .
      (3)   The village design shall create an orderly mix of compatible and
complementary land uses that meet the needs of area residents, and conform to
all of the applicable requirements of this chapter.
   E.   Preservation of historic resource . The applicant shall submit with its
application for land development a form of facade easement/preservation
covenant providing for the historic resource and the facade of any contributing
resource on the property to be preserved in perpetuity. The Board of
Commissioners may approve the land development plan subject to alterations in
the form of the easement or covenant, the final form of which shall be subject
to the approval of the Township Solicitor. The final land development plan and
the easement or covenant shall be recorded at the same time with the Recorder
of Deeds, Norristown, PA.
ARTICLE XXXIII
FW Ft. Washington Village District
[Added 2-13-2007 by Ord. No. 1182]
§ 255-243.   Legislative intent.
In addition to the purpose set forth in §
255-2 of Article I of this chapter, this article is intended to recognize the
unique characteristics of a portion of the Ft. Washington area of Upper Dublin
Township, designated in this Code as the FW Ft. Washington Village District
(FWVD). The FWVD lies between Pennsylvania Avenue, a primary, state owned
arterial, on the south, and a quiet, single-family residential neighborhood on
the north. Within this area lies one of the oldest properties in the Township
as well as several other colonial era buildings . The Fort Washington train
station, an express stop along the commuter rail line leading into
Philadelphia, is one block south of the FWVD in Whitemarsh Township. The vision
for the Fort Washington station area is for it to become a pedestrian-oriented
mixed-use village center. Therefore, to remain vital, the provisions of the
FWVD must take advantage of and compliment the train station area and serve as
a transitional zone, buffering the adjacent residential neighborhood to the
north from the major transportation corridor existing along Pennsylvania
Avenue. More specifically, the intent of this overlay district is to:
   A.   Use scale, building orientation and landscaping to establish community
identity.
   B.   To allow and encourage a mix of residential and appropriate commercial
uses within a structure , property or a single development .
   C.   Encourage the preservation and reuse of the historic structures in the
district.
   D.   Establish appropriate design standards to protect the quality and
character of the surrounding neighborhood .
   E.   Help foster bicycle and pedestrian accessible development , reflecting
a pedestrian oriented village center rather than an auto-oriented commercial
strip.
   F.   Prohibit retail/commercial uses that are typically high volume traffic
generators, contain excessive amounts of paved areas and numerous access
points, and do not contribute to the historic character of the district.
   G.   Provide incentives that encourage shared access points, parking areas
and public-spaces.
   H.   Protect, to the greatest extent possible, the natural features of the
district including the open space, steep slopes and large trees.
§ 255-244.   District established.
[Amended 8-11-2020 by Ord. No. 20-1361, § 2]
   A.   The FWVD shall be deemed an overlay on any zoning district now or
hereafter applicable to any lot located within the District. The regulations,
requirements and restrictions set forth in this article are mandatory and
subdivision /land development applications within the overlay district shall
comply with requirements of this article in lieu of the underlying zoning
district, unless approved by conditional use .
   B.   The design regulations in §
255-246.1 (in the case of a Senior Assisted Living Residence) and §
255-247 of the FWVD shall apply to those exterior building  improvements
requiring a Township building  permit .
§ 255-245.   Conditional use development.
   A.   Authorization to develop a property in accordance with the provisions
of the underlying zoning district (conventional development ), rather than the
FWVD, may be granted by the Board of Commissioners as a conditional use
pursuant to Article XXV of this Chapter, provided the applicant demonstrates:
      (1)   Compliance with the standards and criteria set forth in §
255-194.
      (2)   That conventional development will achieve the FWVD development
goals and standards set forth in this article to a degree equal to or greater
than development under the FWVD regulations would permit.
   B.   A land development proposing an individual structure with a gross floor
area greater than 4,000 square feet is only permitted by conditional use of the
Board of Commissioners.
   C.   A Senior assisted living residence is permitted by conditional use
pursuant to the terms of Chapter 255, Article XXV and Article XXXIII, §
255-246.1 and §
255-252.
§ 255-246.   Use regulations.
[Amended 12-9-2025 by Ord. No. 25-1408, § 2].
In the FWVD, the following uses and no others shall be permitted as indicated,
either as a single use within a building or as one of several mixed uses within
a building . Multiple buildings are permitted on a single parcel.
   A.   Permitted uses .
      (1)   Multiple-dwellings , provided no one structure has more than 12
units.
      (2)   Live/work units for artisans, professionals and service providers,
etc., provided the office area does not exceed 50% of the floor area of the
dwelling unit .
      (3)   Retail sale/loan of dry goods, books, variety and general
merchandise, clothing, food, flowers, beverages, drugs, household supplies or
furnishings, antiques, art galleries and picture framing, sale or repair of
jewelry, watches, clocks, optical goods, musical, professional or scientific
products, small scale hardware, and any other use of the same general
character.
      (4)   Retail copy facility.
      (5)   Restaurant , tearoom, café, taproom, confectionary, bakery, or
similar establishment producing and serving food or beverages to be sold at
retail on the premises.
      (6)   The following personal service shops, dealing directly with retail
customers: barber shop, beauty parlor, cleaner, (provided that no flammable
fluids are used), cobbler, millinery, seamstress, tailor or upholstery shop.
      (7)   Travel agent, real estate agency, cultural studio , or professional
medical office.
      (8)   Bank or financial institution, with out drive thru facilities.
      (9)   Exercise gym, fitness center, yoga studio, spa, provided it does
not exceed 30% of the building coverage .
      (10)   Bed and breakfast inn ; hotel with no more than 10 rooms.
      (11)   Postal services or municipal use .
      (12)   Business or professional office and insurance agencies.
      (13)   Music, dance, art or martial arts studio or school of similar uses
.
      (14)   Educational, religious or philanthropic use .
      (15)   Vehicle dealer storage lot. A vehicle dealer storage lot is
permitted subject to the following regulations:
         (a)   A vehicle dealer storage lot shall take vehicular access only
from an automobile sales and service agency on an adjacent lot. A vehicle
dealer storage lot shall not take access directly from a public street.
         (b)   No automobile service shall occur at a vehicle dealer storage
lot. Any such service may occur only at the adjacent lot at which the
automobile sales and service agency is located or at some other property where
automobile service is permitted. All vehicles stored at a vehicle dealer
storage lot shall have a current registration with the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania Department of Transportation and shall be capable of being moved
from one place to another on their own power and without the need for any
immediate mechanical service. Power from outlets on the light fixtures may be
utilized to charge vehicles in the lot.
         (c)   A vehicle dealer storage lot shall include a softening buffer in
accordance with §
212-32(F)(2) of the Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance; provided,
however, that no buffer shall be planted between the vehicle dealer storage lot
and the adjacent lot at which the associated automobile sales and service
agency is located.
         (d)   The lot line(s) between any vehicle dealer storage lot and the
adjacent lot at which the associated automobile sales and service agency is
located shall be eliminated pursuant to the Subdivision and Land Development
Ordinance or other applicable law when the record plans are recorded.
         (e)   Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, the drive
aisles in a vehicle dealer storage lot lot may be a minimum of 20 feet wide.
         (f)   Notwithstanding any other provisions of this chapter, the
parking spaces in a vehicle dealer storage lot shall measure 9 ½ feet in width
and 17 feet in length, having an area not less than 161.5 square feet. [Added
12-9-2025 by Ord. No. 25-1408, § 2]
   B.   Preservation. When existing structures , including accessory structures
such as barns , identified by the Township as historic resources , are retained
on site or are relocated and adaptively reused on a site within the district,
the building coverage of that structure will not be included in the maximum
building coverage permitted on the lot , provided:
      (1)   The historic structure shall be rehabilitated/renovated as needed
and/or adaptively reused for a use permitted in the district.
      (2)   The Secretary of the Interior’s Standards for Rehabilitation, as
amended, as they apply to the exterior facade of the structure , shall be met.
      (3)   The property owner executes and records a covenant in a form
approved by the Township Solicitor committing to maintain the historic
structure pursuant to these standards in perpetuity.
§ 255-246.1
[Added 8-11-2020 by Ord. No. 20-1361]
   A.   Residential units within a Senior Assisted Living Residence are
hereinafter referred to as "assisted living units" and shall not be considered
"dwelling units " as that term is used in this Article XXXIII.
   B.   A senior assisted living residence permitted by conditional use
pursuant to §
255-245.C above may include up to one additional and abutting parcel outside
the FWVD provided such additional and abutting parcel:
      (1)   Is over two acres in gross area, that being the horizontal area
lying within the legal boundaries of the parcel as described in the deed; and
      (2)   Is zoned in a residential district; and
      (3)   Possesses no frontage along a publicly dedicated street ; and
      (4)   Is by virtue of the conditional use approval required by §
255-245.C above made subject to all regulations of the FWVD set forth in §
255-246.1 below and elsewhere in this
Chapter 255.
   C.   A senior assisted living facility shall conform to the following
regulations. To the extent these regulations conflict expressly or impliedly
with any other regulations in this
Chapter 255, the regulations contained herein below shall apply:
      (1)   The minimum lot area shall be three acres.
      (2)   The minimum lot frontage on a public street shall be 250 feet.
      (3)   The front yard shall have a minimum depth of 40 feet.
      (4)   Two side yards shall be provided totaling no less than 100 feet,
with no side yard being less than 25 feet, and no side yard adjacent to a
residentially zoned and residentially used property being less than 75 feet.
      (5)   The rear yard shall have a minimum depth of 165 feet. Frontage
along a private street shall be considered a rear yard for purposes of this
section.
      (6)   The maximum building height shall be 42 feet.
      (7)   The maximum building area shall be 30,000 square feet, and the
maximum gross floor area shall be 85,000 square feet.
      (8)   The maximum building coverage shall be 25% of the lot area.
      (9)   The maximum impervious coverage shall be 60% of the lot area.
      (10)   The minimum unit size for each assisted living studio or one-
bedroom unit shall be 300 square feet. The minimum unit size for each assisted
living 2-bedroom unit shall be 700 square feet.
      (11)   No more than two residents shall be permitted to reside in any
assisted living unit.
      (12)   Each assisted living unit shall contain a fully private bathroom
(including toilet, bathtub and/or shower and vanity/sink), personal closet
space, emergency call system, lockable entry door, and prewiring for private
telephone and television reception.
      (13)   No less than 80 square feet of floor area per resident shall be
provided for community dining, recreation, circulation, and socialization
areas, exclusive of hallways and passageways.
      (14)   A central dining area shall be provided, together with a private
dining room available for use by residents and their family and guests for
private visitation and entertaining.
      (15)   No more than 35% of the total number of assisted living units
within a Senior Assisted Living Residence may be set aside as memory care
units. The minimum area of a single-occupancy memory care unit shall be 250
square feet, and the minimum area of a double-occupancy memory care unit shall
be 425 square feet.
§ 255-247.   Dimensional standards for development.
[Amended 12-9-2025 by Ord. No. 25-1408, §§ 3, 4].
   A.   Table of dimensional regulations. The following dimensional regulations
shall apply in the Ft. Washington Village District:
 
Minimum Net Lot Area Maximum Building Height Maximum Impervious Minimum Yards
                     (7)                     Coverage
                                                             Front Side Rear
< ½ acre            42 feet                 50%                0(1)  0(2) 0(2)
½ – ¾ acre       42 feet                 60%                0(1)  0(2) 0(2)
¾ – 1 acre        42 feet                 70%                0(3)  0(4) 0(4)
> 1 acre             42 feet                 75%                0(5)  0(6) 0(6)
 
Footnotes to Table of Dimensional Regulations:
(1)   A minimum of 90% of the nonresidential or mixed use building facade(s)
shall be located within 10 feet of the ultimate right of way .
(2)   When adjacent to a residentially zoned and used property the minimum
setback shall be 35 feet. Notwithstanding, the minimum setback for a vehicle
dealer storage lot shall be 5 feet. [Amended 12-9-2025 by Ord. No. 25-1408, §
3]
(3)   A minimum of 70% percent of the nonresidential or mixed use building
facade(s) shall be located within 10 feet of the ultimate right of way .
(4)   When adjacent to a residentially zoned and used property the minimum
setback shall be 45 feet.
(5)   A minimum of 50% of the nonresidential or mixed use building facade(s)
shall be located within 10 feet of the ultimate right of way .
(6)   When adjacent to a residentially zoned and used property the minimum
setback shall be 55 feet.
(7)   Three stories are permitted, provided the building height does not exceed
42 feet.
   B.   Building height. Notwithstanding the building height provisions noted
in the Table of Dimensional Regulations above, no portion of a building located
within 100 feet of an existing one or two-family dwelling in a residential
zoning district shall be permitted to exceed 35 feet.
   C.   Other mass/bulk standards.
      (1)   Building area shall not exceed 25% of the developable acreage of
total lot area . No individual building, not including a senior assisted living
residence building, may have a footprint larger than 6,000 square feet.
Developable acreage shall be calculated as provided for in §
255-43.D(1).  
[Amended 8-11-2020, by Ord. No. 20-1361, § 4]
      (2)   Maximum residential gross floor area : the square footage shall not
exceed 65% of the developable square footage of the property.
      (3)   Maximum nonresidential gross floor area : the square footage shall
not exceed 50% of the developable square footage of the property.
      (4)   The maximum number of residential units per acre of tract shall be
14.
      (5)   Building separation. Individual structures must have sufficient
separation to meet applicable fire protection codes, but in no case may this
separation be less than 15 feet.
   D.   Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, a vehicle dealer
storage lot shall have a maximum impervious coverage of 75%, regardless of lot
size. [Added 12-9-2025 by Ord. No. 25-1408, § 4]
§ 255-248.   Design regulations.
[Amended 8-11-2020, by Ord. No. 20-1361, § 5]
   A.   Intent. The following design regulations apply to the construction and
alteration of any structure in the FWVD. It is the intent of this ordinance to
encourage pedestrian oriented design and facilitate the placement of buildings
to enhance the visual character and functionality of the space for pedestrians.
Auto oriented, suburban strip development in this area will exacerbate traffic
problems. It may also result in the loss of the historic integrity and reduce
the viability of the surrounding residential neighborhood .
   B.   General standards. All new and rehabilitated buildings shall comply
with the following standards:
      (1)   All uses shall be served by public water and sewer service.
      (2)   All utility lines serving all uses shall be placed underground from
the edge of the right-of-way to the place of service.
      (3)   Drive-through facilities are prohibited for all uses within the
district.
      (4)   Driveways, parking areas and traffic circulation patterns shall be
designed as shared facilities whenever feasible. The design of these elements
shall create a unified site plan between lots . The goal is to gain parking
efficiencies, reduce the number of access points and improve internal and
external vehicular circulation patterns.
      (5)   The design of newly constructed facilities shall conform to the
architectural style and scale of surrounding structures .
      (6)   Multiple dwellings unit buildings used exclusively for residential
purposes shall be designed and built to appear similar to a single-family
dwelling .
   C.   Retention and adaptive reuse of historic structures .
      (1)   If the election is made to retain and use the existing principal
building (s) and barn (s), or portions thereof, built before 19[53] on the lot
:
         (a)   The proposed development , including new structures and
additions to existing structures , shall retain the general appearance,
character and types of building materials of the front and side facades of the
existing building , including front and side porches and window openings.
         (b)   Expansion to the side shall conform in general appearance,
scale, and building materials to the front facade of the existing building .
         (c)   Expansion to the rear shall conform in scale to the existing
building .
         (d)   Rooflines shall be similar or complimentary to those of the
existing building .
         (e)   The applicant shall submit architectural drawings for evaluation
of the proposed principal building expansion, including building elevations and
colored renderings. The Board of Commissioners may approve expansion different
from the existing building , provided that the Board determines in approving
the land development plan that the expansion conforms in architectural style
and scale with the existing building and the intent of this article.
      (2)   Historic buildings from elsewhere are encouraged to be relocated to
this district. The Board of Commissioners may, by conditional use , relax the
requirements for exterior materials and building style to allow for such a
building relocation to this district.
      (3)   Identification signs may be installed to identify and explain the
historic significance of particular structures , areas, objects or events in
the district. These signs shall not to be counted toward signage area limits
described elsewhere in this chapter.
   D.   Design of mixed use , senior assisted living residence , and
nonresidential buildings .
      (1)   Placement and access. A building ’s public access points shall be
articulated and at least one must be visible from the street .
         (a)   Building entrances shall incorporate arcades, roofs, porches,
alcoves and/or awnings that protect pedestrians from the sun and rain.
         (b)   If a mixed use or nonresidential building has frontage on more
than one street , the building shall provide, at a minimum, public access
points oriented towards both streets , or a single access point to the corner
where two streets intersect.
         (c)   All mixed use and nonresidential buildings shall be placed to
encourage continuous uninterrupted pedestrian accessways that link windows,
doorways and open spaces.
      (2)   Facades. A building ’s primary front facade shall be designed with
clear windows, public access points and signage.
         (a)   Multi-story buildings shall articulate the line between the
ground and upper levels with a cornice, canopy, balcony, arcade, or other
visual device.
         (b)   The ground floor of the primary front facade(s) of mixed use and
nonresidential buildings shall contain an average of 60%, but no less than 30%,
clear windows and doors.
            (i)   The maximum sill height above the adjacent sidewalk elevation
shall be two feet.
            (ii)   Lintels shall be 9 to 12 feet above sidewalk level.
            (iii)   The top of primary front facade windows shall be at least
as high as door height.
         (c)   Blank walls, if visible from a right of way , accessway or
adjacent residentially used property, shall be articulated by two or more of
the following:
            (i)   Details in masonry courses.
            (ii)   The provision of blank window openings trimmed w/frames,
sills and lintels.
            (iii)   If the building is occupied by a nonresidential use ,
recessed or projecting window casings.
         (d)   Upper stories of a primary front facade, except those floors
used for residential purposes, shall contain an average of 40%, but no less
than 25%, clear windows.
            (i)   Clear window openings shall be vertical, at least twice as
high as the width of those openings.
            (ii)   To the extent possible, upper story windows shall be
vertically aligned with the location of window and doors on the ground level,
including storefront or display windows.
         (e)   Required ground floor clear window areas of mixed use and
nonresidential buildings must must be designed to allow views into working
areas or lobbies, pedestrian entrances, or merchandise display areas.
      (3)   Massing. The mass of a building or buildings shall be de-emphasized
in a variety of ways, including the use of projecting and recessed elements
such as porches, windows and roof dormers. The intent is to reduce the apparent
overall bulk and volume of a structure , to enhance visual quality and
contribute to human-scaled development . Such breaks in the facades and roof
lines shall occur not more frequently than every 25 feet nor less frequently
than every 50 feet.
         (a)   Building length: If there are multiple principal buildings on a
lot the lengths of such buildings shall vary, and their average length most
closely parallel to the front yard shall not exceed 120 feet.
         (b)   Building forms: While architectural features are permitted,
structural building components shall have some use . False elements such as
empty gables, dormers or blank windows, when not otherwise authorized, are
prohibited.
         (c)   All principal buildings should generally relate in scale,
massing and style to the surrounding buildings .
         (d)   Where an existing building is to be reused and is non-conforming
to these design requirements, every effort shall be made to change the detail
of the roofline and to enhance canopy, window and door treatments to achieve
the design goals set forth in this section.
      (4)   Materials. Exterior wall material may be a combination of split
face aggregate block or brick of a consistent or complementary shape, color and
texture as that found within the adjacent neighborhood , architectural or real
stone, stucco, and/or wood siding.
         (a)   Windows shall have detailed mullions and shutters with hardware
when these architectural features are employed.
         (b)   The following building materials are prohibited: exterior
insulation and finishing systems (EIFs), aluminum or vinyl siding and shutters;
white, tan or painted brick; T-111 or other similar plywood siding.
         (c)   Except on rear walls, not visible from any public way, all forms
of concrete block shall be prohibited.
         (d)   Metal buildings are prohibited.
         (e)   Historic buildings can be restored to their original conditions
or surfaced with brick or stone with wood trim and details.
      (5)   Roof design. The roof shall be designed with either overhanging
eaves or cornices on all sides extending a minimum of 12 inches beyond the
building wall.
         (a)   A variety of ridge heights and/or dormers, masonry finished
chimneys and cupolas shall be included in the design of the building (s).
         (b)   Roofing materials shall vary on buildings to feature porches,
cupolas, or bay windows.
         (c)   Roofing materials may include fiberglass architectural shingles
that represent slate or wood, natural slate, shakes, shingle (either wood or
asphalt composition) and metal formed to resemble “standing seams.”
Specifically prohibited are white, tan or blue shingles, red clay tiles, and
corrugated plastic or metal.
         (d)   Fascias, dormers and gables or similar architectural features
shall be employed to provide visual interest.
         (e)   Flat roofs (those with a pitch of less than one foot vertical
for every four feet horizontal) shall be prohibited on one-story buildings and
on structures with a floor area of 4,000 square feet or less.
         (f)   Flat roofs may be used on buildings of two or more stories. In
these instances, all visibly exposed walls shall have articulated cornices that
project horizontally from the vertical building wall plane. Architectural
features that serve a function and add visual interest to roofs shall be
included in the design of such buildings .
         (g)   All rooftop mechanical equipment, including antennas , shall be
screened visually and acoustically. Such screening shall be integral to the
architectural design of the building .
      (6)   Awnings, canopies or porches. Buildings may have any of the
following: permanent porches, canopy, arcade or retractable canvas awnings to
protect pedestrians along the fronting sidewalk. No permanent porch or canopy
shall be permitted to encroach into a dedicated right-of-way .
         (a)   The furthest extension of a ground floor awning and/or canopy
shall be no less than three feet and no more than seven feet from the facade of
the building . The furthest edge of the awning may be no closer than 12 inches
to the curb.
         (b)   Ground floor awnings and canopies shall terminate no less than
18 inches below the second floor windowsills.
         (c)   The height of ground floor awnings and canopies shall not exceed
15 feet above pavement and shall be below the cornice or frieze.
         (d)   All ground floor awnings and/or canopies shall be retractable.
The minimum height from the bottom of the frame to the sidewalk is seven feet.
The minimum height from the bottom of the canvas awning valance to the sidewalk
shall be six feet nine inches.
         (e)   Fixed awnings may be used above the first story provided they
project no more than four feet.
§ 255-249.   Parking and loading requirements.
[Amended 8-11-2020, by Ord. No. 20-1361, § 6]
   A.   Required parking and loading. When there is more than one building on a
lot and/or within a development , the total amount of required parking shall be
divided into discreet sections. The buildings shall be directly accessible to
pedestrians from all parking areas. Entrance drives leading into a parking area
shall be multi-functional, serving for both pedestrian and vehicular access and
providing a limited amount of parking when feasible.
      (1)   Minimum parking requirements shall be calculated utilizing the
standards set forth in Article XIX, except for in a Mixed Use development where
residential units require 1.5 spaces per unit.
      (2)   Two way parking aisle widths may be reduced to a minimum of 22
feet, by conditional use , provided emergency, service and delivery vehicles
can safely service buildings on the property as determined by the Township
Engineer.
      (3)   Areas used for loading or trash receptacle purposes proximate to
residential uses /zoning districts shall be screened from view. Noise, sound
and odors associated with these uses shall not be discernable at the property
line.
      (4)   Buildings and structures , excluding parking structures , must
provide adequate area for loading/unloading entirely within the property lines
of the premises.
      (5)   Bicycle storage. Sufficient area for the storage of bicycles shall
be provided as approved by the Township Engineer, including racks or other
permanently affixed storage devices to accommodate one bicycle for each five
required vehicular parking spaces , at a minimum. Bicycle storage facilities
may be held in reserve upon approval of the Township Engineer upon a finding
that the requirements set forth herein exceed the foreseeable need therefor.
   B.   Shared access. In an effort to reduce the total number of curb cuts
within the district, as well as to enhance internal vehicular circulation,
promote traffic safety and reduce congestion on adjacent public roads ,
applicants shall as part of any proposed development , either eliminate two or
more existing curb cuts by the merger of properties, or allow for future access
to adjacent properties with the FWVD by seeking agreements for shared vehicular
access.
      (1)   When two or more abutting lots share an access driveway, that
driveway shall be designed as the main access to those lots .
      (2)   Shared access may be located entirely on one lot or be split across
a common lot line .
      (3)   Access easements and maintenance agreements or other suitable legal
mechanisms shall be submitted to the Board of Commissioners with the
application for land development approval.
      (4)   Impervious cover limits may be increased by 5% over the percentage
limit applicable to each parcel that is party to a shared access agreement.
   C.   Shared parking. Required parking may be located on an abutting lot and
along or across a common lot line , provided both properties are commercially
zoned and/or are developed in accordance with the FWVD regulations.
      (1)   The required aggregate parking capacity may be reduced up to 50% by
the Board of Commissioners and held in reserve, where shared parking allows
greater efficiency for the uses proposed, subject to review and recommendation
by the Township Engineer.
         (a)   Regardless of the number of spaces actually developed, the
parking area shall be designed to accommodate the aggregate number of parking
spaces normally required. The area which is proposed to be left undeveloped
shall be shown on the land development plan as “reserved parking area.” This
area shall be planted with vegetative cover and integrated into the site’s
landscaping plan. Such area shall be developed as designed if and when the
Zoning Officer determines the spaces are needed.
   D.   Parking location.
      (1)   Surface parking lots shall be located behind or to the side of the
principle buildings .
      (2)   If surface parking is visible from the street frontage, then a
fence, wall or plantings shall be provided to maintain the street edge and to
buffer views of the parked cars. (§
255-252.B)
         (a)   In no case shall surface parking lots occupy more than of the
parcel’s frontage along a pedestrian oriented street or street segment.
      (3)   Curb cuts. Each lot shall have no more than one curb cut per street
frontage for a two- way driveway for vehicular access. If sufficient room is
not available for one two-way driveway, the Board of Commissioners may approve
two curb cuts for two one-way driveways, subject to approval by PennDOT where
required.
      (4)   Parking setbacks. The following setback requirements shall apply
for parking spaces and aisles:
         (a)   There shall be no minimum side or rear yard parking setback for
a parcel(s) being developed in accordance with these overlay provisions if that
property line is adjacent to a nonresidentially zoned and/or used property.
         (b)   When a property being developed in accordance with these overlay
provisions is adjacent to a residentially zoned and/or used property which is
not made part of the senior assisted living residence  development pursuant to
§
255-246.1 .B, there shall be a minimum setback of 35 feet from the residential
property line. This setback may be reduced to a distance of no less than 15
feet by the Board of Commissioners as part of any conditional use approval
provided the applicant can demonstrate additional buffering is utilized,
including (without limitation) plant material, existing vegetation, berming,
fencing, retaining walls, and/or changes in grade to provide a complete visual
screen of the developed property. Permanent maintenance of the additional
buffering shall be guaranteed by the recording of a covenant in a form approved
by the Township Solicitor.
         (c)   If any parking is along the right of way , the parking setback
shall be 10 feet from the ultimate right-of-way .
         (d)   Parking shall be set back a minimum of 10 feet from any building
. This area shall be used for pedestrian accessways and planting beds.
§ 255-250.   Streetscape improvements.
   A.   Crosswalks. Crosswalks shall be provided at driveways and street
intersections.
      (1)   Crosswalks shall be differentiated to stand out from the vehicular
cartway at all intersections by using a variety of material, including stamped
concrete, brick or Belgian block, colored asphalt or similar material.
   B.   Walkways.
      (1)   Walkways shall connect all buildings in the district to each other
in convenient routes, even across or through parking areas. Walkways must also
connect all buildings to sidewalks along the street .
      (2)   Direct pedestrian access from the adjoining residential
neighborhoods and adjacent commercial sites shall be provided by sidewalks
built within the road rights of way and public access easements.
      (3)   If required by the Board of Commissioners, safe, comfortable and
inviting access between the residential neighborhood and the development site
shall be created by providing a gate in the fence and an improved pathway
through the buffer plantings.
      (4)   Stairs are allowed along walkways but alternate routes must be
available for handicapped access.
   C.   Street lighting. Street lighting shall be model “Old Town #A8850 SR” as
manufactured by Sternberg Vintage Lighting, or approved equal. Poles for light
fixtures shall be model 5700- KP as manufactured by Sternberg Vintage Lighting,
or approved equal, and shall not exceed 20 feet in height. Approved equals may
be approved as a conditional use by the Board of Commissioners.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5df02b024b4c8f2f8cc81a782b45029f5e431e28/
IMAGES/0-0-0-36.png]
   D.   Public space requirements.
      (1)   The Board of Commissioners may, by conditional use , approve a 10%
increase in the impervious cover or gross floor area permitted on a parcel if
the applicant creates public space accessible from a public right of way . Such
space shall be landscaped and/or hardscaped pursuant to the following:
         (a)   The public space may be dedicated to the Township. The Township
can accept or refuse the dedication based upon a finding that the proposed
improvement enhances the public health, safety and welfare.
         (b)   The space may not contain any advertising or credit to the
donor.
         (c)   All items provided are to be weatherproof, low maintenance, and
vandal-resistant. Whether dedicated to the Township or not, the space and the
items located in it are to be maintained by the property owner(s).
      (2)   To qualify as a public space , the area must contain at least 500
square feet, be visually and physically accessible to a public right of way ,
and contain at least three of the following items:
         (a)   Historic identification markers, signs or monument.
         (b)   Street furniture, including benches, receptacles and bollards.
         (c)   Kiosk for public notices .
         (d)   Fountain.
         (e)   Public art.
         (f)   Clock tower.
         (g)   Landscaping.
      (3)   The street furniture, such as receptacles, benches, bollards, etc.
shall be as required in §
212-29, or an approved equal.
   E.   Street trees. Applicants shall install street trees as specified in the
Pennsylvania Avenue ISTEA project. Specifications are on file at the Upper
Dublin Township Administration Building.
§ 255-251.   Landscaping and buffering.
[Amended 8-11-2020, by Ord. No. 20-1361, § 7]
   A.   Existing trees with a caliper of 16 inches or more shall not be removed
unless they are either relocated on the tract or are each replaced by at least
four trees of similar type, each with a minimum of 3½ inches to 4 inches
caliper.
   B.   Buffer requirements: When any proposed mixed-use , senior assisted
living residence , or nonresidential development abuts a residential use , a
screen buffer, as required in Subdivision and Land Development Code, §
212-32.F(3), shall be provided. In addition:
      (1)   There shall be a solid six foot tall fence and a mixture of
evergreen landscaping to create a solid visual barrier that will grow to a
minimum of 12 feet high within three years.
         (a)   If required by the Board of Commissioners, safe, comfortable and
inviting access between the residential neighborhood and the development site
shall be created by providing a gate in the fence and an improved pathway
through the buffer plantings.
      (2)   A landscaped buffer, a minimum five feet in depth, shall screen the
view of all parking lots from any existing street . The buffer shall include
shrubs and shade trees and be designed pursuant to the requirements of §
212-32.F(4).
      (3)   Parking lot landscaping shall also be provided for residential
parking lots as delineated in §
212-32.F(4).
      (4)   A planting strip at least five feet wide shall be placed between
the public cartway edge and the edge of the sidewalk.
   C.   Refuse facility: All trash refuse and recycling facilities shall be
maintained in a common trash facility that is totally screened with masonry
walls with wooden gates that are a minimum of eight feet in height. Such refuse
areas shall be located at least 100 feet from any adjacent residential use and
they may not be located in front of the buildings .
§ 255-252.   Conditional use standards.
All conditional use applications shall be filed and processed in compliance
with Article XXV. In addition, applicants shall demonstrate compliance with the
following:
   A.   Existing conditions analysis: All existing trees over six inches in
caliper shall be shown on the plan.
   B.   Architectural characteristics: The applicant shall submit drawings to
demonstrate compliance with the design standards, including building
elevations, colored renderings and signage.
   C.   Traffic control: The conditional use application shall be accompanied
by a transportation impact study, parking analysis, and pedestrian analysis as
further provided in §
212-35.1.
      (1)   New applications shall provide shared access, access easements,
cross easements, driveway interconnections, shared parking and parking
easements with other properties in order to facilitate the objectives of this
District.
      (2)   Access easements and maintenance agreements or other suitable legal
mechanisms shall be provided, acceptable to the Board of Commissioners.
      (3)   When it is not yet appropriate to construct driveway
interconnections, shared access or shared parking and access easements shall be
set aside for future use .
Article XXXIV
Historic Resource Overlay District
[Added 6-14-2011 by Ord. No. 11-1241, § 4]
§ 255-253.   Legislative intent.
It is hereby declared as a matter of public policy that the preservation and
protection of buildings , structures and sites of historic, architectural,
cultural, archaeological, educational and aesthetic merit are a public benefit
and are in the interests of the health, prosperity and welfare of the people of
Upper Dublin Township. To that end, a separate zoning district is hereby
created to overlay all other zoning districts in the Township. The provisions
of this article, coupled with the provisions of
Chapter 73 and
Chapter 127, are intended to:
   A.   Promote the general welfare by protecting the integrity of the historic
resources of Upper Dublin Township.
   B.   Provide incentives for the continued use of historic resources and to
facilitate their appropriate reuse.
   C.   Establish a clear and public process by which proposed land use
incentives affecting historic resources can be reviewed.
   D.   Discourage the unnecessary demolition of historic resources .
   E.   Encourage the conservation of historic settings and landscapes.
   F.   Promote retention of historical integrity in the context of proposed
land use and/or structural changes.
§ 255-254.   Applicability.
The provisions of this article shall apply to all properties containing
structures meeting the criteria for Class I and Class II Historic Resource as
set forth in
Chapter 127 of the Upper Dublin Township Code. Properties which meet the
criteria shall constitute the Historic Resource Overlay District which shall
constitute an overlay to the Township Zoning Map.
§ 255-255.   Permitted uses.
The following uses and no others shall be permitted on properties within the
Historic Resource Overlay District.
   A.   Any use permitted in the underlying zoning district in which the
property is located.
   B.   For those properties within the Historic Resource Overlay District
which also contain a structure designated as a Class 1 or Class 2 Historic
Resource on the Upper Dublin Township Code, § A 264-1, Historic Resource
Inventory, the following uses are permitted:
      (1)   Provided that the guarantee referenced in §
255-257B(4) has first been submitted and approved, historic resources on
properties which obtain access from any street may, in addition to the use
permitted in Subsection A above, be used for any of the following uses ,
subject to obtaining a recommendation for approval from the Historical
Commission pursuant to
Chapter 127, and obtaining conditional use approval from the Board of
Commissioners:
         (a)   Bed-and-breakfast, subject to the following conditions:
            [1]   The historic resource must have a gross floor area of 2,500
square feet or more to be eligible for this use .
            [2]   A maximum of five guest suites shall be permitted in any one
bed-and- breakfast establishment, with a maximum occupancy of 15 guests.
            [3]   There shall be no kitchen or cooking facilities in any guest
suite.
            [4]   The use of any amenities provided by the establishment, such
as swimming pool or tennis courts, shall be restricted in use to guests staying
at the establishment.
            [5]   Off-street parking spaces shall be provided at a rate of one
space per guest suite plus the regularly required parking for any other
permitted use .
            [6]   The property owner, the manager or the lessor of the bed and
breakfast must reside on the premises.
         (b)   Artist studio or crafts workshop producing objects which may be
sold at retail on the premises. Such crafts shall include painting, sculpting,
model malting, rug weaving, lapidary work, furniture making and similar crafts.
            [1]   The historic resource must have a gross floor area of 2,500
square feet or more to be eligible for this use .
            [2]   The property owner or artisan selling the objects must reside
on the premises.
            [3]   There may be no more than three employees.
            [4]   There may be no more than eight retail visits per day.
         (c)   Historic resource home occupation ; provided that one additional
off-street parking space is provided for each employee.
            [1]   No more than one-third of the gross floor area of the
historic resource shall be utilized for the home occupation .
            [2]   An historic resource home occupation may be conducted in a
structure accessory to the practitioner’s principal residence, provided that
the accessory structure already exists on the property as of the date of
adoption of this article and provided the Historic Commission recommends
approval of the application because the architectural character of the
accessory structure is complementary and sympathetic to the structure listed on
the historic resource inventory.
         (d)   Accessory apartment . This use may also be conducted in a
structure accessory to the principal dwelling on the property, provided that
the accessory structure already exists on the property as of the date of
adoption of this article and provided the Historic Commission recommends
approval of the application because the architectural character of the
converted accessory structure is complementary and sympathetic to the structure
listed on the historic resource inventory.
         (e)   Conversion. The historic resource may be converted into a multi-
family dwelling , subject to the following requirements:
            [1]   Each dwelling unit shall not have less than 750 square feet
of floor area.
            [2]   The lot area per dwelling unit shall be no less than 30% of
that required by this chapter for a single family dwelling in the district in
which the historic resource is situated.
            [3]   External alterations to the historic resource , as permitted
herein below by conditional use , shall be reviewed and recommended for
approval by the Historical Commission. Fire escapes, outside stairways or other
life, health and safety improvements shall, where practicable, be located so
they are not visible from any public right of way and/or to the rear of the
building .
         (f)   A club or fraternal organization on a parcel having a gross lot
area of twice that required by this chapter for a single family dwelling in the
district in which the historic resource is situated. No more than 25% of the
gross floor area of the historic resource may be utilized for this incentive
use .
      (2)   Provided that the guarantee referenced in §
255-257B(4) has first been submitted and approved, historic resources on
properties which obtain access from an arterial, primary or secondary street,
49  may, in addition to the use permitted in Subsection A above, be used for
any one of the following uses , subject to obtaining a recommendation for
approval from the Historical Commission, pursuant to
Chapter 127, and obtaining conditional use approval from the Board of
Commissioners:
         (a)   Any use permitted in Subsection B(1)[a]–[f].
         (b)   Professional office, limited to one non-resident employee per
500 square feet of gross floor area devoted to professional office use .
         (c)   Cultural studio , teaching skills such as music, theatre or
dance, subject to the following conditions, if located in a residential zoning
district:
            [1]   The historic resource must have a gross floor area of 4,000
square feet or more to be eligible for this use .
            [2]   The use shall be limited to one class at a time with no more
than 10 students per class and no more than two instructors.
            [3]   The property owner or the manager of the studio must reside
on the premises.
   C.   On properties where uses permitted in both Subsections A and B above
occur, the use permitted in the underlying zoning district may only occur in a
structure in existence on the lot as of the date of adoption of this article.
   D.   For all uses permitted in Subsection B(1) and (2) on a property located
in a residential zoning district, the following additional regulations shall
apply:
      (1)   Unless otherwise provided for in this Section the off-street
parking requirements of this chapter are applicable.
      (2)   To the extent that they are visible from neighboring residential
properties, new off- street parking areas for guests, students, employees,
patients or clients shall be visually screened from such properties. The
screening shall meet the intent of a screen buffer, as defined in the SALDO,
Chapter 212, but may utilize plant material or a combination of plant material,
fencing or berms.
      (3)   Newly required off street parking spaces built to serve an
incentive use approved under this article may be no closer than five feet from
a lot ’s side or rear property lines.
      (4)   There shall be no use of show windows or displays or advertising
visible outside the premises, other than a single, non-illuminated sign , not
exceeding three square feet.
      (5)   There shall be no outdoor storage of materials and/or supplies for
a use occurring on a property, where that use was authorized as part of the
review and approval process set forth in this article.
      (6)   Refuse on the property shall be stored indoors where possible
feasible. In the alternative refuse may be stored outdoors within a trash
enclosure that is architecturally compatible with the historic resource or is
not visible to pedestrians or occupants within vehicles utilizing adjacent
streets or sidewalks.
      (7)   The hours of operation for the uses listed in Subsection B(1)(b),
(c) and (f) or in Subsection B(2)(b) and (c) shall fall between the hours of 9:
00 a.m. and 9.00 p.m.
      (8)   No use shall be permitted which generates noise perceptible at the
property line.
      (9)   Site lighting shall be designed to screen the source of
illumination and glare from adjacent properties.
      (10)   Special events which will generate an unusual volume of traffic
beyond that normally generated by a permitted use on a daily basis, such as
fund-raising events, recitals, stage performances, lectures and exhibitions,
are prohibited unless specifically allowed by conditional use , in which case
the applicant shall have the burden of proving that the public interest will be
protected considering the criteria set forth at §
255-174.
      (11)   No square footage added to a structure /property after the date of
adoption of this chapter may be used in the calculation of gross floor area for
purposes of this section.
   E.   The provisions of
Chapter 73 relating to building  permits for historic buildings are
incorporated herein by reference.
49. See Upper Dublin Township’s Engineering and Construction Standards,
Improvement Procedures for specific street names
§ 255-256.   Bulk, area and setback requirements.
Provided that the guarantee referenced in §
255-257B(4) has first been submitted and approved, the underlying zoning
district standards regulating building area , impervious surfaces and front,
side and rear yard setbacks may be modified by up to 15% with respect to a
property listed on the Township’s historic resource inventory, subject to
obtaining a recommendation for approval from the Historical Commission,
pursuant to
Chapter 127 and obtaining conditional use approval from the Board of
Commissioners. Any modifications shall apply to the area of the lot as it
existed on the date of adoption of this article.
   A.   Where the requirements are modified pursuant to this section, the
applicant must demonstrate to the satisfaction of the Board of Commissioners
that the degree of relief is required to accommodate the reasonable development
, use or enhancement of the historic resource .
   B.   The additional building area and impervious surface coverages permitted
by this section may each not exceed 100% of the building area of the historic
resource (s) subjected to the guarantee submitted as required by §
255-257B(4).
   C.   Where the requested relief is determined by the Board of Commissioners
to be essential to the preservation of the historic resource , because without
such relief it would not be physically or economically possible to maintain the
historic resource , the Board of Commissioners may reduce such dimensional
requirements to a greater degree than that permitted by this section.
§ 255-257.   Specific requirements for conditional use approval.
   A.   Application procedures.
      (1)   An applicant seeking conditional use approval under the provisions
of this article shall submit the appropriate application to the Director of
Code Enforcement in accordance with the provisions of §
255-192. The information to be provided shall, in addition, include the
following:
         (a)   Name and address of the record owner and applicant (if
different).
         (b)   Site plan showing all buildings and structures on the property.
         (c)   Recent photographs of the historic resource .
         (d)   A detailed narrative description of the proposed use (s).
         (e)   Any physical changes proposed for the affected historic resource
(s) and their surrounding landscape.
         (f)   Any proposed modifications to otherwise applicable area, bulk
and parking regulations.
      (2)   The conditional use application shall be accompanied by an historic
resource impact study where any land development or subdivision is proposed on:
         (a)   Any property that contains any Class I or Class II Historic
Resource(s).
         (b)   Any contributing property within the boundaries of any National
Register Historic District or any local historic district.
      (3)   The Director Of Code Enforcement shall forward the complete
application to the Historic Commission and the Planning Commission in
accordance with §
255-193. The Historical Commission, at a regular or special meeting, shall
review the application for conditional use and shall promptly forward its
recommendations to the Director of Code Enforcement for distribution to the
Board of Commissioners. In formulating its recommendations, the Historical
Commission shall consider each of the criteria imposed by this section for the
grant of conditional use approval.
      (4)   The Board of Commissioners shall act upon the application in
accordance with the provisions of Article XXV of this Chapter. The Board may
refer the application to a hearing officer to conduct any hearings and make
recommendations to the Committee.
   B.   Criteria for the grant of conditional use approval. Where a use is
permitted in an Historic Resource Overlay District by conditional use , that
use shall not be granted unless the following requirements have been satisfied
in addition to those set forth at §
255-194:
      (1)   The applicant shall have the burden of demonstrating that approval
of the application will not jeopardize the preservation of the historic
resource (s) contained on the property subject to application. To sustain this
burden the applicant shall present evidence demonstrating the following:
         (a)   The exact location of the area in which the work is to be done,
supports the applicants ability to preserve the historic resource .
         (b)   The exterior changes to be made or the exterior character of the
structure to be erected aids in the preservation of the historic resource .
         (c)   A list of the surrounding structures with their general exterior
characteristics and how they relate to the historic resource and how and if the
proposed improvements change that relationship.
         (d)   The effect of the proposed improvements upon the general
historic and architectural nature of the property.
         (e)   The appropriateness of exterior architectural features of
structures involved with the proposed work and how they support or enhance the
application’s preservation of the historic resource .
         (f)   The general design, arrangement, texture, material, scale, mass
and color of any affected building , structure or site and how the proposed
improvements affect the historic resource as well as the relationships between
such factors to similar features of other structures on the property.
         (g)   That proposed improvements and any rehabilitation work will
preserve the distinguishing qualities or character of the historic resource and
cultural landscape .
         (h)   In the event that replacement of contributing architectural
features is necessary and can not be done in kind, the new material shall, as
closely as possible, match the material being replaced. At a minimum, the
composition, design, color, texture and other aesthetic qualities shall be
sympathetic to and in character with the historic resource . In instances where
original materials are either unavailable or their use economically infeasible,
the Board may approve the use of materials which are aesthetically consistent
with, even if not completely duplicative of, the character of the historic
resource .
         (i)   That the distinctive stylistic features or examples of skilled
craftsmanship are preserved.
         (j)   Changes which may have taken place in the course of time are
evidence of the history and development of the building , structure or site and
its environment. Provided the Historical Commission deems these changes have
acquired significance in there own right, the proposed application recognizes
and respects this significance.
         (k)   The property is used for its historic purpose or is placed in a
new use that requires minimal change to the defining characteristics of the
building and its cultural landscape .
      (2)   The most current version of the secretary of the interior’s
standards for rehabilitation of historic structures , as amended, shall be used
as a guideline in carrying out any plans involving the rehabilitation,
alteration or enlargement of historic resource (s).
         (a)   Additions and/or expansions to historic resources shall be sited
to the rear or side of the building being preserved, provided that location is
the best opportunity to preserve the structure ’s significant architectural
features.
      (3)   Where plans involving the rehabilitation, alteration or enlargement
of historic resource (s) will result in all or portions of any such resource(s)
remaining unoccupied, such unoccupied resources shall be securely sealed and
barred off and the utilities turned off for safety, in a manner not
jeopardizing historical integrity, as per the most current construction
techniques for historic structures .
      (4)   A means to guarantee the permanent protection of the historical
integrity of the subject resource(s), such as the establishment of conservation
easement(s) or appropriate covenants in a form acceptable to the Township
Solicitor, shall be provided.
      (5)   The applicant shall have the burden of proving that the historical
integrity of the resource has been provided for through the design of the
building  improvements as well as through implementation of buffering,
landscaping, lighting, storage, access and traffic management, interior
circulation, loading, parking, fencing, signage and all other land development
features.
      (6)   The applicant shall have the burden of proving that the grant of
the application will not be destructive of the integrity of the historic
resource or detrimentally affect the value of surrounding properties.
      (7)   Unless otherwise provided for in this article, the off-street
parking requirements of this chapter are applicable to the proposed use as set
forth in this article. The Board of Commissioners may prohibit any additional
parking between the right-of-way and the facade of the building if the Board
finds such parking would negatively impact the historical integrity of the
resource.
      (8)   The applicant must comply with the requirements of this chapter
with respect to signage. The Board of Commissioners may condition approval on a
reduction in the size of the signage if it finds that the permitted signage
will obstruct views required to assure the safety of the public or to retain
the historic nature of the property.
      (9)   The Board of Commissioners may attach conditions to achieve the
objectives set forth in this section and to promote the public health, safety
and welfare, which conditions may relate to any aspect of the proposed use of
the property including, but not limited to, buffering, parking, signage,
traffic volume and flow, hours of operation, noise and odor emission.
      (10)   Where the Board of Commissioners waives any requirement which
thereby increases the rate or volume of stormwater generated on the property,
the additional rate and/or volume of runoff caused by such waiver shall be
controlled for the 100-year storm.
   C.   Any conditional use granted under this subsection shall expire unless a
building  permit to perform the work for which the conditional use was sought,
or an occupancy permit to allow such use , is issued within one year after the
same shall have been granted.
§ 255-258.   Historic resource impact study.
   A.   The historic resource impact study shall be prepared by a qualified
land planner with professional expertise in historic preservation, historical
architecture or related disciplines as provided for in 36 CFR 61.
   B.   Contents. The study shall contain the following information unless the
Director of Code Enforcement determines them to be not pertinent to the
application:
      (1)   Background information.
         (a)   If not otherwise provided by the applicant, a site plan,
including existing structures , topography, watercourses , vegetation,
landscaping, existing drives, etc.
         (b)   General description and classification of all historic resources
located on the subject tract as shown on the site plan, or on tracts
immediately adjacent to the subject tract .
         (c)   Statement of the significance of each Class I or II Historic
Resource, both relative to the Township and region in general.
         (d)   Sufficient number of black and white eight-inch by ten-inch
photographs to show every historic resource identified in Subsection B(1)
above, in its setting.
         (e)   Narrative description of the historical development of the
subject tract .
      (2)   Proposed change.
         (a)   General description and site plan of the project, including time
table or phases.
         (b)   Description of impact on each Class I or II Historic Resource
affected by the proposed development or subdivision , with regard to
architectural integrity, historic setting and future use .
         (c)   General description of effect of noise and traffic and other
impacts generated by the proposed change on any Class I or II Historic Resource
affected by the proposed development or subdivision .
      (3)   Mitigation measures. Recommendations for mitigating the project’s
impact on Class I or II Historic Resources, including design alternatives,
buffering, landscaping, conservation of existing, shall be detailed.
ARTICLE XXXV
Alternative Energy
[Added 5-14-2013 by Ord. No. 13-1275]
§ 255-259.   Intent.
The purpose of this article is to promote and regulate the safe, effective and
efficient use of alternative energy sources and to encourage the reduction of
on-site consumption of utility supplied energy while protecting the health,
safety and welfare of the public and adjacent and surrounding land uses .
§ 255-260.   Definitions.
   A.   As used in this article, the following electricity and energy terms
shall have the meanings indicated:
      ALTERNATING CURRENT (AC) — An electric current whose direction reverses
cyclically, as opposed to direct current (DC) , whose direction remains
constant. AC is the form of consumer electricity that is delivered to a home or
business.
      ALTERNATIVE ENERGY — As used in this chapter, the term “alternative
energy” shall include geothermal energy, solar energy , wind energy, and
biomass energy sources. Alternative energy sources may at times be referred to
as renewable energy sources.
      DIRECT CURRENT (DC) — The constant flow of electric current in one
direction. DC electricity always flows in the same direction, which
distinguishes it from alternating current (AC) .
      ELECTRIC METER — A device used to measure and record the amount of
electricity used or generated.
      INTERCONNECTION — Interfacing an on-site electricity generator, to the
electric distribution system (i.e., the grid). This configuration allows an on-
site electricity generating system to operate in parallel with the grid. For
small systems, the point of interconnection is through a circuit breaker of the
main electric service panel on-site, or it could be a supply tap on the service
line just before the main electric service panel.
      INTERCONNECTION AGREEMENT — A legal document between a customer and an
electric utility authorizing the connection of the customer’s on-site
electricity generating system to the utility’s electric grid.
      INVERTER — A device that converts direct current (DC) electricity into
alternating current (AC) electricity that can be used in a home or building .
      LOAD — The amount of power carried by a utility system or the amount of
power consumed by an electric customer at a specific time. Base load is the
minimum constant level of electricity required by utility customers; peak load
is the amount of electricity required at the time of greatest demand.
      NET METERING — An approach for interconnecting and metering on-site
electricity generating facilities. The means of measuring the difference
between electricity supplied by an electric utility, electric distribution
company, or electric generation supplier and the electricity generated by a
customer-generator using alternative energy sources. Net metering allows
customers to use excess on-site generated electricity to offset utility-
purchased electricity on a monthly or annual basis.
      NET METERING AGREEMENT — An agreement with a customer-generator and an
electric utility, electric distribution company, or electric generation
supplier and the electricity generated by a customer generator that allows
customers to receive a credit at the retail price of electricity for surplus
electricity generated on-site. Under net metering agreement, a bidirectional
electric meter is used to measure and record the flow of electricity in both
directions from and to the customer-generator.
      POWER PURCHASE AGREEMENT (PPA) — A contract to purchase energy. A PPA is
usually established between a party that generates electricity and a party that
purchases electricity. A PPA may also be a contract written between a building
owner that wants to generate electricity on site and a third-party developer
who will install, maintain and own the system used to generate the electricity,
and then sell the electricity produced by the system to the building owner at a
pre-determined rate.
      TIME-OF-USE (TOU) METER — An electric meter that measures and records the
times when a customer consumes or generates electricity during utility defined
on-peak and off- peak periods. This type of meter is used for customers who are
on time-of-use rates .
      TIME-OF-USE (TOU) RATES — Electricity prices that vary depending on the
time period in which the energy is consumed or produced. In a time-of-use rate
structure , higher prices are charged during utility peak-load times. Such
rates can provide an incentive for consumers to curb power use during peak
times.
      TONNAGE — A measure of cooling power. One ton of cooling power is
produced by one ton of ice. One ton of cooling power is equal to 12,000 Btu/hr
or 3.51 kW. In the United States, heat pumps and air conditioners are rated on
tonnage. A typical U.S. residence of 2,000– 2,400 square feet will require a
three to four ton cooling unit.
      WATT — A unit of electric power measurement.
         KILOWATT (kW) — A unit of electric power equal to 1,000 watts , which
constitutes the basic unit of electric demand. The watt is a measurement of
power (not energy) and is the rate (not the duration) at which electricity is
used. One thousand kW is equal to one megawatt (MW).
         KILOWATT—HOUR (kWh) — A unit of electric energy, equivalent to the use
of one kilowatt of electricity for one full hour. One kilowatt-hour (kWh) = the
amount of electricity required to burn a 100 watt light bulb for 10 hours.
Utilities measure customers’ electric energy usage on the basis of kilowatt-
hours , and electricity rates are most commonly expressed in cents per
kilowatt-hour.
         MEGAWATT (MW) — Unit of electric power equal to 1,000 kW, or 1,000,000
watts .
      WATT-HOUR (Wh) — A unit of energy measurement, equal to one watt of power
used for one hour.
   B.   As used in this article, the following geothermal energy terms shall
have the meaning indicated:
      GEOTHERMAL BOREHOLE or BOREHOLE — A hole drilled or bored into the earth
into which piping is inserted for use in a closed vertical loop geothermal
system .
      GEOTHERMAL ENERGY SYSTEM — An alternative energy system serving as a
mechanism for heat exchange that uses the Earth’s thermal properties in
conjunction with electricity to provide greater efficiency in the heating and
cooling of buildings . The most common form of geothermal energy in
Pennsylvania comes from shallow bore heat pumps, which capitalize on the
constant temperature within the Earth’s upper crust. A fluid in a system of
tubes is used to transfer energy to and from the Earth to provide cooling in
the summer and warmth in the winter. Boreholes are drilled and pipes are buried
in the ground. Fluid is circulated through the system. In summer, the fluid
takes heat from a building and moves it to the Earth. In winter, the fluid
absorbs heat from the Earth and transfers it to the building . Geothermal heat
pumps come in two basic configurations: closed loop and open loop systems.
      CLOSED HORIZONTAL LOOP GEOTHERMAL SYSTEM — A mechanism for heat exchange
that consists of the following basic elements: underground loops of piping;
heat transfer fluid; a heat pump; and an air distribution system. An opening is
made in the Earth. A series of pipes are installed into the opening and
connected to a heat exchange system in the building . The pipes form a closed
loop and are filled with a heat transfer fluid. The fluid is circulated through
the piping from the opening into the heat exchanger and back. This type of
geothermal system is usually the most cost effective when trenches are easy to
dig and the available land area is adequate. Workers use a backhoe to dig the
trenches three to six feet below the ground in which they lay a series of
parallel plastic pipes. A typical horizontal loop will require 400–600 feet of
tubing per ton of heating and cooling capacity.
      CLOSED VERTICAL LOOP GEOTHERMAL SYSTEM—This type of geothermal mechanism
for heat exchange is used where there is little available land area, when
surface rocks make digging impractical, or when disruption to the landscape is
to be avoided. Vertical boreholes approximately 100 to 450 feet deep are bored
into the ground, and a single loop of pipe with a U-bend at the bottom of the
borehole is inserted before the borehole is filled. The pipes are connected to
the heat exchanger and heat transfer fluid is circulated through the pipes.
      OPEN HORIZONTAL LOOP GEOTHERMAL SYSTEM — Water is pumped from a water-
well or surface water source into a heat exchanger located in a building . The
water drawn from the Earth or water body is then pumped back into the ground or
discharged to the water body. In the heating mode, cooler water is returned to
the Earth or water body, and in the cooling mode, warmer water is returned to
the Earth or water body.
      STANDING COLUMN WELL GEOTHERMAL SYSTEM — A standing column well
geothermal system is a specialized type of open loop system. It is a
groundwater heat pump system that uses groundwater drawn from wells in a semi-
open loop arrangement. The ground heat exchanger in such systems consists of a
vertical borehole that is filled with groundwater up to the level of the water
table. Water is circulated from the well through the heat pump in an open-loop
pipe circuit. Water is drawn from the bottom of a deep rock well, passed
through a heat pump, and returned to the top of the well, where traveling
downwards it exchanges heat with the surrounding bedrock.
   C.   As used in this article, the following solar energy terms shall have
the meaning indicated:
      ACTIVE SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEM — Photovoltaic (PV) panels or solar thermal
collectors that harness solar energy . Active solar energy systems increase the
supply of energy and are considered supply side technologies.
      ALBEDO — The ratio of reflected radiation from a surface to the incident
radiation upon the surface (i.e., the reflection coefficient). Albedo is a
measure of the reflectivity of a surface and may be used to quantify the amount
of solar glare from a solar energy system .
      ARRAY — An assembly of electrically interconnected photovoltaic modules
providing a single electrical output.
      ARRAY AREA — The total photovoltaic area of an entire solar field of
arrays .
      AZIMUTH — The horizontal angular distance between a vertical plane
containing a point in the sky and true south.
      BUILDING INTEGRATED PHOTOVOLTAIC (BIPV) SYSTEM — A BIPV system forms part
of the structure to which it is affixed. Typically integrated into a roofing
system (e.g., solar shingles), BIPV systems can provide architectural interest
and/or an unobtrusive solar energy system installation.
      CONVERSION EFFICIENCY — The amount of the sun’s energy that a solar cell
can convert into electricity; the balance is lost as heat or reflected light.
      INSOLATION — The amount of solar energy that shines on a building or area
and usually expressed in annual kilowatt-hours per square meter.
      MODULE — An assembly of electrically interconnected PV cells providing a
single electrical output. Modules are typically rated between 10 watts and 300
watts .
      ORIENTATION — The direction that the surface of a solar module faces. The
two components of orientation are the tilt angle (the angle of inclination a
module makes from the horizontal) and the azimuth .
      PASSIVE SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEM — A solar energy collection system that
captures light or heat from the sun through use of materials with favorable
thermal mass or light dispersing properties. Passive solar energy systems are
demand side systems and may be used to heat water, air, other building mass, or
to direct sunlight into a building for illumination purposes.
      SOLAR ACCESS — The ability of sunlight to shine on a property owner’s
land, or more specifically, the owner’s solar energy facility or solar energy
system , without the sunlight being blocked by structures , vegetation, or
other obstructions on neighboring land.
      SOLAR EASEMENT — A legal agreement that protects access to sunlight, or
solar access , on a property.
      SOLAR ELECTRIC SYSTEM — Converts sunlight into electricity. Also known as
a “photovoltaic system.”
      SOLAR ENERGY — Radiant light and heat from the sun.
      SOLAR ENERGY FACILITY— An alternative energy facility that consists of
one or more ground-mounted or free-standing solar collection devices, solar
energy related equipment and other associated infrastructure with the primary
intention of generating electricity or otherwise converting solar energy to a
different form of energy for commercial or other off-site use .
      SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEM — An alternative energy system that consists of one
or more ground-mounted, free-standing, or building -mounted solar collection
devices and solar energy related equipment and other associated infrastructure
with the primary intention of generating electricity or otherwise converting
solar energy to a different form of energy to reduce on-site consumption of
purchased power, except that when a property upon which the system is installed
also receives electricity supplied by a utility company, excess electricity
generated and not presently needed for on-site use may be used off-site by a
utility company.
      SOLAR GLARE — The effect produced by light reflecting from a solar panel
with an intensity sufficient to cause annoyance, discomfort, or loss in visual
performance and visibility. See “ALBEDO ” definition.
      SOLAR HOT WATER SYSTEM — Uses solar energy to heat water. The most common
types of solar water heaters are evacuated tube collectors and glazed flat
plate collectors generally used for domestic hot water; and unglazed plastic
collectors used mainly to heat swimming pools.
      SOLAR PANEL — A device containing one or more receptive cells equal to or
greater than two square feet, the purpose of which is to convert solar energy
into electrical or thermal energy.
      SOLAR PHOTOVOLTAIC (PV) SYSTEM — Solar energy system that uses a
semiconductor to convert sunlight directly into electricity. A solar cell, or
photovoltaic (PV) cell, converts sunlight into electric current using the
photoelectric effect. A flow of direct current (DC) electricity is produced
when sunlight strikes solar cells containing a photovoltaic material. The DC
energy produced by the modules is then fed into an inverter that converts DC
power into AC power, which in turn is fed into a main electrical panel to power
a home or business. A PV solar cell produces a small amount of power. To
produce more power, PV cells (about 40) may be interconnected to form PV panels
or PV modules . If more power is needed, several PV modules may be installed in
a rack to form a PV array .
      SOLAR RELATED EQUIPMENT — Items including a solar photovoltaic cell,
panel, module or array , or solar hot air or water collector device panels,
lines, pumps, batteries, mounting brackets, framing and foundations used for or
intended to be used for collection and conversion of solar energy .
      SOLAR THERMAL SYSTEM — Uses solar energy to heat a fluid, such as water
or an antifreeze solution, or to heat a gas, such as air. Solar thermal systems
are most commonly utilized for heating domestic hot water systems, though they
are also used for space heating, heating swimming pools, and even space
cooling.
      TRACKER OR TRACKING ARRAY — A number of PV modules mounted such that they
track the movement of the sun across the sky to maximize energy production,
either with a single-axis or dual-axis mechanism.
   D.   As used in this article, the following wind energy terms shall have the
meaning indicated:
      ARCHITECTURALLY INTEGRATED WIND ENERGY SYSTEM — A wind energy system
installed directly onto a building rooftop or designed as part of a building
itself.
      HUB HEIGHT — The vertical distance measured from the ground at a tower
foundation to the height of a wind turbine hub.
      ROOF MOUNTED — A wind energy system installation where the system is
mounted on the roof of and totally supported by a building .
      ROTOR DIAMETER — The cross sectional dimension of the circle swept by the
rotating blades of a wind turbine .
      SHADOW FLICKER — The on-and-off flickering effect or alternating changes
in light intensity caused by moving wind turbine blades casting shadows on the
ground and on stationary objects.
      TOWER — The monopole or freestanding structure that supports a wind
turbine .
      TURBINE HEIGHT — the vertical distance measured from the ground at the
tower foundation to the tip of a wind turbine blade when the blade tip is at
its highest point.
      WIND ENERGY FACILITY — An alternative energy facility that consists of
one or more wind turbine generators and other associated infrastructure with
the primary intention of generating electricity for commercial or other off-
site use . The term does not include wind turbines constructed primarily to
generate electricity or otherwise convert wind energy for on-site use .
      WIND ENERGY SYSTEM — An alternative energy system that converts wind
energy into electricity or other usable forms of energy for on-site use . This
equipment includes any base, blade, foundation, generator, nacelle, rotor,
tower , transformer, vane, wire, inverter , batteries or other component used
in the system. A wind energy system is intended to primarily reduce on-site
consumption of purchased power, except that when a parcel on which the system
is installed also receives electricity supplied by a utility company, excess
electricity generated and not needed for on-site use may be used off-site by a
utility company.
      WIND MILL — A wind energy system that uses wind energy to power
mechanical equipment such as a water pump. For the purposes of this article, a
wind mill shall be considered as a form of wind turbine .
      WIND TURBINE — A wind energy conversion system that converts wind energy
into electrical energy (i.e., electricity) or mechanical energy through the use
of a wind turbine generator or other mechanism. When the wind spins the wind
turbine ’s blades, a rotor captures the kinetic energy of the wind and converts
it into rotary motion to drive an electric generator. Wind turbines fall into
two general classes depending on how they spin: horizontal axis and vertical
axis. Vertical axis machines spin about an axis perpendicular to the ground and
are usually ground mounted. Horizontal axis machines spin about an axis
parallel to the ground, are usually tower mounted, and are the dominate type of
wind turbine .
      WIND TURBINE GENERATOR — The blades and associated mechanical and
electrical conversion components used to generate electricity through the
conversion of wind energy to electrical energy.
   E.   As used in this article, the following biomass energy terms shall have
the meaning indicated:
      BIOMASS — Biological material, including plant matter such as wood, used
as an energy source.
      CLEAN WOOD — Natural wood that has been seasoned to reduce its water
content and provide more efficient combustion. The term clean wood does not
include wood that has been altered as follows:
         (a)   Coated with paint, stain, oil, resin or any other preservative,
fire retardant or decorative materials.
         (b)   Impregnated with preservatives or fire retardants.
         (c)   Exposed to salt water.
         (d)   Manufactured with use of adhesives, polymers or resins, such as
oriented strand, particle and veneer lumber and recycled lumber.
      OUTDOOR WOOD-FIRED BOILER (HYDRONIC HEATER) — A fuel-burning device; also
known as an outdoor hydronic heater, outdoor wood-fired furnace, outdoor wood-
burning appliance, or wood-fired boiler; that is used as an alternative energy
system. The outdoor wood-fired boiler is a variant of the classic indoor wood
stove or boiler. An outdoor wood- fired boiler is designed for installation
outdoors to transfer heat to building interiors. It often resembles a small
shed with a smokestack on top. An outdoor wood-fired boiler works by heating a
water jacket that surrounds the firebox. The heated water is then used to
transfer heat to a heating system in a building . An outdoor wood-fired boiler
is designed to:
         (a)   Burn clean wood or other fuels specifically tested and listed
for use by the manufacturer.
         (b)   Operate outdoors or in structures not normally intended for
habitation by humans or domestic animals (e.g., garages).
         (c)   Heat building space and/or water via distribution, typically
through pipes, of a fluid heated in the device, typically water or a water/
antifreeze mixture.
      PHASE 2 OUTDOOR WOOD—FIRED BOILER (HYDRONIC HEATER) — An outdoor wood-
fired boiler that has been certified or qualified by the U.S. Environmental
Protection Agency as meeting a particulate matter emission limit of 0.32 pounds
per million British Thermal Units (BTU) output.
      STACK — A vertical structure enclosing a flue(s) to carry off smoke or
exhaust from a furnace or other fuel-burning device such as a wood-fired
boiler.
§ 255-261.   Use regulations.
   A.   Alternative energy systems as described in this article are permitted
in all zoning districts as an accessory use to a permitted principal use
subject to the standards for accessory uses in the applicable zoning district
and the specific criteria set forth in this article.
   B.   Alternative energy facilities as described in this article are
permitted in specified zoning districts as a principal use subject to the
standards of the applicable zoning district and the specific criteria set forth
in this article.
   C.   Where general standards of the applicable zoning district and the
specific criteria set forth in this article overlap or conflict, the specific
criteria of this article shall supersede the general standards.
   D.   An alternative energy system shall provide on-site power or energy for
the principal use and/or another accessory use on the same lot , parcel, or
unit on which the alternative energy system is located and shall not be
primarily used to convert energy for commercial or other off-site transfer or
use , although this provision shall not be interpreted to prohibit the sale of
electricity generated in excess of on-site requirements under an
interconnection agreement , net metering agreement , or power purchase
agreement .
§ 255-262.   Geothermal energy systems.
Geothermal energy systems are permitted as an accessory use in all zoning
districts subject to the following specific criteria:
   A.   Lot , yard and bulk requirements.
      (1)   All parts of a geothermal energy system , including subsurface
pads, shall comply with all required setbacks applicable to accessory uses in
the zoning district in which the system is located.
      (2)   Above-ground equipment associated with geothermal energy systems
are prohibited in front yards and along any street frontage.
      (3)   Geothermal energy systems shall not encroach upon any ultimate
right-of-way or easement including, but not limited to, water, stormwater,
sanitary sewer , natural gas, telephone, and electrical easements.
      (4)   Geothermal energy systems shall be set back at least 15 feet from
stormwater management facilities.
      (5)   Geothermal energy system  boreholes and wells shall comply with
applicable Federal, State, and local laws and regulations with respect to
setbacks and isolation distances.
   B.   Design and installation requirements.
      (1)   Only the following types of geothermal energy systems shall be
permitted:
         (a)   Closed horizontal loop .
         (b)   Closed vertical loop .
      (2)   Open loop geothermal energy systems are prohibited with the
exception of standing column well geothermal systems in which water is
circulated from and back to the same borehole , in which case such open loop
geothermal energy system may be permitted with conditional use approval in all
zoning districts subject to demonstration by the applicant for conditional use
approval that the proposed site for the standing column well geothermal system
has the requisite geological and groundwater properties for the proper
functioning of the system.
      (3)   The design and installation of geothermal energy systems and
related wells, boreholes and trenches shall conform to applicable Federal,
State, and local laws and regulations, and applicable industry standards,
including those of the American National Standards Institute (ANSI), the
International Ground Source Heat Pump Association (IGSHPA), the American
Society for Testing and Materials (ASTM), the Air-Conditioning and
Refrigeration Institute (ARI), and other similar certifying organizations.
      (4)   For all closed loop geothermal systems relying upon circulating
fluids, only nontoxic, biodegradable circulating fluids such as food grade
propylene glycol shall be permitted.
      (5)   All horizontal closed loop systems shall be no more than 20 feet
deep.
      (6)   Geothermal energy systems shall be designed and constructed to
provide an effective watertight seal with the borehole casing to prevent
contamination from reaching groundwater sources. Boreholes must be grouted from
bottom to top with cement, bentonite, or other appropriate material to prevent
surface communication with groundwater.
      (7)   Geothermal energy systems shall be installed in compliance with all
applicable Federal, State, and local construction and earth disturbance codes
and regulations, including regulations with respect to boreholes , wells, and
stormwater management.
   C.   Operation and performance standards .
      (1)   Geothermal energy systems shall be operated in compliance with all
Federal, State, and local laws and regulations.
   D.   Decommissioning requirements.
      (1)   If a geothermal energy system remains unserviceable for a
continuous period of one year, the system shall be deemed to be abandoned and
shall constitute a public nuisance. The owner shall remove or seal the system
within six months of abandonment after a demolition permit has been obtained in
accordance with the following:
         (a)   Any aboveground mechanical equipment, wiring, piping, coils, and
other components shall be removed.
         (b)   Underground pipes or coils should be removed and the resulting
void space filled, or if abandoned in place, underground pipes and coils shall
be filled with grout to displace the heat transfer fluid. The top of any pipe,
coil or boring shall be uncovered and grouted.
         (c)   Heat transfer fluid shall be captured and disposed of in
accordance with applicable regulations.
      (2)   When a geothermal energy system is removed, any disturbed earth as
a result of the removal of the system shall be restored, graded and reseeded.
§ 255-263.   Solar energy systems.
Solar energy systems are permitted as an accessory use in all zoning districts
subject to the following specific criteria:
   A.   Lot , yard and bulk requirements.
      (1)   Setback restrictions.
         (a)   Solar energy system components are prohibited in front yards ,
along any street frontage, and within any required setback.
         (b)   Solar energy system components shall not encroach upon any
right-of-way or easement including, but not limited to, water, stormwater,
sanitary sewer , natural gas, telephone, and electrical easements.
         (c)   Solar energy systems must meet the applicable accessory use
setbacks for the zoning district in which the system is located.
         (d)   A ground mounted or freestanding solar energy panel or array may
not extend into the applicable side-yard or rear-yard setback when oriented at
minimum design tilt.
         (e)   Solar energy systems shall not encroach upon any stormwater
management facility.
      (2)   Height restrictions.
         (a)   Building mounted solar energy systems , other than a building
integrated system, shall not exceed the maximum height restriction imposed upon
principal and accessory structures and uses within the applicable zoning
district. For purposes of height measurement, building mounted solar energy
systems shall be considered equipment or mechanical devices and are restricted
consistent with the height limitations applicable to other building mounted
equipment or mechanical devices in the zoning district in which the solar
energy system is located.
         (b)   Ground mounted or freestanding solar energy systems shall not
exceed the applicable maximum accessory structure height in the zoning district
in which the solar energy system is located.
      (3)   Lot coverage.
         (a)   For purposes of determining compliance with building coverage
standards of the applicable zoning district, the total horizontal projection
area of all ground- mounted and freestanding solar collectors, including solar
photovoltaic cells, panels, arrays , and solar hot air or water collector
devices, shall be considered building area . For a tracking array or other
moveable system, the horizontal projection area shall be calculated at a 33
degree tilt angle.
   B.   Design and installation requirements.
      (1)   Solar energy systems shall be installed in compliance with all
applicable building and construction codes, including regulations with respect
to stormwater management and impervious cover.
      (2)   The design and installation of solar energy systems shall conform
to applicable industry codes and standards, including those of the
International Code Council (ICC), American National Standards Institute (ANSI),
Underwriters Laboratories (UL), the American Society for Testing and Materials
(ASTM), the National Fire Protection Association (NFPA) 70, and any other
similar certifying and professional organizations such as the American Society
of Civil Engineers and the American Society of Mechanical Engineers.
      (3)   All exterior electrical and/or plumbing lines shall be buried below
the surface of the ground and shall be placed in conduit.
      (4)   All solar energy system components shall be clearly labeled with a
warning concerning voltage and other important electrical safety information.
      (5)   Roof access, pathways, smoke ventilation and setbacks for roof
mounted solar panels (photovoltaic arrays) must conform to the requirements of
the Uniform Construction Code (IBC, IFC and IRC) adopted by the Township in
Chapter 73, Uniform Construction Code, § 73-6. [Amended 4-11-23 by Ord. No. 23-
1385, § 1]
      (6)   All solar panels shall be mounted in accordance with the listed
installation instructions of the system.
      (7)   Non-habitable structures. Non-habitable structures are not subject
to the roof access, pathway, and smoke ventilation requirements of this
section. Non-habitable structures include, but are not limited to accessory
detached garages, barns, and sheds.
      (8)   Solar panels that are part of a building mounted solar energy
system are exempt from visual screening requirements specified by the Code of
the Township of Upper Dublin outside of this Chapter, but the solar panels
shall be positioned to prevent solar glare upon neighboring properties.
[Amended 3-23-21 by Ord. No. 21-1367, § 1].
   C.   Operation and performance standards .
      (1)   Solar energy systems shall be operated in compliance with all
Federal, State, and local laws and regulations.
      (2)   Solar panels shall be positioned to prevent solar glare upon any
neighboring properties.
      (3)   Solar energy systems shall not be used to display advertising or
decoration, including signage, streamers, pennants, spinners, reflectors,
ribbons, tinsel, balloons, flags, banners, lights, or similar items.
Manufacturers and equipment information, safety warnings, and ownership
information may be displayed on solar energy system equipment provided such
information complies with applicable sign regulations.
      (4)   Owners of solar energy systems are encouraged but not required to
obtain solar easements from neighboring landowners to ensure solar access . The
Township does not guarantee and will not protect any individual property rights
with respect to solar access .
   D.   Decommissioning requirements.
      (1)   If a solar energy system remains unserviceable for a continuous
period of one year, the system shall be deemed to be abandoned and shall
constitute a public nuisance, with the exception of BIPV systems . The owner
shall remove the system within six months of abandonment after a demolition
permit has been obtained in accordance with the following:
         (a)   Any aboveground mechanical equipment, wiring, and structural
components shall be removed.
         (b)   Underground wiring and structural components shall be removed
and the resulting void space filled.
      (2)   When a ground-mounted or freestanding solar energy system is
removed, any disturbed earth as a result of the removal of the system shall be
restored, graded and reseeded.
§ 255-264.   Wind energy systems.
Wind energy systems are permitted as an accessory use with conditional use
approval in all zoning districts subject to the following specific criteria:
   A.   Lot , yard and bulk requirements.
      (1)   Setback restrictions.
         (a)   Wind energy system components are prohibited in front yards ,
along any street frontage, and within any required setback.
         (b)   Wind energy system components shall not encroach upon any right-
of-way or easement, including but not limited to water, stormwater, sanitary
sewer , natural gas, telephone, and electrical easements.
         (c)   Wind turbine  towers shall be located a minimum distance of one
and one tenth times the turbine height from any property line, parking lot,
street  right-of-way , or overhead utility line, to minimize potential harm if
the tower should fall.
         (d)   Wind energy system components shall not extend over parking
areas, access drives, driveways or sidewalks.
         (e)   Wind energy system components shall not encroach upon any
stormwater management facility.
      (2)   Height restrictions.
         (a)   The minimum height of the lowest position of a wind turbine
blade or other moving part shall be 15 feet above the ground.
         (b)   Building mounted wind energy systems shall not exceed the
maximum height restriction imposed upon principal and accessory structures and
uses within the applicable zoning district. For purposes of height measurement,
building mounted wind energy systems shall be considered equipment or
mechanical devices and are restricted consistent with the height limitations
applicable to other building mounted equipment or mechanical devices in the
zoning district in which the wind energy system is located.
         (c)   Tower -mounted wind turbine height shall be limited as follows:
Lot Size Turbine Height
Lot Size       Turbine Height
0–1.99 acres 35 feet
2–2.99 acres 40 feet
3–3.99 acres 45 feet
4–4.99 acres 50 feet
5–9.99 acres 55 feet
10–14.99 acre65 feet
15–19.99 acre85 feet
 
   B.   Design and installation requirements.
      (1)   Wind energy systems shall be installed in compliance with all
applicable building and construction codes, including regulations with respect
to stormwater management and impervious cover.
      (2)   The design and installation of all wind energy systems shall
conform to applicable industry standards, including those of the American
National Standards Institute (ANSI), Underwriters Laboratories, Det Norske
Veritas, Germanischer Lloyd Wind Energies, the American Society for Testing and
Materials (ASTM), and other similar certifying organizations.
      (3)   When an accessory structure is necessary for storage cells or
related wind energy system equipment, the accessory structure shall comply with
the accessory structure requirements specified within the underlying zoning
district.
      (4)   All signs , other than the manufacturer’s or installer’s
identification, appropriate warning signs , or owner identification on a wind
turbine or structure associated with a wind energy system , shall be
prohibited.
      (5)   No illumination of a wind turbine or tower shall be allowed unless
required by the Federal Aviation Administration.
      (6)   Any climbing foot pegs or ladder rungs below twelve feet on a wind
turbine  tower shall be secured to prevent unauthorized climbing.
      (7)   All on-site utility and transmission lines shall be placed
underground.
      (8)   Wind turbines and towers shall be a non-obtrusive color such as
white, off-white or gray.
      (9)   All wind energy systems shall be equipped with an appropriate
braking system. This includes both overspeed controls and mechanical brakes.
Stall regulation shall not be considered a sufficient braking system for
overspeed protection.
      (10)   A clearly visible warning sign concerning voltage must be placed
on all electrical equipment.
      (11)   Visible, reflective, colored objects, such as flags, reflectors,
or tape shall be placed on the anchor points of all tower guy wires and along
all tower guy wires up to a height of ten feet from the ground.
      (12)   The location of a wind turbine shall be clear of and shall not
interfere with any existing, trees, structures , wires and the like.
      (13)   A wind turbine generator or other wind energy system component
that is part of a building mounted wind energy system is exempt from visual
screening requirements specified by the Code of the Township of Upper Dublin
outside of this article.
   C.   Operation and performance standards .
      (1)   Wind energy systems shall not interfere with any broadcast, radio,
wireless or other telecommunication signals or facilities.
      (2)   Wind energy systems shall not generate noise that exceeds 55
decibels nor 10 decibels above ambient noise in any one hour, whichever is
higher. Noise is measured at the property line. The ambient sound measurement,
known as “A-weighted sound level” is taken where the noise from the wind
turbine cannot be heard, or with the wind turbine shut down. The ambient sound
level shall be considered the level that is exceeded 90% of the time when the
noise measurements are taken. The 55 decibel or 10 decibel level may be
exceeded during short-term events such as utility outages and/or severe wind
storms.
      (3)   Wind energy systems shall not produce shadow flicker on any
occupied building not on the lot where the wind energy system is located.
      (4)   All access doors to wind turbines and electrical equipment shall be
locked or fenced, as appropriate, to prevent entry by unauthorized persons .
   D.   Decommissioning requirements.
      (1)   If a wind energy system remains unserviceable for a continuous
period of one year, the system shall be deemed to be abandoned and shall
constitute a public nuisance. The owner shall remove the system within six
months of abandonment after a demolition permit has been obtained in accordance
with the following:
         (a)   Any aboveground mechanical equipment, wiring, and structural
components shall be removed.
         (b)   Underground wiring and structural components shall be removed
and the resulting void space filled.
      (2)   When a wind energy system is removed, any disturbed earth as a
result of the removal of the system shall be restored, graded and reseeded.
§ 255-265.   Biomass energy systems.
An outdoor wood-fired boiler shall be permitted as an accessory use in all
zoning districts subject to the following provisions:
   A.   Lot , yard and bulk requirements.
      (1)   Minimum lot size. Outdoor wood-fired boilers are prohibited on lots
, units or parcels of land with an area less than two acres.
      (2)   Setback restrictions.
         (a)   Outdoor wood-fired boilers and associated fuel storage are
prohibited in front and side yards , along any street frontage, and within any
required setback.
         (b)   Outdoor wood-fired boilers must be set back at least 150 feet
from any lot lines and 500 feet from the nearest occupied building not on the
lot where the boiler is located.
         (c)   Outdoor wood-fired boilers and associated fuel storage shall not
encroach upon any right-of-way or easement including, but not limited to,
water, stormwater, sanitary sewer , natural gas, telephone, and electrical
easements.
         (d)   Outdoor wood-fired boilers and associated fuel storage shall not
encroach upon any stormwater management facility.
   B.   Design and installation requirements.
      (1)   Only Phase 2 outdoor wood-fired boilers are permitted to be
installed.
      (2)   Outdoor wood-fired boilers must be equipped with a properly
functioning spark arrestor and must have a minimum stack height the taller of
10 feet above the ground or two feet above the highest point of any building
located less than 150 feet from the outdoor wood-fired boiler .
      (3)   All piping and electrical connections between an outdoor wood-fired
boiler and a serviced building shall be buried underground.
      (4)   Outdoor wood-fired boilers shall be installed in compliance with
all applicable building and construction codes, including regulations with
respect to stormwater management and impervious cover.
   C.   Operation and performance standards .
      (1)   Only clean wood or wood pellets made from clean wood may be used as
a fuel or burned in new and existing outdoor wood-fired boilers .
      (2)   Outdoor wood-fired boilers installed after the effective date of
this article may not be used or operated between the dates of May 1 and
September 30.
      (3)   Outdoor wood-fired boilers shall be used and operated in compliance
with all Federal, State, and local laws and regulations.
      (4)   Fuel shall be stored so as not to create a fire, pest, or safety
hazard, or otherwise create a nuisance.
   D.   Decommissioning requirements.
      (1)   If an outdoor wood-fired boiler remains unserviceable for a
continuous period of one year, the system shall be deemed to be abandoned and
shall constitute a public nuisance. The owner shall remove the system within
six months of abandonment after a demolition permit has been obtained in
accordance with the following:
         (a)   Any aboveground mechanical equipment, wiring, and structural
components shall be removed.
         (b)   Underground wiring and structural components shall be removed
and the resulting void space filled.
      (2)   When an outdoor wood-fired boiler is removed, any disturbed earth
as a result of the removal of the unit shall be restored, graded and reseeded.
§ 255-266.   Solar energy facilities.
Solar energy facilities are permitted as a principal use in the EC Employment
Center District. The regulations, requirements and restrictions set forth in
this article shall apply to solar energy facilities in addition to those
regulations, requirements and restrictions of the EC Employment Center
District.
   A.   Lot , yard and bulk requirements.
      (1)   Setback restrictions.
         (a)   Solar energy facility components shall not be located within any
required setback.
         (b)   Solar energy facility components shall not encroach upon any
right-of-way or easement, including but not limited to water, stormwater,
sanitary sewer , natural gas, telephone, and electrical easements.
         (c)   Solar energy facility components shall not encroach upon any
stormwater management facility.
      (2)   Height restrictions.
         (a)   Solar energy facilities shall be subject to the maximum height
regulation specified within the zoning district.
      (3)   Lot coverage.
         (a)   For purposes of determining compliance with building coverage
standards of the applicable zoning district, the total horizontal projection
area of all solar energy facility ground-mounted and freestanding solar
collectors, including solar photovoltaic cells, panels, arrays , and solar hot
air or water collector devices, shall be considered building area . For a
tracking array or other moveable system, the horizontal projection area shall
be calculated at a 33 degree tilt angle.
   B.   Design and installation requirements.
      (1)   Solar energy facilities shall be installed in compliance with all
applicable building and construction codes, including regulations with respect
to floodplain management, stormwater management and impervious cover.
      (2)   The design and installation of solar energy facilities shall
conform to applicable industry standards, including those of the American
National Standards Institute (ANSI), Underwriters Laboratories (UL), the
American Society for Testing and Materials (ASTM), and other similar certifying
organizations, and shall comply with applicable construction and building codes
with all other applicable fire and life safety requirements.
      (3)   All exterior electrical and/or plumbing lines shall be buried below
the surface of the ground and be placed in a conduit.
      (4)   All solar energy facility components shall be clearly labeled with
a warning concerning voltage and other important electrical safety information.
      (5)   Solar panels shall be positioned to prevent solar glare upon any
neighboring properties or any public or private street , and to prevent
additional heat load upon neighboring properties.
      (6)   All equipment for solar energy facilities including any structure
for batteries or storage cells shall be completely enclosed by a minimum eight-
foot high fence with a self- locking gate.
   C.   Operation and performance standards .
      (1)   Solar energy facilities shall be operated in compliance with all
Federal, State, and local laws and regulations.
      (2)   Solar energy facilities shall not be used to display advertising or
decoration, including signage, streamers, pennants, spinners, reflectors,
ribbons, tinsel, balloons, flags, banners, lights or similar items.
Manufacturers and equipment information, safety warnings, and ownership
information may be displayed on solar energy facility equipment provided such
information complies with applicable sign regulations.
      (3)   Owners of solar energy facilities are encouraged but not required
to obtain solar easements from neighboring landowners to ensure solar access .
The Township does not guarantee and will not protect any individual property
rights with respect to solar access .
      (4)   The grazing of animals, to include, but not be limited to, sheep
and goats, to control vegetation growing underneath solar arrays is permitted
as customarily incidental to a solar energy facility  principal use subject to
the lot size requirements for livestock specified in this chapter.
   D.   Decommissioning requirements.
      (1)   If a solar energy facility remains unserviceable for a continuous
period of two years, the facility shall be deemed to be abandoned and shall
constitute a public nuisance, unless the owner demonstrates a good faith intent
to sell the facility. Within six months of abandonment, the owner shall remove
the system after a demolition permit has been obtained in accordance with the
following:
         (a)   Any aboveground mechanical equipment, wiring, and structural
components shall be removed.
         (b)   Underground wiring and structural components shall be removed
and the resulting void space filled.
      (2)   When a solar energy facility is removed, any disturbed earth as a
result of the removal of the system shall be restored, graded and reseeded.
§ 255-267.   Wind energy facilities.
Wind energy facilities are permitted as a principal use in the EC Employment
Center District. The regulations, requirements, and restrictions set forth in
this article shall apply to wind energy facilities in addition to those
regulations, requirements and restrictions of the EC Employment Center
District.
   A.   Lot , yard and bulk requirements.
      (1)   Setback restrictions.
         (a)   Wind energy facility components shall not be located within any
required setback.
         (b)   Wind energy facility components shall not encroach upon any
right-of-way or easement including, but not limited to, water, stormwater,
sanitary sewer , natural gas, telephone, and electrical easements.
         (c)   A wind turbine  tower shall be located a minimum distance of one
and one tenth times the turbine height from any building not located on the lot
on which the wind energy facility is proposed, property line, parking lot,
street  right-of-way , or overhead utility line, to minimize potential harm if
a tower should fall.
         (d)   Wind energy facility components shall not extend over parking
areas, access drives, driveways or sidewalks.
         (e)   Wind energy facility components shall not encroach upon any
stormwater management facility.
      (2)   Height restrictions.
         (a)   The minimum height of the lowest position of a wind turbine
blade or other moving part shall be 15 feet above the ground.
         (b)   Wind turbine height shall be limited as follows:
Lot Size Turbine Height
Lot Size       Turbine Height
1–1.99 acres 35 feet
2–2.99 acres 40 feet
3–3.99 acres 45 feet
4–4.99 acres 50 feet
5–9.99 acres 55 feet
10–14.99 acre65 feet
15–19.99 acre85 feet
 
   B.   Design and installation requirements.
      (1)   Wind energy facilities shall be constructed in compliance with all
applicable building and construction codes, including regulations with respect
to floodplain management and stormwater management.
      (2)   The design and installation of all wind energy facilities shall
conform to applicable industry standards, including those of the American
National Standards Institute (ANSI), Underwriters Laboratories, Det Norske
Veritas, Germanischer Lloyd Wind Energies, the American Society for Testing and
Materials (ASTM), and other similar certifying organizations, and shall comply
with the Township Building Code and with all other applicable fire and life
safety requirements.
      (3)   When an accessory structure is necessary for storage cells or
related wind energy facilities equipment, the accessory structure shall comply
with the accessory structure requirements specified within the zoning district.
      (4)   All signs , other than the manufacturer’s or installer’s
identification, appropriate warning signs , or owner identification on a wind
turbine or structure associated with a wind energy facility , are prohibited.
      (5)   No illumination of a wind turbine or tower shall be allowed unless
required by the Federal Aviation Administration.
      (6)   All on-site utility and transmission lines shall be placed
underground.
      (7)   Wind turbines and towers shall be a non-obtrusive color such as
white, off-white or gray.
      (8)   A clearly visible warning sign concerning voltage must be placed on
all electrical equipment.
      (9)   Visible, reflective, colored objects, such as flags, reflectors, or
tape shall be placed on the anchor points of all tower guy wires and along the
tower guy wires up to a height of 10 feet from the ground.
      (10)   The location of a wind turbine shall be clear of and shall not
interfere with any existing, trees, structures , wires and the like.
      (11)   Wind energy facilities components shall not be constructed,
altered, or maintained so as to project above any of the imaginary airspace
surfaces described by Federal Aviation Administration.
      (12)   All wind energy facilities shall be equipped with a redundant
braking system. This includes both aerodynamic overspeed controls (including
variable pitch, tip, and other similar systems) and mechanical brakes.
Mechanical brakes shall be operated in a fail- safe mode. Manual regulation by
wind energy facility personnel shall not be considered a sufficient braking
system for overspeed protection.
      (13)   All mechanical equipment of wind energy facilities including any
structure for batteries or storage cells shall be completely enclosed by a
minimum eight-foot high fence with a self-locking gate. Wind turbine climbing
apparatus shall be limited to no lower than 12 feet from the ground or the wind
turbine climbing apparatus shall be fully contained and locked within the tower
 structure .
   C.   Operation and performance standards .
      (1)   Wind energy facilities shall not interfere with any broadcast,
radio, wireless or other telecommunication signals or facilities.
      (2)   Wind energy facilities shall not generate noise that exceeds 55
decibels nor 10 decibels above ambient noise in any one hour, whichever is
higher. Noise is measured at the property line. The ambient sound measurement,
known as “A-weighted sound level” is taken where the noise from a wind turbine
cannot be heard, or with the wind turbine shut down. The ambient sound level
shall be considered the level that is exceeded 90% of the time when the noise
measurements are taken. The 55 decibel or 10 decibel level may be exceeded
during short-term events such as utility outages and/or severe wind storms.
      (3)   Wind energy facilities shall not produce shadow flicker on any
occupied building not on the lot where the wind energy facility is located.
      (4)   All access doors to wind turbines and electrical equipment shall be
locked or fenced, as appropriate, to prevent entry by unauthorized persons .
   D.   Decommissioning requirements.
      (1)   If a wind energy facility remains unserviceable for a continuous
period of two years, the facility shall be deemed to be abandoned and shall
constitute a public nuisance, unless the owner demonstrates a good faith intent
to sell the facility. Within six months of abandonment, the owner shall remove
the system after a demolition permit has been obtained in accordance with the
following:
         (a)   Any aboveground mechanical equipment, wiring, and structural
components shall be removed.
         (b)   Underground wiring and structural components shall be removed
and the resulting void space filled.
      (2)   When a wind energy facility is removed, any disturbed earth as a
result of the removal of the system shall be restored, graded and reseeded.
ARTICLE XXXVI
(Reserved)
[“TDR Transferable Development Rights Overlay District,” added 11-26-2013 by
Ord. No. 13-1277, §4;
repealed 5-14-2019 by Ord. No. 19-1351, §4]
§ 255-268.   (Reserved)
[“Purpose,” added 11-26-2013 by Ord. No. 13-1277; repealed 5-14-2019 by Ord.
No. 19-1351]
§ 255-269.   (Reserved)
[“Purpose,” added 11-26-2013 by Ord. No. 13-1277; repealed 5-14-2019 by Ord.
No. 19-1351]
§ 255-270.   (Reserved)
[“Use categories,” added 11-26-2013 by Ord. No. 13-1277; repealed 5-14-2019 by
Ord. No. 19-1351]
§ 255-271.   (Reserved)
[“Character of development credits,” added 11-26-2013 by Ord. No. 13-1277;
repealed 5-14-2019 by Ord. No. 19-1351]
§ 255-272.   (Reserved)
[“Sending parcel–development credit allocation and use,” added 11-26-2013 by
Ord. No. 13-1277; repealed 5-14-2019 by Ord. No. 19-1351]
§ 255-273.   (Reserved)
[“Credit allocation revision process,” added 11-26-2013 by Ord. No. 13-1277;
repealed 5-14-2019 by Ord. No. 19-1351]
§ 255-274.   (Reserved)
[“Registration of development credits,” added 11-26-2013 by Ord. No. 13-1277;
repealed 5-14-2019 by Ord. No. 19-1351]
§ 255-275.   (Reserved)
[“Sending parcels: separation and sale of development credits,” added 11-26-
2013 by Ord. No. 13-1277; repealed 5-14-2019 by Ord. No. 19-1351]
§ 255-276.   (Reserved)
[“Subdividing and redesignating a sending parcel,” added 11-26-2013 by Ord. No.
13-1277; repealed 5-14-2019 by Ord. No. 19-1351]
§ 255-277.   (Reserved)
[“Receiving zone: process for using development credits,” added 11-26-2013 by
Ord. No. 13-1277; repealed 5-14-2019 by Ord. No. 19-1351]
§ 255-278.   (Reserved)
[“Receiving zone: standards for use of development credits,” added 11-26-2013
by Ord. No. 13-1277; repealed 5-14-2019 by Ord. No. 19-1351]
§ 255-279.   (Reserved)
[“Receiving zone: standards for use of development credits,” added 11-26-2013
by Ord. No. 13-1277; repealed 5-14-2019 by Ord. No. 19-1351]
§ 255-280.   (Reserved)
[“Plan submittal process for development utilizing development credits,” added
11-26-2013 by Ord. No. 13-1277; repealed 5-14-2019 by Ord. No. 19-1351]
ARTICLE XXXVII
MRH Mixed Use Residential-Historic District
[Added 11-11-2014 by Ord. No. 14-1292]
§ 255-281.   Legislative intent.
It is the intent of this article to provide for the preservation of meaningful
historical buildings , structures and features on property proposed for mixed
use residential development by the establishment of reasonable zoning standards
to promote the desirable benefits which will follow the development of a mixed
use residential community which will preserve as part of the community
significant historical buildings , structures and features. Design criteria
shall include standards governing use type and mix, dwelling unit  density ,
parking requirements, dwelling unit setbacks from internal roadways and from
historic buildings as well as perimeter setbacks, which standards are to ensure
that the community will not exert an adverse impact on the historical buildings
, structures and features nor on surrounding neighborhoods .
§ 255-282.   Use regulations and definitions.
Within the MRH Mixed Use Residential-Historic District, one or more buildings
may be erected or used, and a lot may be used or occupied, for any of the
following purposes:
   A.   The uses permitted by right, by special exception and by conditional
use in Article XIII, INST Institutional District, §
255-88, §
255-90 (Life Care Complexes) and §
255-90.1 (Senior Assisted Living Residence ), subject to the regulations set
forth at §
255-87 through §
255-91, as applicable to such use .
   B.   Historic preservation mixed residential community, by conditional use ,
subject to the provisions set forth in this article.
   C.   “Historic preservation mixed residential community,” as used in this
section, shall mean a planned development comprised of a mix of uses , which
mix of uses may include:
      (1)   Single family detached dwelling .
      (2)   Twin dwelling .
      (3)   Townhouse dwelling .
      (4)   Apartment building (with condominium ownership governed by Uniform
Condominium Act).
      (5)   Senior independent living campus.
      (6)   Office.
   D.   “Senior independent living campus,” as used in this section, shall mean
a residential facility which consists of private dwelling units to be occupied
by persons at least one of which is age 55 or over, with accessory uses ,
supportive social residential services such as dining facilities, housekeeping,
medical and support services, security and 24-hour-monitoring, an emergency
call system, recreational facilities including a fitness center with indoor
pool, wellness promotion, exercise programs, local transportation, educational
and special events, laundry services and social and recreational programs,
together with accessory uses appropriate for allowing independent older adults
to age in place, as well as accessory structures for maintenance services and
equipment. If a building with historic value is to be preserved as part of the
senior independent living campus, a maximum of 10% of the total residential
dwelling units may be located within the preserved historic building , which
are not subject to the minimum 55 years of age limitation, provided that no
occupant of any such dwelling unit may be 19 years of age or under, other than
a visitor whose occupancy shall not exceed 90 days in any calendar year.
§ 255-283.   Senior independent living campus residence regulations.
The following requirements shall apply to the senior independent living campus
component of a historic preservation mixed residential community:
   A.   The minimum unit size for each dwelling unit occupied by one resident
shall be 500 SF. The minimum unit size for each dwelling unit occupied by two
residents shall be 700 SF.
   B.   No more than two residents shall be permitted to reside in any dwelling
unit plus a caregiver.
   C.   Each dwelling unit shall contain a fully private bathroom (including
toilet, bathtub and/or shower and vanity/sink), personal closet space,
emergency call systems, lockable entry doors accessible by master key or
similar system available at all times in the senior independent living campus
residence and for designated staff, and pre-wiring for private telephone,
internet and television reception.
   D.   No less than 80 square feet of floor area per dwelling unit shall be
provided for community common areas for dining, active and passive recreation,
circulation and socialization, exclusive of hallways and passageways and
inclusive of common areas designated in the historic structures .
   E.   A dining area or areas shall be provided, together with a private
dining room available for use by residents and their families and guests for
private visitation and entertaining.
   F.   All residential units shall be part of a complex, similar to
multifamily housing. No stand-alone units or townhouses shall be permitted.
§ 255-284.   Development regulations.
The following area, bulk, density , area, dimensional, building height, parking
and buffer regulations shall apply to the historic preservation mixed
residential community use :
   A.   Lot area . A lot area of not less than 40 acres with a minimum width of
800 feet at the existing legal right-of-way of at least one bordering roadway.
   B.   Use and dwelling unit mix.
      (1)   The community shall contain a minimum of three of the permitted
residential uses identified in §
255-282C hereinabove, one of which shall be the senior independent living
campus.
      (2)   A minimum of 50% and a maximum of 80% of the units within the
community shall be senior independent living campus units. For each other
residential use to be included within the community, there shall be a minimum
of 5% of the total units within the community comprised of each such use .
      (3)   Office use accessory to the senior independent living campus.
   C.   Density .
      (1)   The senior independent living campus component shall have a maximum
density of 14 units per acre for its portion of the overall lot area within the
community, not more than 60% of the units shall be available for double
occupancy. The acreage of the lot area associated therewith shall be subtracted
from the community’s overall lot area and the density for the remaining lot
area shall not exceed five units per acre.
      (2)   Where townhouses are part of the community, the maximum number of
units in each building shall be five and the maximum building length shall be
160 feet.
   D.   Impervious surface coverage. A maximum impervious surface coverage of
40% of total lot area shall be permitted. The definition of impervious surface
contained at §
255-7 shall apply except that the horizontal surface area of a water feature
such as a lake or pond, whether or not the water feature serves as part of the
stormwater management system, shall not be considered an impervious surface .
   E.   Perimeter setbacks.
      (1)   The following minimum setbacks shall be observed from the property
line, unless the applicable setback is adjacent to a street in which case the
setback shall be provided from the legal right-of-way line .
 
          Abutting                         Abutting State
Perimeter Institutional or Abutting        Road or Arterial Abutting Township
Setback   Non-Residential  Residential Use Road             Road
          Use
Front     100 feet         100 feet        60 feet          60 feet
Side      100 feet         100 feet        60 feet          50 feet
Rear      100 feet         100 feet        60 feet          50 feet
 
      (2)   Existing historic structures and features in the nature of
perimeter walls, entrance archways and pillars and guard/gatehouses shall be
exempt from these perimeter setback requirements.
      (3)   Accessory structures to the principal building in the nature of a
deck, porch, patio, Jacuzzi/spa, sitting wall or fence shall be permitted to
extend a maximum of 20 feet into the applicable perimeter setback.
      (4)   Nothing shall be placed within the 100-foot setback between
existing residential property lines and apartment buildings and/or senior
independent living campus buildings with the exception of an emergency
driveway.
      (5)   Internal roadways designed for single family detached, twin and/or
townhouse dwelling units shall be set back a minimum of 40 feet from existing
residential property lines, excepting existing internal roads which are part of
historic sight lines.
      (6)   An internal roadway may be placed within the perimeter setback
along an existing State right-of-way , provided the edge of roadway is set back
a minimum of 50 feet from the right-of-way and is buffered and/or bermed as
viewed from the existing street .
      (7)   An internal roadway may be placed within the perimeter setback
along an existing Township right-of-way , provided the edge of roadway is set
back a minimum of 20 feet from the right-of-way and is buffered and/or bermed
as viewed from the existing street .
      (8)   The minimum internal roadway setbacks specified in Subsections (6)
and (7) shall not apply to entrances from or exits to a State or Township road
.
   F.   Building height. The maximum building height, as defined in
Chapter 212, the Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance, shall be 35 feet
for all residential uses other than the senior independent living campus and
apartment building . The maximum height for those uses shall be four stories,
provided that any such use closer than 200 feet from any adjoining residential
district shall be limited to three stories. The height of such buildings shall
be compatible with the historic buildings to be preserved adjacent to or in
close proximity thereto, so as to be compatible with design features of
existing roof lines, inclusive of turrets, spires or similar architectural
features. Otherwise, the maximum height for three stories shall be 45 feet and
for four stories shall be 55 feet. Parking areas beneath a building shall not
be considered a story; provided, however, the aforesaid maximum height
limitations shall apply to buildings with or without such parking areas.
   G.   Parking shall be provided in accordance with the following standards:
      (1)   Senior independent living campus: 1.5 spaces per dwelling unit , of
which 0.25 spaces per unit may be held in reserve, which spaces may include
garage and driveway and designated shared or common parking spaces .
      (2)   Townhouse: 2.5 spaces per dwelling unit , which may include garage
and driveway and designated shared or common parking spaces
      (3)   Apartment building : 2 spaces per dwelling unit , which may include
garage and driveway and designated shared or common parking spaces .
      (4)   Single-family detached and twin dwellings : 2.5 spaces per dwelling
unit which may include garage and driveway.
      (5)   Not less than 10 feet of open space shall be provided between the
curb line of any common or shared parking area and the outside wall of any
building . Shared or common parking with more than 12 spaces in a row shall
provide a landscaped island separation of a minimum of 10 feet between further
parking spaces .
   H.   Ownership and maintenance of interior roads and drives. Interior roads
and drives shall not be dedicated, but shall be owned and maintained by an
appropriate homeowners association , condominium association and/or an
association of such entities working in concert for the proper use, maintenance
and repair of the private roads and drives servicing the overall community.
§ 255-285.   Building setback, spacing, buffering and screening and open space
requirements.
The following building setback, spacing, buffering and screening and open space
requirements shall apply to the historic preservation mixed residential
community use :
   A.   Lot area and width. There shall be no minimum lot size or dimension, as
the required mix of residential uses will be governed by either or both
Pennsylvania’s Planned Community Act and/or Uniform Condominium Act.
   B.   The minimum setback for buildings along a private street shall be 20
feet from back of curb or back of sidewalk.
   C.   The minimum distance between buildings (not including decks, patios and
accessory structures ) shall be 20 feet regardless of the orientation of the
buildings .
   D.   Buildings within the senior independent living campus may be
interconnected by climate controlled and sprinklered walkways, either at ground
level or elevated, appropriate for access between buildings within the campus.
Such interconnection shall not be deemed to violate the minimum distance
between buildings as set forth hereinabove.
   E.   Buffer and screening requirements. The buffer and screening provisions
of §
255-90G shall apply; provided, these buffer and screening requirements shall
apply solely to the perimeter of the development property and do not establish
any requirement for screening or buffering internally between the various uses
proposed. Where portions of the development property are not proposed for
development in proximity to existing adjoining residential development , these
buffer and screening requirements shall not apply if the development property
has existing woodlands, wetlands and natural features that provide comparable
buffer and screening for those areas.
   F.   Open space. At least 20% of the tract area shall be preserved as open
space to allow for the protection of sensitive natural features , scenic views
and other unique features. Portions of the open space shall allow for public
access by trails or other means, while other areas may be restricted to the
residents of the development . The definition of open space contained at §
212-5 of the Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance [
Chapter 212] shall apply.
§ 255-286.   Application and review requirements.
   A.   Application requirements. Before a historic preservation mixed
residential community can be permitted in this district, it will be necessary
for the applicant to submit an application for conditional use approval to the
Upper Dublin Board of Commissioners establishing:
      (1)   The conformance of the proposed development with this chapter and
compatibility with existing and proposed land uses adjacent to the site.
      (2)   The impact on existing floodplains , waterways, heavily wooded
areas, steep slopes and other sensitive natural features , if any.
      (3)   The impact on the Township and regional transportation system and
the ability of adjacent streets and intersections to efficiently and safely
handle the traffic generated by the proposed development .
      (4)   The impact on public utilities, including but not limited to sewage
disposal, water supply and storm drainage.
      (5)   The impact upon provisions of police and fire protection.
      (6)   The impact on the open space and recreation facilities of Upper
Dublin Township.
      (7)   The impact upon the character of the surrounding neighborhood . The
applicant must show how the proposed development will address the impact upon
the surrounding neighborhoods .
   B.   Required documentation shall include the following:
      (1)   The location and size of the site, with evidence supporting the
general adequacy for development .
      (2)   The proposed residential density of the development and the
percentage mix of permitted uses .
      (3)   Conceptual plans of proposed utility and drainage systems.
      (4)   Plans and renderings indicating the design, utility and aesthetic
relationship of building and landscaping within the proposed development .
      (5)   Historic resource inventory.
      (6)   Historic Preservation Plan, which identifies at a minimum:
         (a)   Exterior architectural and building elements to be renovated and
preserved for each building , structure or feature consistent with the historic
period represented by each building , structure or feature.
         (b)   Landscape elements (e.g., mature tree groves and specimen trees)
consistent with the historic period represented by the historic buildings ,
structures and features and the extent to which each element will be preserved
and maintained.
         (c)   Interior architectural and building elements to be renovated and
preserved consistent with the historical period represented by each structure .
         (d)   Sight lines for visibility of historic buildings and structures
on-site and off-site.
         (e)   Setbacks from historic buildings , structures and features.
         (f)   Declaration of covenants and restrictions setting forth
perpetual, binding requirements addressing restoration, preservation and future
funding for proper maintenance of the buildings , structures and features set
forth in applicant’s Historic Preservation Plan.
      (7)   Traffic impact statement.
      (8)   Fiscal impact statement.
      (9)   Preliminary grading plan.
      (10)   Preliminary stormwater management plan.
      (11)   Tree removal and preservation plan.
      (12)   Preliminary landscaping plan.
      (13)   Sketch plans and architectural renderings showing at a minimum
elevations and material samples for each building type.
      (14)   Open space plan with walkways and provisions for public access.
      (15)   Common areas /shared facility plan including roads , parking
areas, walkways, utilities, all historic structures and natural features ,
including proposed cross easements.
      (16)   The text of covenants, easements and existing restrictions or
those to be imposed upon the land or structures , including provisions for
public utilities and trails for such activities as hiking or bicycling, if
applicable.
   C.   Application review. The Upper Dublin Township Planning Commission shall
review the conditional use application for compliance with the terms of this
chapter, and shall submit its recommendations thereon to the Upper Dublin
Township Board of Commissioners, after review by the Montgomery County Planning
Commission.
   D.   Criteria for the grant of conditional use approval. An application for
conditional use shall not be granted unless the following requirements have
been satisfied in addition to those set forth at §
255-194. The applicant shall have the burden of demonstrating:
      (1)   That the property contains a significant number of historic
buildings , structures , statuary and other elements of vintage, character and
age to warrant the grant of conditional use approval.
      (2)   That the proposed improvements to the historic buildings ,
structures , statuary and other features will preserve the distinguishing
qualities and character of the historic resources and cultural landscape .
      (3)   That the dwelling unit site layout, design and implementation of
buffering, landscaping, lighting, interior circulation, access and traffic
management, parking, fencing and other land development features will preserve
the integrity of the historic resources .
      (4)   That the proposed development will not have a significant adverse
effect upon the surrounding neighborhoods .
   E.   The conditions which shall be imposed by the Board of Commissioners
shall include, at a minimum, the recording of a declaration of covenants and
restrictions, in form and substance satisfactory to the Board of Commissioners,
setting forth perpetual, binding requirements addressing restoration,
preservation and future funding for proper maintenance of the buildings and
features set forth in applicant’s Historic Preservation Plan. Park and
recreation contributions, as mandated by Township ordinance for residential
developments , shall be waived and replaced by a binding requirement, set forth
in the declaration, enforceable by the Township, requiring an amount equal
thereto to be paid into a fund for proper maintenance of the aforesaid features
warranting historic preservation. Existing structures suitable for and approved
by the Board of Commissioners for restoration and/or renovation for residential
usage, or structures in the nature of gate houses or guard houses or other
similar structures appropriate for retainage or renovation into residential
usage, as identified in applicant’s Historic Preservation Plan, may be
designated in the conditional use approval for preservation and future
residential usage with allowance for siting of same on designated fee simple
parcels.
   F.   An applicant may elect to submit a complete preliminary land
development /subdivision application meeting the requirements of the
Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance [
Chapter 212] for processing contemporaneously with a conditional use
application, provided the applicant waives, in writing, mandatory time
limitations imposed upon Upper Dublin Township for action upon both the
conditional use application and the preliminary land development /subdivision
application to afford the Upper Dublin Township Board of Commissioners adequate
time to render their decision upon both applications.
   G.   Internal parcel creation and designation. At the time of approval of a
final land development plan for a historic preservation mixed residential
community, the Board may approve a parcel plan to be recorded in the Office for
the Recording of Deeds of Montgomery County establishing separate parcels for
the senior independent living campus and/or individual buildings within the
campus, as well as any multi-family components to allow for independent
conveyance of those parcels separate and apart from the other residential uses
, as well as to allow for recording of mortgage liens and financing liens in
regard to such components. As a condition to the approval of such a parcel
plan, a declaration shall be approved by Board for recording establishing
requisite cross easements servicing those parcels in concert with the parcel or
parcels for the development of the other residential uses as well as for
requisite participation in the funding of future maintenance and repair of all
common areas and shared facilities in the nature of roadways and utilities by
and among all residential components within the community.
ARTICLE XXXVIII
GFW Greater Fort Washington District
[Added 5-14-2019 by Ord. No. 19-1351, §5]
§ 255-287.   Intent.
[Amended 8-11-2020 by Ord. No. 20-1360, § 1]
In expansion of the declaration of legislative intent contained in Article I, §
255-2, of this chapter, it is hereby declared to be the intent of this article,
with respect to the GFW Greater Fort Washington District, to:
   A.   Create a vibrant, mixed-use district which contributes toward the
economic vitality of Upper Dublin Township, with a combination of uses such as
office, commercial, institutional, light industrial, residential apartments ,
recreational, and transportation.
   B.   Promote a more diverse, walkable, pedestrian-oriented place that
provides opportunities to work, dine, shop, live, learn, and recreate.
   C.   Incentivize development and redevelopment in order to transform the
character of the existing office park into a future mixed-use  neighborhood .
   D.   Allow for office, commercial, institutional, light industrial,
residential apartments , recreational and transportation oriented development
with controls to limit air, land and water pollution, noise emissions and
traffic congestion.
   E.   Promote a variety of well-designed apartment  developments to enable
opportunities: to live in close proximity to employment and thereby to
potentially reduce vehicular trips in the Fort Washington area; to strengthen
the connection to the Fort Washington Train Station; and to provide options to
age in place in Upper Dublin Township.
   F.   Promote a range of uses with supporting service, dining and retail uses
.
   G.   Encourage the redevelopment of underutilized and vacant buildings .
   H.   Provide protection to people and buildings from fire, offensive noise,
vibrations, odors and other nuisances through strict performance standards .
   I.   Ensure that site development and building design includes stormwater
management measures, to meet on-site requirements while considering area-wide
controls.
   J.   Ensure adequate buffering of adjacent districts and land uses .
   K.   Ensure safe pedestrian access from buildings to and along streets and
transit stops.
   L.   Support the creation of a bicycle trail to serve existing and future
development in the district.
   M.   Support the use and growth of transit service and other alternative
transit modes, such as bicycle sharing, car sharing, and van pooling, within
and nearby the district.
   N.   Ensure safe and efficient vehicle and pedestrian access.
   O.   Allow development in the floodplain only where a net improvement to
stormwater management is achieved, and in compliance with Article XXII –
Floodplain Conservation District.
   P.   Encourage energy efficiency and conservation in site development ,
building design, construction and ongoing maintenance/operations.
Q.   Comply with Chapter 212, Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance,
Article IV, §
212-35.2. General Manual of Written and Graphic Design Standards.
§ 255-288.   Uses permitted by right.
[Amended 8-11-2020 by Ord. No. 20-1360, § 2]
   A.   The specific uses permitted in this district shall be the erection,
construction , alteration or use of buildings or premises for one or more of
the following uses and no other:
      (1)   Office buildings .
      (2)   Service retail  uses , limited to a maximum of 15,000 square feet
of ground floor building area per lot .
      (3)   Restaurants, both stand-alone and as part of any other building in
the district, and including restaurants with outdoor dining areas.
      (4)   Hotels, subject to annual inspections to verify occupancy and
compliance with Building Codes.
      (5)   Banks with drive-through facilities, and automated teller machines.
      (6)   Medical facilities , animal hospitals and the offices of
veterinarians.
      (7)   Pharmacy with drive-through facilities.
      (8)   Schools.
      (9)   Library.
      (10)   Museum.
      (11)   Places of worship.
      (12)   Public and private recreation lands or facilities.
      (13)   Theaters.
      (14)   Laboratories and research and development facilities.
   B.   One or a combination of the following uses are permitted by conditional
use in accordance with the standards for approval under §
255-295 and under Article XXV of this chapter:
      (1)   The following commercial/retail uses , limited to a maximum of
40,000 square feet of ground floor building area per lot .
         (a)   Retail sale of household merchandise, food and beverage
products, and personal effects, such as dry goods, variety and general
merchandise, clothing, prepared and packaged food, grocery items, deli
products, flowers, beverages, household supplies and furnishings, jewelry,
optical goods, musical items, and antiques.
         (b)   Personal services, to include barber shop, hairdresser, clothes
cleaning, tailoring, nail care and spa.
         (c)   Personal fitness center.
         (d)   Any commercial or retail use having the same general character
as the uses provided in this paragraph, §
255-288.B.(1).
      (2)   A personal care facility , retirement community, assisted living
center or nursing home.
      (3)   Licensed day-care center .
      (4)   An exhibition center .
      (5)   Apartment  development .
      (6)   Indoor storage facility. Where a lot abuts the Pennsylvania
Turnpike and there is no more than 2,750 feet between the subject lot's access
point and the access point to the Pennsylvania Turnpike, an indoor storage
facility is permitted, provided the given criteria and standards are satisfied.
Measurement of the 2,750 foot distance shall be along the route vehicles must
utilize to access the site. [Added 3-23-2021 by Ord. No. 21-1368, § 3]
      (7)   Highway and interchange uses . Where a lot abuts a regional
vehicular corridor designed with limited access points, such as the
Pennsylvania Turnpike or the Route 309 corridor, and there is no more than
1,000 feet between the subject lot's access point and the vehicular corridor’s
access point, the following use is permitted, provided the given criteria and
standards are satisfied. Measurement of the 1,000 foot distance shall be along
the route vehicles must utilize to access the site.
         (a)   Freestanding retail sales, which attract high volumes of
vehicular traffic and require convenient automobile access in relation to a
highway, interchange or limited access thoroughfare.
      (8)   Any light industrial use not specifically excluded in §
255-104.
      (9)   Drive-through facilities, such as drive-through restaurants and
drive-through banks, provided that the drive-through component shall not face
the front yard and that such facilities comply with §
212-35.2.A.(15) of the General Manual of Written and Graphic Standards of the
Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance.
   C.   Density chart. The following chart summarizes permitted densities in
the GFW – Greater Fort Washington District:
 
Land Use                               Permitted Maximum Density
Service retail                         15,000 sq.ft. of ground floor building
                                       area per lot
Commercial/retail                      40,000 sq.ft. of ground floor building
                                       area per lot
Highway and interchange - Freestanding 15,000 sq.ft. of gross floor area per
retail                                 lot
Personal care facility, retirement     40 dwelling units per acre. 50 dwelling
community, assisted living center or   units per acre with incentives.
nursing home
Apartments                             40 dwelling units per acre. 45 or 50
                                       dwelling units per acre with incentives.
 
§ 255-288.1 Prohibited uses.
[Added 8-11-2020 by Ord. No. 20-1360, § 3; Amended 3-23-21 by Ord. No. 21-1368,
§ 4]
The following uses , as well as any use not specifically permitted by right,
are prohibited:
   A.   Automobile and other vehicle sales, service, or repair establishment.
   B.   A use regulated by
Chapter 54 of the Upper Dublin Township Code.
   C.   (Reserved)
   D.   Kennel.
   E.   Greenhouse, garden center, or landscape nursery, including an outdoor
area for sale or storage of plants and materials.
   F.    The uses stated in §
255-104.B through §
255-104.KK.
§ 255-289.   Outdoor storage and waste disposal.
   A.   No flammable or explosive liquids, solids or gases shall be stored in
bulk above the ground; provided, however, that tanks or drums directly
connecting with energy devices, heating devices or appliances located on the
same lots as the tanks or drums are excluded from this provision.
   B.   All outdoor storage facilities for fuel, raw materials and products
stored outdoors, including those permitted in Subsection A hereinabove, shall
be enclosed by a fence of a type, construction and size as in the opinion of
the Board of Commissioners shall be adequate to protect and conceal the
facilities from any adjacent properties. In determining the same, the
Commissioners shall not only consider the question of safety, but the screening
as determined by the Board of Commissioners may be in the nature of evergreen
trees, evergreen shrubbery, fence with evergreen plants, and the like.
   C.   No materials or wastes which might cause fumes or dust or which
constitute a fire hazard or which may be edible or otherwise be attractive to
rodents or insects shall be stored except outdoors only in closed containers.
   D.   Flammable or explosive liquids, solids or gases may not be placed or
stored within 200 feet of a residential zoning district, or a residential use
within the GFW District.
§ 255-290.   Power sources.
Every use requiring power shall be operated so that the service lines,
substation, etc., shall conform to the highest safety requirements known, shall
be so constructed, installed, and located as to be an integral part of the
architectural features of the building and shall be concealed by evergreen
planting.
§ 255-291.   Traffic control.
   A.   All development in the GFW District shall be designed to safely permit
vehicles to enter and exit the property. A transportation impact study may be
required by the Board of Commissioners for new buildings or building additions
of 5,000 square feet or greater, for any freestanding retail use permitted
under this article, §
255-288, for all conditional uses in the GFW District, and as required by §
212-35.1 of the Subdivision and Land Development Code.
   B.   Where a traffic study is required, the Board of Commissioners reserves
the right to request its own traffic engineer to establish the type and nature
of the assumptions used for the generation and distribution of vehicular trips,
review and comment on the applicant's traffic study, and require acceptable
improvements necessary to minimize any identified traffic impacts. The expense
for such review shall be payable by the applicant to the Township.
   C.   A transportation impact study (whether pursuant to subdivision and land
development or conditional use approval) shall meet the requirements outlined
in §
212-35.1 of the Subdivision and Land Development Code.
   D.   Organization of report. The transportation impact study findings shall
be labeled as consecutively numbered exhibits and properly referenced
throughout the text of the documents. The report shall be written in a manner
and style that clearly focus the information, data and analysis on the issues
mentioned above. Sources of all data must be appropriately documented. The name
and title of the preparer is required. The preparer shall be a licensed
engineer experienced in transportation.
§ 255-292.   Stormwater management.
All development shall be subject to the provisions of
Chapter 212, Subdivision and Land Development , as well as all stormwater
management provisions in the Township Code. In addition to installing
facilities to control runoff caused by any development , applicants shall offer
easements for dedication to the Township where, in the view of the Township,
such easements are necessary to direct or detain stormwater to the benefit of
the entire GFW District.
§ 255-293.   Lot, yard and bulk regulations.
[Amended 8-11-2020 by Ord. No. 20-1360, § 4; Amended 3-23-2021 by Ord. No. 21-
1368, §§ 5, 6]
   A.   Area and yard regulations.
      (1)   Minimum lot size
      (a)   Generally: 2 acres.
      (b)   Indoor storage facilities : 1.75 acres.
      (c)   Apartments or townhouse developments: 3 acres.
      (2)   Minimum lot width: 200 feet, measured at the building  setback line
.
      (3)   Yard requirements.
         (a)   Front yards . The required minimum depth of a front yard shall
be 25 feet, except, where the property is on the opposite side of a street from
land which is zoned residential, in which case the front yard shall be 60 feet;
and except where the property abuts the right-of-way of the Pennsylvania
Turnpike, in which case the front yard shall be 15 feet. [Amended 3-23-2021 by
Ord. No. 21-1368, § 6]
         (b)   Side yards . The required minimum depth of a side yard shall be
35 feet.
         (c)   Rear yards . The required minimum depth of a rear yard shall be
45 feet.
         (d)   Exceptions for side and rear yards . Where a side or rear yard
abuts a residential zoning district or residential use , or a street adjacent
to a residential zoning district or residential use , the required minimum
depth of the abutting side or rear yard shall be 60 feet.
         (e)   Maintenance of yards and open areas. All yards and open areas
(except for the portion provided for driveways and parking as herein provided)
shall be planted in grass, groundcovers, shrubbery, and trees and be maintained
by the owner or tenants in a careful manner and in conformance with an approved
landscape plan. Planting shall comply with the requirements in §
212-32, Landscaping. In addition, any front yard shall be planted with a
softening buffer, as provided for in §
212-32.F.(2).
   B.   Building and lot regulations.
      (1)   Building coverage. The maximum building coverage shall be 30% of
the square foot area of the lot , plus 2.5% per acre multiplied by the lot area
in acres, not to exceed 45% of the lot area. For example: Lot area of two
acres: 30% plus 5% (2 times 2.5) equals 35%.
      (2)   Impervious surface . The maximum impervious surface of a lot shall
not exceed 60% for office buildings , and 65% for all other uses . Where
feasible, pervious paving surfaces shall be used.
      (3)   Green space : 15% minimum of the gross lot area , within which a
minimum of 3% of the gross lot area shall be built and maintained as public
space .
      (4)   Height regulations.
         (a)   The maximum height of buildings in the Greater Fort Washington
District shall be in accordance with the Height Restrictions Map (
Map 1) wherein heights ranging from 38 feet to 75 feet are shown.
         (b)   If a property is situated within two height limits, the taller
height limit shall apply, except for properties that abut Highland Avenue and/
or Camp Hill Road and contain a 38-foot height limit area. For those
properties, the height limit boundaries shall be observed as specified on the
Height Restrictions Map (Map 1).
         (c)   The height of a building may be increased above the main roof to
accommodate the following:
            [1]   Parapets, but not in excess of four (4) feet in mean height.
Parapets do not count toward the calculation of building height.
            [2]   A structure or structures limited to 10 feet in height and
utilizing not more than 10% of the roof area only for elevator penthouses and
air conditioning, heating or ventilating equipment, provided that such
equipment is screened from public view.
      (5)   Pedestrian and trail improvements shall be made by the applicant,
including offering last-mile transit, multi-use trail rights-of-ways for
dedication or by public easement, constructing frontage sidewalks and sidewalk
connections to buildings and to the Cross County Trail, if it intersects the
applicant's property; and providing areas for bus stops. If the Cross County
Trail is planned to intersect their property, the applicant shall construct and
maintain the segment of the trail that crosses the property. The property
owner’s obligation to maintain trails that cross the property shall be set
forth in a recorded covenant. Any trail right-of-way dedicated to the public
shall be counted as part of the required green space .
   C.   Adjustments to yard requirements.
      (1)   The front yard setback noted above shall be replaced with a “build-
to line ” along Pinetown Road as detailed below, for new development on lots
with frontage on Pinetown Road between Commerce Drive and Highland Avenue.
      (2)   The front facades of buildings on lots within the above noted area
shall be situated no further than 25 feet from the street  right-of-way line .
The build-to line may be increased up to an additional 15 feet, to a total of
40 feet, when the additional area is designed and used for outdoor dining and/
or for use as a public plaza with outdoor seating areas or other approved
public space .
      (3)   No double bay parking lots shall be installed in front of buildings
, and no more than 30% of the lot frontage width may be occupied by parking in
front of a building provided, however, that all such parking shall be screened
by a pier-fence-hedge-street tree combination.
      (4)   Other than as described above, surface parking for buildings on
lots within the above noted area shall be situated to the rear of the building
. A minor number of parking spaces , equal to the horizontal dimension of the
side of the building measured in feet and divided by 10, may be located along
the side of the building provided that parking is screened from the view of
pedestrians and vehicles traveling in the public right of way . Screening may
be created by using fences and/or landscaping approved by the Board of
Commissioners.
§ 255-294.   Parking.
[Amended 3-23-2021 by Ord. No. 21-1368, § 7]
   A.   Location of parking.
      (1)   No parking shall be permitted within the required yard area
abutting a residentially zoned district.
      (2)   Parking shall be set back 50 feet from the right-of-way , unless
otherwise permitted.
      (3)   Parking shall be set back 40 feet from the side or rear property
line adjacent to nonresidential districts, and 60 feet from the side or rear
property line adjacent to residential districts.
   (4)   Parking for indoor storage facilities shall be set back 17.5 feet from
a right-of-way. [Added 3-23-2021 by Ord. No. 21-1368, § 7]
   B.   Multilevel parking. Multilevel parking shall be considered a building
for setback and definitional purposes. The footprint of a multilevel parking
area shall be included in calculation of impervious surface coverage, but shall
not be included in calculating the permitted building coverage on the premises.
   C.   Reserve parking . Required parking may be held in reserve if the
applicant can show, to the satisfaction of the Board of Commissioners, that the
additional parking will not be needed, subject to the following maximum
percentages: 25% for office buildings and exhibition centers ; 50% for all
other uses . Regardless of the number of spaces actually developed, a parking
area to accommodate the aggregate number of parking spaces normally required
shall be fully designed and the area which is proposed to be eliminated shall
be shown on the land development plan as “parking reserve area.” The parking
reserve area shall be planted with vegetative cover and integrated into the
site’s landscaping plan. Such area shall be required to be developed as
designed if and when the Zoning Officer    determines the need therefor.
   D.   Whenever two or more different uses are proposed on a property, the
parking requirements in Article XIX of this chapter may be reduced, whereby at
least 3.3 parking spaces per 1,000 square feet of gross floor area shall be
required.
   E.   In addition to the parking requirements outlined in this section, any
additional parking requirements that are applicable in Article XIX of this
chapter shall be met.
   F.   The parking and staging of trucks, truck trailers and passenger
vehicles is permitted only as an accessory use to a principal permitted use
located on the same lot .
   G.   Auto and vehicle sales and/or storage are prohibited.
§ 255-295.   Standards for conditional use approval.
[Amended 8-11-2020 by Ord. No. 20-1360, § 5]
Those uses permitted in this article by conditional use shall be required to
conform to the following standards:
   A.   A personal care facility , retirement community, assisted living center
or nursing home.
      (1)   Such use is consistent with §
255-287, Intent.
      (2)   Such use will not adversely affect the health, safety or welfare of
the neighborhood .
      (3)   Parking is provided in accordance with Article XIX of this chapter.
      (4)   Buffer and screening requirements required for a flife care complex
in an INST – Institutional District shall be complied with unless modified by
the Board of Commissioners.
      (5)   The density shall not exceed:
         (a)   40 dwelling units per acre.
         (b)   50 dwelling units per acre (Option 1) with the installation of a
green roof or a solar, geothermal or other renewable energy power-generation
facility that is designed to provide at least 20% of the expected annual energy
use for the building . The facility shall be designed and installed under the
direction of a professional with demonstrated expertise in the design and
construction of such facilities. The green roof shall cover at least 70% of the
net roof area (the total gross area minus areas covered by mechanical
equipment) of a building . Green roofs shall be designed and installed under
the direction of a professional with demonstrated expertise in green roof
design and construction . Vegetation shall be maintained for the life of the
building . The green roof shall conform to the best available technology
standards, such as those published by LEED.
         (c)   50 dwelling units per acre (Option 2) if the applicant provides
reliable shuttle service to the train station(s) and if the applicant
demonstrates compliance with three (3) of the Alternative Transportation Design
Standards of Appendix A of Chapter 212 Subdivision and Land Development ,
Article IV, §
212-35.2., as well as moderate income housing as described in §
255-295.C.(1)(b)[v].
         (d)   The continued maintenance of the optional facilities shall be
secured by a recorded covenant.
      (6)   The plans shall comply with the development requirements for
multiple dwelling  development in Article VIII, MD – Multi-Dwelling District, §
255-53.1.
   B.   Exhibition center .
      (1)   Such use is consistent with §
255-287, Intent.
      (2)   Such use will not adversely affect the health, safety or welfare of
the neighborhood .
      (3)   Adequate provision has been made to accommodate increased traffic
on public streets .
      (4)   The Board of Commissioners may limit the total square footage of
gross floor area of an exhibition center based on the legislative intent of the
GFW Greater Fort Washington District and the standards and criteria contained
in Article XXV, Conditional Use by Board of Commissioners.
   C.   Apartment  development .
      (1)   Apartment  lot , density, yard , bulk, height, and parking
regulations.
         (a)   Minimum lot size. 3 acres.
         (b)   Maximum density.
            [i]   40 dwelling units per acre.
            [ii]   45 dwelling units per acre on lots of 5 acres or greater.
            [iii]   45 dwelling units per acre with the installation of a green
roof or renewable energy facility as described in §
255-295.A.(5)(b).
            [iv]   45 dwelling units per acre is also permitted with vertical
mixed use  development , consisting of ground floor non-residential development
and apartments in the floors above.
            [v]   50 dwelling units per acre (Option 1) with the installation
of a green roof or renewable energy facility as described in §
255-295.A.(5)(b), and moderate income housing provided that such units shall be
so maintained by a covenant running with the land. To qualify for the increase,
the new building shall be three stories or higher and at least 10% of the
dwelling units, but no less than two units, shall be affordable to moderate-
income families. Access to amenities shall not be differentiated based on type
of household. Price and income guidelines for moderate-income households shall
be as defined by the Pennsylvania Housing Finance Agency (PHFA) Keystone Home
Loan Program income guidelines in effect at time of application. Developers and
subsequent transferees of moderate-income units shall provide documentation
showing compliance with these family incomes and rental/purchase price limits.
               [a]   Moderate-income dwelling units require 1.0 parking space
per unit rather than the 1.5 spaces per unit required for market-rate housing.
               [b]   Building coverage may be increased to 60%, impervious
surface may be increased to 75%, and green space may be reduced to 7.5% for
single-use developments.
            [vi]   50 dwelling units per acre (Option 2) if the applicant
provides reliable shuttle service to the train station(s) and if the applicant
demonstrates compliance with three (3) of the alternative transportation design
standards of
Appendix A of Chapter 212 Subdivision and Land Development , Article IV, §
212-35.2.A.(4), as well as a green roof or renewable energy facility, or
moderate income housing as described in §
255-295.C.(1)(b)[v].
            [vii]   Provision for autonomous passenger vehicles. If and when
the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania authorizes operation of autonomous passenger
vehicles on all roadways within Montgomery County, an applicant seeking to
construct and/or operate at least one hundred (100) residential units at a site
within this district must make the following provisions for autonomous
passenger vehicles:
               [a]   The principal vehicle access must be on a two-way street .
               [b]   The plan for the proposed development must include at
least one designated pick-up/drop-off space for autonomous passenger vehicles
for every 100 units.
               [c]   Certification by an engineer that the building and its
exterior do not include any element which would interfere with the use of LIDAR
(or any comparable technologies in use by autonomous vehicles) within the site
or entering or exiting the site at its intersection with any public street .
               [d]   The plan must provide for adequate curbside management,
including pedestrian waiting area at each pick-up/drop-off area, security
cameras for each such location, and bollard and signage barring trucks and
other commercial vehicles from each such location, sufficient to provide
safeguards for persons using such area.
         (c)   Minimum lot width (measured at building  setback line ). 200
feet.
         (d)   Yard requirements.
            [i]   Front yard . 25 feet.
            [ii]   Side yards . 35 feet.
            [iii]   Rear yard . 45 feet.
         (e)   Building coverage. 40%.
         (f)   Impervious coverage. 75%.
         (g)   Green space . 15% minimum of the gross lot area , within which a
minimum of 3% of the gross lot area shall be built and maintained as public
space .
         (h)   Maximum building height, subject to the height restrictions (
Map 1).
            [i]   38 to 75 feet for various properties as shown on
Map 1.
         (i)   Parking requirements.
            [i]   Parking shall be provided at a rate of 1.5 parking space per
unit plus 10% for guest parking. (This shall be added to Article XIX, Off-
Street Parking and Loading as §
255-135.B.(14), Apartment  Buildings .)
         (j)   Bedrooms per dwelling unit.
            [i]   All apartment  buildings shall have the following
distribution of unit types:
               Studio and 1 bedroom units – minimum 50% of total units.
               2 bedroom units – maximum of 45% of total units.
               3 bedroom units – maximum of 5% of total units.
               4 bedrooms or more – not permitted.
      (2)   Apartment unit maximum. A maximum of 900 apartment units shall be
permitted within the GFW- Greater Fort Washington District. In the event
multiple applications are pending before the Township which, if granted, would
exceed the 900 unit maximum, the applications will be considered in the order
in which preliminary approval is granted. When preliminary approval of an
application would cause the number of approved apartment units to exceed 900
units in the GFW district, the application shall be denied. Conditional use
approval for apartment units shall be conditioned upon compliance with the unit
maximum at the time of preliminary plan approval.
   D.   (Reserved)
   E.   Highway and interchange uses – freestanding retail sales.
      (1)   Adequate provisions shall be made to accommodate increased traffic
on public streets as required by §
255-291, Traffic control.
      (2)   The provisions of §
255-293, Lot , yard and bulk regulations, shall apply to this use , except as
noted below:
         (a)   The maximum building area shall be 15,000 square feet.
      (3)   Fuel dispensing may be provided as an accessory use , provided the
following criteria and standards are met:
         (a)   There shall be no more than sixteen fueling positions.
         (b)   Tools and/or equipment needed for incidental activities, such as
window cleaning and checking/adding air to vehicle tires, may be provided.
         (c)   Fuel storage and dispensing equipment shall be located entirely
outside of any floodplain and all fuel storage facilities shall be underground.
         (d)   Canopies over fuel dispensing positions may be installed to
protect users from poor weather conditions, provided they are no taller than 20
feet.
      (4)   Overnight rest facilities or publically available electric hookups
are prohibited, as are showers or other similar personal hygiene facilities,
except for customarily available public rest rooms.
      (5)   Signs permitted for highway and interchange uses are provided for
in §
255-155.B.
      (6)   Site lighting shall be designed so as to shield the source of
illumination and eliminate glare that will be seen by motorists passing by on
adjacent roadways and limited access highways.
      (7)   Off-street parking and loading areas.
         (a)   Parking shall be provided as required in this article in §
255-294, Parking, and in Article XIX, Off-Street Parking.
         (b)   Parking and loading areas shall be designed so as to ensure the
safe, orderly and efficient movement and use of the site by both motorists and
pedestrians.
         (c)   Conflicts between vehicular and pedestrian movements shall be
minimized to the greatest extent practical. Solutions such as changing the
materials, color and texture of parking areas, driving lanes and pedestrian
routes shall be utilized to clearly define and differentiate the vehicular and
pedestrian circulation patterns and pathways.
         (d)   Landscaping and pedestrian pathways shall be installed and
maintained in all parking areas.
      (8)   Architectural and design standards. In addition to the Design
Standards: Appendix A in Article IV, §
212-35.2 of the Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance, buildings shall be
designed as indicated below.
         (a)   Other than roofing material, no less than 80% of the primary
building's exterior facade, excluding window and door openings, shall be faced
with natural building materials, such as wood, stone and/or brick, or man-made
materials that are engineered and designed to replicate these natural
materials, provided that all proposed materials other than trim materials shall
be non-white in color to reduce the potential amount of light reflected glare.
         (b)   Steel or other metals shall not be used on building exteriors,
except as may be needed for roofing, window trim, gutters and downspouts.
         (c)   Unpainted concrete block, except when textured or tinted is
prohibited on building exteriors.
         (d)   Waste receptacles and other outdoor furniture shall be designed
as an integral part of the site’s design and shall be consistent with and
incorporated into the site’s overall architectural character.
         (e)   All mechanical equipment shall be visually screened from all
public rights-of-way. The screening shall be architecturally appropriate and
designed as an integral part of the site’s design.
         (f)   All applications shall include building elevations depicting the
proposed materials and colors of the buildings , as well as a materials and
colors legend.
§ 255-296.   Submittal of plans; review; approval.
   A.   Plans for any subdivision or land development in the GFW Greater Fort
Washington District shall be submitted to the Township prior to the issuance of
any zoning permit or certificate of occupancy as provided in Article XXIV, and
such plans shall include, but not be limited to the following:
      (1)   A plot plan of the lot showing the location of all present and
proposed buildings , drives, parking lots , waste disposal fields and other
constructional features on the lot ; and all buildings , streets , alleys ,
highways, waters of the Commonwealth and other topographical features of the
lot and within 200 feet of any lot line; easements affecting the property.
      (2)   Conceptual architectural plans and building elevations for any
proposed buildings .
      (3)   A description of any light industrial operations proposed in
sufficient detail to indicate the effects of those operations in producing
traffic congestion, noise, glare, air pollution, water pollution, fire hazard
or safety hazard.
      (4)   Engineering and architectural plans for the handling and disposal
of sewage and industrial waste.
      (5)   Engineering and architectural plans for the handling of any excess
traffic congestion, noise, glare, air pollution, water pollution, fire hazard
or safety hazard.
      (6)   Engineering and architectural plans for the screening of rooftop
HVAC equipment.
      (7)   The proposed number of shifts to be worked and the maximum number
of employees on each shift.
      (8)   A specific manual of written and graphic design standards,
demonstrating compliance with the General Manual of Written and Graphic Design
Standards in Article IV, §
212-35.2. of the Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance.
      (9)   Any other data or evidence that the Board of Commissioners may
require.
   B.   Conceptual development strategy plan (Reserved).
   C.   As a guide for recommendations by the Planning Commission and for final
approval or disapproval by the Township Commissioners on any GFW District plan,
the following provisions shall be considered:
      (1)   The plan is consistent with the purpose of this chapter to promote
the health, safety, and the general welfare of the Township.
      (2)   The appropriate use of the property so that the property adjacent
to the area included in the plan will be safeguarded.
      (3)   The development will consist of a harmonious grouping of buildings
, service and parking areas, sidewalks, circulation and open spaces, planned as
a single unit, in such manner as to constitute a safe, efficient and convenient
site.
      (4)   The uses to be included shall be limited to those permitted by this
article.
      (5)   There is adequate provision made for safe and efficient pedestrian
and vehicular traffic circulation within the boundaries of the site.
      (6)   Provision is made for safe and efficient ingress and egress to and
from public streets and highways serving the site without undue congestion to
or interference with normal traffic flow within the Township.
      (7)   Adequate off-street  parking and loading space is provided in
accordance with §
255-116 and Article XIX of this chapter.
      (8)   All buildings within the development shall be served by public
sewers and public water.
      (9)   If the development is to be carried out in progressive stages, each
stage shall be so planned that the foregoing requirements and intent of this
chapter shall be fully complied with by the development at the completion of
any stage.
      (10)   Provision is made to mitigate any potential adverse impacts on
flooding, and shall comply with all flood control regulations.
      (11)   The development is found to be consistent with the General Manual
of Written and Graphic Design Standards in Appendix A of Article IV, §
212-35.2, Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance.
APPENDIX A
[Added 5-14-2019 by Ord. No. 19-1351; Amended 8-13-2019 by Ord. 19-1354]
Map 1
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5df02b024b4c8f2f8cc81a782b45029f5e431e28/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4839.png]
 
Zoning Map Amendments
Ord. No. Date Subject
Ord. No. Date       Subject
                    Rezoning three parcels commonly known as 385, 425 and 445
22-1376  10-11-2022 Ambler Road from A Residential District and EC Employment
                    Center District to A Residential District.
                   
                   
                   
                   
                   
                   
 
Zoning Map
Note: To view the Zoning Map in PDF, click HERE
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5df02b024b4c8f2f8cc81a782b45029f5e431e28/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4845.png]
APPENDIX
Chapter A261
POLICE PENSION PLAN
ARTICLE I
Pension Plan and Pension Fund
§
A261-1.   Establishment of pension plan and pension fund.
§
A261-2.   Assets and liabilities.
ARTICLE II
Membership
§
A261-3.   Definitions.
§
A261-4.   Rights affected.
ARTICLE III
Maintenance of Pension Fund
§
A261-5.   Source of funding.
§
A261-6.   Payments exclusive to fund.
§
A261-7.   Payments to be a charge on fund only.
§
A261-8.   Payments from Commonwealth Treasurer.
§
A261-9.   Normal cost.
§
A261-10.   Allowable administrative costs.
§
A261-11.   Other administrative costs.
§
A261-12.   Payments from any other source.
ARTICLE IV
Pension Committee of Trustees
§
A261-13.   Establishment of Pension Committee of Trustees.
§
A261-14.   Membership of the Pension Committee.
§
A261-15.   Chairman.
§
A261-16.   Compensation.
§
A261-17.   Term.
§
A261-18.   Plan Administrator.
§
A261-19.   Minutes and records.
§
A261-20.   Indemnification.
§
A261-21.   Limitations on voting.
§
A261-22.   Voting and voting results.
§
A261-23.   Meetings.
§
A261-24.   Powers and duties.
§
A261-25.   Use of evidence.
§
A261-26.   Determinations to be final.
§
A261-27.   Limitations on powers.
ARTICLE V
Role of Actuary
§
A261-28.   Approved actuary.
§
A261-29.   Employment of approved actuary.
§
A261-30.   Duties of actuary.
ARTICLE VI
Retirement Benefits
§
A261-31.   Eligibility for normal retirement benefit.
§
A261-32.   Year of service.
§
A261-33.   Normal retirement age.
§
A261-34.   Final average salary.
§
A261-35.   Salary.
§
A261-36.   Actuarial equivalent.
§
A261-37.   Normal retirement benefit.
§
A261-38.   Length of service increment.
§
A261-38.1.   Early retirement benefit.
§
A261-39.   Preretirement survivor's benefit.
§
A261-40.   Disability retirement benefit.
§
A261-41.   Cost-of-living allowance.
§
A261-42.   Temporary service.
§
A261-42.1.   Killed in service benefit.
ARTICLE VII
Vesting
§
A261-43.   Treatment of terminated vested member.
§
A261-44.   Vesting requirements.
§
A261-45.   Superannuation retirement date.
§
A261-46.   Accrued normal retirement benefit.
§
A261-47.   Conunencement of accrued normal retirement benefit.
§
A261-48.   Refund.
§
A261-49.   Military service.
ARTICLE VIII
Members' Required Contributions
§
A261-50.   Required contributions.
§
A261-51.   Amount.
§
A261-52.   Payroll deductions.
§
A261-53.   Reduction or elimination of required contributions.
§
A261-54.   Pick up contributions.
§
A261-55.   Refund of required contributions.
ARTICLE IX
Rollovers
§
A261-56.   Transfer of distribution.
§
A261-57.   Definitions.
§
A261-58.   Explanation to be provided.
§
A261-59.   Member or surviving spouse to provide information.
§
A261-60.   Failure to elect direct rollover option.
ARTICLE X
Maximum Benefit
§
A261-61.   Applicability.
§
A261-62.   Limitation on combined annual benefit.
§
A261-63.   Limitation on retirement benefit.
§
A261-64.   Limitation on benefits for members under 62 years of age.
§
A261-65.   Determination of social security retirement age.
§
A261-66.   Minimum.
§
A261-67.   Adjustment for members whose benefits begin after age 65.
§
A261-68.   Members with 15 years of service.
§
A261-69.   Other plans.
§
A261-70.   Members with fewer than 10 years of service.
§
A261-71.   Determination of years of service.
§
A261-72.   Years of service for disabled members.
§
A261-73.   Fractional years.
§
A261-74.   Reduction of limitations.
§
A261-75.   Change in benefit structure; effect on members with fewer than 10
years of service.
§
A261-76.   Other employee contributions.
§
A261-77.   Annual additions.
§
A261-78.   Participation in other contribution plans during limitation years.
§
A261-79.   Defined benefit fraction.
§
A261-80.   Defined contribution fraction.
§
A261-81.   Definitions.
§
A261-82.   Adjustments for governmental pronouncements.
§
A261-83.   Reduction of benefits accrued prior to limitation year.
§
A261-84.   Plan years ending after December 31, 1982.
§
A261-85.   Limitation years ending after December 31, 1986.
ARTICLE XI
Required Distributions
§
A261-86.   Latest commencement of benefits.
§
A261-87.   Mandatory benefit commencement date.
ARTICLE XII
Miscellaneous
§
A261-88.   Payments to be free from all claims.
§
A261-89.   Modification.
§
A261-90.   Gender.
§
A261-91.   Revocation of prior enactments.
§
A261-92.   Severability.
ARTICLE XIII
Deferred Retirement Option Program
§
A261-93.   Definitions.
§
A261-94.   Eligibility.
§
A261-95.   Written DROP election and letter of resignation.
§
A261-96.   Limitations during DROP period.
§
A261-97.   Benefit calculation.
§
A261-98.   Payments to the DROP account.
§
A261-99.   DROP account.
§
A261-100.   Accrual of non-pension benefits.
§
A261-101.   Payout.
§
A261-102.   Disability during DROP.
§
A261-103.   Death during DROP.
§
A261-104.   Forfeiture of benefits.
§
A261-105.   Effect of qualified domestic relations order.
§
A261-106.   Construal of provisions.
ARTICLE XI
Non-Intervening Military Buy Back
§
A261-107.   Non-intervening military service time buy back.
 
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Board of Commissioners of the Township of Upper Dublin
7-14-1998 by Res. No. 1666. Amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
 
Pensions—See  Nonuniformed employers pension plan—See Ch. A262.
Ch. 35.
 
ARTICLE I
Pension Plan and Pension Fund
§ A261-1.   Establishment of pension plan and pension fund.
The township hereby continues its municipal pension plan and municipal pension
fund for the benefit of police officers employed by the township who shall
receive honorable discharge by reason of age and service, or disability. The
pension plan shall be known as the “Upper Dublin Township Police Pension Plan.”
The pension fund shall be known as the “Upper Dublin Township Police Pension
Fund” (“pension fund”). The pension plan and pension fund are established
pursuant to Act 600. 1 1
1. Editor’s Note: See 53 P.S. § 767.
 
Notes
1    Editor’s Note: See 53 P.S. § 767.
§ A261-2.   Assets and liabilities.
All township or other assets set aside to provide for pension benefits under
this pension plan or any prior plan of benefits for police officers shall be
held in the pension fund. All pension benefits paid to members and terminated
members shall be paid from the pension fund. Required contributions as
described in §
A261-51, annual appropriations of the township, payments from the Commonwealth
Treasurer and all other funding sources shall be paid into the pension fund.
ARTICLE II
Membership
§ A261-3.   Definitions.
As used in this resolution, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
   MEMBER—Each police officer who is employed by the township and subject to
the provisions of civil service, on the effective date of this pension plan.
“Member” also means each police officer who is hired by the township after the
effective date of this pension plan.
   TERMINATED MEMBERS—Any former police officer who has retired or terminated
his employment with the township before the effective date of this pension
plan.
§ A261-4.   Rights affected.
Terminated members shall not be entitled to any rights and benefits under this
pension plan. Rather, terminated members shall receive the benefits described
in the pension plan document in effect on the date of their termination of
employment or retirement, whichever was earlier.
ARTICLE III
Maintenance of Pension Fund
§ A261-5.   Source of funding.
The pension fund shall be maintained by:
   A.   Payments made by the Commonwealth Treasurer to the Township Treasurer
from moneys received pursuant to the Municipal Pension Plan Funding Standard
and Recovery Act, Act of December 18, 1984, P.L. 1005, No. 205, as amended, 53
P.S. § 895.101 et seq. (“Act 205”), and allocated for retirement or disability
benefits for members and terminated members. Payments from the Commonwealth
Treasurer shall be delivered by the Township Treasurer to the pension fund
within the statutory time period following receipt by the Township Treasurer.
   B.   Required contributions by each member as set forth in § A261-51 herein
and in the current collective bargaining agreement. Required contributions
shall be made through payroll deductions on salary, excluding overtime pay as
described in §
A261-36, received by members in the same frequency that members receive their
salary. Required contributions shall be paid into the pension fund at the end
of the month of their deduction.
   C.   Annual appropriations to the pension fund made by the township.
   D.   Gifts, grants, devises or bequests made to the pension fund.
§ A261-6. Payments exclusive to fund.
All payments described in §
A261-5 shall be deemed to be a part of the pension fund and shall not be
applied to any other pension fund or account or disbursed in any manner, except
as provided herein.
§ A261-7. Payments to be a charge on fund only.
Payments for pension benefits under the pension plan shall be a charge only
upon the pension fund and not upon other moneys or funds of the township.
§ A261-8. Payments from Commonwealth Treasurer.
The annual payment made by the Commonwealth Treasurer to the Township Treasurer
pursuant to Act 205 for retirement or disability benefits under the pension
plan shall be used to reduce the pension plan's annual "normal cost" defined in
Section 102 of Act 205 2 as that portion of the actuarial present value of the
pension plan benefits and expenses which is allocated to the plan year by the
actuarial cost method.
2. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 895.102.
§ A261-9. Normal cost.
The pension plan's normal cost shall be comprised of the following:
   A.   The unfunded liability of the pension plan. "Unfunded liability" means
the present value of the unfunded pension benefits accrued under the pension
plan during all years prior to the current year. The unfunded liability of the
pension plan shall be amortized over 25 years.
   B.   The future service liability of the pension plan. "Future service
liability" means the present value of pension benefits accrued during the
current year.
   C.   Allowable administrative costs for the management and administration of
the pension plan and the pension fund.
§ A261-10. Allowable administrative costs.
"Administrative costs" means those costs described in Section 402(9) of Act 205
3 and Auditor General Municipal Pension Bulletin No. 1-88. Allowable
administrative costs shall satisfy the following criteria:
   A.   The cost shall be directly associated with the pension plan.
   B.   The Pension Committee shall monitor any services provided to ensure
that the cost is necessary, reasonable and beneficial the pension plan and
pension fund.
   C.   Appropriate records of costs are kept as necessary for the Auditor
General audit.
3. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 895.402.
§ A261-11. Other administrative costs.
Any administrative costs that do not satisfy the criteria described in §
A261-10 shall be provided for by appropriation made by the Board of
Commissioners of the township.
§ A261-12. Payments from any other source.
Any other moneys paid into the pension fund shall be applied equally against
the member and township portions of the normal cost, unless otherwise
specified.
ARTICLE IV
Pension Committee of Trustees
§ A261-13. Establishment of Pension Committee of Trustees.
The township hereby establishes the Township of Upper Dublin Police Pension
Fund Committee of Trustees ("Pension Committee") to whom the township delegates
authority to administer the pension plan and pension fund.
§ A261-14. Membership of the Pension Committee.
The Pension Committee shall consist of five Trustees as follows:
   A.   The President of the Board of Commissioners or an individual appointed
by the Board of Commissioners.
   B.   The Township Manager.
   C.   The Township Finance Director.
   D.   Two police officers elected by a majority vote of the members of the
pension plan.
§ A261-15. Chairman.
The Chairman of the Pension Committee shall be the President of the Board of
Commissioners or the Commissioners' representative.
§ A261-16. Compensation.
Pension Committee Trustees shall serve without compensation.
§ A261-17. Term.
Each Trustee shall be appointed for a two-year term. Trustees may be
reappointed or reelected.
§ A261-18. Plan Administrator.
The Pension Committee shall appoint a Plan Administrator to handle the day-to-
day operation of the pension plan and pension fund.
§ A261-19. Minutes and records.
The Plan Administrator shall keep minutes of the Pension Committee's
proceedings and all dates, records and documents pertaining to the Pension
Committee's administration of the pension plan.
§ A261-20. Indemnification.
No Trustee shall be liable for any act or omission of any other Trustee, nor
for any act or omission on his own part excepting only his own willful
misconduct. The township shall indemnify and save harmless claims or
liabilities arising from acting as a Pension Committee Trustee, excepting only
expenses and liabilities arising out of the Trustee's own willful misconduct.
Trustees shall serve without bond.
§ A261-21. Limitations on voting.
No Trustee shall vote on any matter directly related to the payment of benefits
to the Trustee.
§ A261-22. Voting and voting results.
The action of the Pension Committee shall be determined by the vote or other
affirmative expression of a majority of its Trustees. All actions of the
Pension Committee shall be certified by its Chairman and attested to by the
Plan Administrator.
§ A261-23. Meetings.
The Pension Committee shall meet at least semiannually and at other times at
the call of the Chairman or the request of the majority of the Pension
Committee.
§ A261-24. Powers and duties.
The Pension Committee shall have the following powers and duties:
   A.   To administer the pension plan and pension fund in accordance with the
Custodial Trust Agreement between the township and First Union National Bank,
N.A or such other appropriate agreement of trust approved by the Board of
Commissioners. The Custodial Trust Agreement permits money manager(s) approved
by the Board of Commissioners to manage and operate the pension fund and to
receive, hold, invest and disperse any sum or sums as may be necessary to cany
out the pension plan and all other applicable statutes, ordinances and
regulations.
   B.   To provide guidance to any money manager(s) of the pension fund for the
investment of all moneys deposited in such pension fund and the reinvestment of
all earnings of the pension fund.
   C.   To adopt rules and regulations for the governance of the affairs of the
Pension Committee to better enable it to carry out its powers and duties
imposed hereunder.
   D.   To employ, retain and compensate, upon approval of the Board of
Commissioners, actuaries, accountants, auditors, attorneys, money managers and
investment consultants as it may deem necessary to carry out its duties
hereunder.
   E.   To make all decisions pertinent to the pension plan regarding pension
payments to any applicant or participant, or for the return of any required
contributions to any person who may be entitled to the same under the pension
plan.
   F.   To designate a pension fund custodian for the depository of all pension
fund assets.
   G.   To deposit into the pension fund all contributions required under
applicable law and in accordance with the advice, counsel and direction of the
pension plan's actuary.
   H.   To make all decisions in accordance with the terms of the pension plan,
including but not limited to the following:
      (1)   To determine all questions relating to the eligibility of police
officers to become members in the pension plan.
      (2)   To compute and certify to the pension plan custodian the amount and
kind of benefits payable to members.
      (3)   To make and publish such rules and regulations for the
administration of the pension plan as are not inconsistent with the terms of
the Agreement of Trust or applicable law.
§ A261-25. Use of evidence.
The determinations by the Pension Committee shall be made based upon the
submission of such evidence as the Pension Committee shall require.
§ A261-26. Determinations to be final.
The determination of the Pension Committee in each case shall be final and
conclusive and entitled to deference by any third party unless such
determination is arbitrary and capricious.
§ A261-27. Limitations on powers.
Notwithstanding anything herein, the Pension Committee shall not have the power
to amend the terms of the pension plan or take any action that would directly
or indirectly increase the township's funding obligation under the pension plan
other than in the normal course of determining benefits under the pension plan.
ARTICLE V
Role of Actuary
§ A261-28. Approved actuary.
An approved actuary is a person who has at least five years of actuarial
experience with public pension plans and who is either enrolled as a member of
the American Academy of Actuaries or enrolled as an actuary pursuant to the
Employee Retirement Income Security Act of 1974.
§ A261-29. Employment of approved actuary.
The Board of Commissioners shall, from time to time, employ an approved actuary
at a compensation to be determined by the Board of Commissioners. In selecting
an approved actuary, the Board of Commissioners shall consult with the Pension
Committee.
§ A261-30. Duties of actuary.
The actuary employed by the Board of Commissioners shall provide the following
services on behalf of the pension plan:
   A.   Prepare all required actuarial studies, in accordance with all
applicable laws, including but not limited to Act 205 and Act 600.
   B.   Determine the pension plan's annual normal cost as described in §
A261-9 and the amount which the township shall contribute to the pension fund
each year after taking into consideration the other sources of revenue for the
pension fund.
   C.   Such other reasonable and necessary actuarial services as the Board of
Commissioners or the Pension Committee shall direct.
ARTICLE VI
Retirement Benefits
§ A261-31. Eligibility for normal retirement benefit.
A member shall be eligible to receive a normal retirement benefit when he has
satisfied the following requirements:
   A.   The member has completed a minimum aggregate total of 25 years of
service; and
   B.   The member has attained age 50.
§ A261-32. Normal retirement age.
The first day of the month following satisfaction of the requirements described
in §
A261-31 shall be the member's normal retirement age.
§ A261-33. Year of service.
   A.   "One full year of service" means 365 completed days of employment. A
"partial year of service" means any portion of a year of employment that does
not constitute a full year based upon the ratio that the number of such days
bears to 365.
   B.   Subject to Subsection C below, a member's years of service shall be
calculated from his date of employment or reemployment with the township as a
police officer to his date of separation from employment or retirement from the
township, whichever is earlier.
   C.   The following periods of time shall not interrupt a member's employment
status for purposes of calculating the member's years of service, provided that
such periods are less than one year, though such periods need not be
continuous:
      (1)   Vacation days.
      (2)   Accrued time days.
      (3)   Leaves of absence.
      (4)   Periods of suspension from duty.
   D.   Family Medical Leave Act. Effective August 5, 1993, a member shall be
credited with completed days of employment for purposes of satisfying the years
of service vesting requirement described in §
A261-44 for any period during which he is absent from work on unpaid leave
under the Family and Medical Leave Act of 1993. However, no member shall be
credited any days of completed service for leave on account of the Family and
Medical Leave Act for purposes of satisfying the years of service eligibility
requirement described in §
A261-31.
§ A261-34.   Final average salary.
“Final Average Salary” means the average monthly salary of the member during
the last 36 months of employment.
§ A261-35.   Salary.
   A.   “Salary” means the sum of the following calculated on an annual
calendar-year basis:
      (1)   All taxable payments from the township, excluding overtime.
      (2)   Any pre-tax contributions to a deferred compensation plan under
Section 457 or 414(h) of the Internal Revenue Code.
      (3)   Any payments made pursuant to the Act of June 28, 1935, P.L. 477,
as amended, 53 P.S. § 637 and 638, commonly known as the “Heart and Lung Act.”
   B.   In no event shall a member’s salary used to compute his final average
salary exceed the following annual compensation limits:
      (1)   Two hundred thousand dollars for 1989.
      (2)   For 1990, 1991, 1992 and 1993, the limit set by the Internal
Revenue Service in accordance with Section 401(a)(17) of the Internal Revenue
Code.
      (3)   One hundred fifty thousand dollars for 1994 and 1995.
      (4)   One hundred sixty thousand dollars for the 1997 Plan Year.
      (5)   For all plan years after 1997, the limit set by Section 401(a)(17)
of the Internal Revenue Code, as adjusted for cost-of-living increases.
§ A261-36.   Actuarial equivalent.
“Actuarial equivalent” means a form of payment of the normal retirement benefit
that is of comparable value to any other form of payment.
§ A261-37.   Normal retirement benefit.
[Amended 1-9-2001 by Ord. No. 1054; 5-8-2001 by Ord. No. 1063; 7-10-2007 by
Ord. No. 1184; 12-11-2012 by Ord. No. 12-1263, § 1]
“Normal retirement benefit” means an amount that is equal to 50% of the
member’s final average salary.
   A.   Members. The normal retirement benefit for all members shall be a
monthly pension payable for the life of the member. Such monthly pension shall
be in an amount equal to 50% of the member’s final average salary commencing at
the member’s normal retirement age.
   B.   Survivor benefit. In addition, the surviving spouse of a retired member
shall be entitled to monthly payments equal to 60% of the member’s normal
retirement benefit. If there is no surviving spouse or if the surviving spouse
subsequently dies, then the child or children of the member shall be entitled
to receive a survivor’s benefit equal to 60% of the pension which the member
was receiving or would have been receiving had the member retired at the time
of death. Such survivor’s benefit to the child or children shall continue until
the child or children reach the age of 18, or until age 23, if the child is
“attending college.” For purposes of this section, the phrase “attending
college” shall mean being enrolled in an institution of higher learning and
carrying a minimum course load of seven credits per semester. [Amended 7-10-
2007 by Ord. No. 1184; 12-11-2012 by Ord. No. 12-1263]
§ A261-38.   Length of service increment.
[Amended 7-10-2007 by Ord. No. 1184]
A member who completes 25 years of service shall receive an additional length
of service increment benefit which shall be added to the member’s normal
retirement benefit.
   A.   For officers retiring prior to July 1, 2007, the length of service
increment shall be $100 per month.
   B.   An officer retiring on or after July 1, 2007, who completes 26 years of
service, shall receive a $100 service increment. An officer retiring on or
after July 1, 2007, who completes years of service over 26 years shall receive
an additional $100/full year of completed service up to a maximum monthly
service increment of $500 for 30 or more years of completed service.
§ A261-38.1.   Early retirement benefit.
[Added 1-9-2001 by Ord. No. 1054]
   A.   There is hereby established an early retirement benefit which shall be
available to a member of the police force with 20 or more years of continuous
service who terminates employment prior to the completion of superannuation
retirement age and service requirements and who files a written application for
an early retirement benefit with the Upper Dublin Township Board of
Commissioners (“Board”).
   B.   The early retirement benefit shall become effective as of the date the
application is filed with the Board or the date designated on the application,
whichever is later, and shall be the actuarial equivalent of a partial
superannuation retirement benefit calculated as follows:
      (1)   A partial superannuation retirement benefit shall be determined by
applying the percentage that the member’s years of service bear to the years of
service that the member would have rendered had the member continued to be
employed until his superannuation retirement date to the gross pension amount
calculated using the monthly average salary during the appropriate period prior
to his termination of employment.
      (2)   The actuarial equivalent of the partial superannuation retirement
benefit shall be determined by actuarially reducing the partial superannuation
retirement benefit to reflect that it will commence on the effective date of
the early retirement rather than on the date on which the member would have
completed superannuation age and service requirements. The actuarial reduction
shall be calculated using the actuarial assumptions reported in the last
actuarial valuation report filed with the Public Employee Retirement Commission
under the act of December 18, 1984 (P.L. 1005, No. 205), known as the
“Municipal Pension Plan Funding Standard and Recovery Act” or “Act 205,” 53
P.S. § 895.101 et seq.
§ A261-39.   Preretirement survivor’s benefit.
The survivor of a member who, on the day of his death, was employed by the
township as a police officer and satisfied the eligibility requirements for a
normal retirement benefit as described in §
A261-31 shall be eligible for a preretirement survivor’s benefit.
   A.   Survivor. “Survivor” means:
      (1)   The surviving spouse of a member; or
      (2)   If no surviving spouse, the surviving minor children of a member.
   B.   Amount. The preretirement survivor’s benefit shall be equal to the
benefit such survivor would have received if the member:
      (1)   Had terminated his employment prior to his death;
      (2)   Had elected to receive a fifty-percent joint and survivor benefit
as described in §
A261-37B(2); and
      (3)   Had died the following day.
   C.   Duration. The preretirement survivor’s benefit shall be a monthly
benefit commencing on the first day of the month following the month in which
the member died, and terminating as follows:
      (1)   As of the date the surviving spouse remarries or dies; or
      (2)   If applicable, when the last of the surviving minor children
obtains age 18 or dies, whichever event shall occur first.
§ A261-40.   Disability retirement benefit.
A member shall be eligible for a disability retirement benefit on his
disability retirement date. No minimum years of service are required for
eligibility.
   A.   Disability retirement date. A member’s disability retirement date shall
be the day that the member is totally disabled as a result of a service-
connected disability. No disability retirement benefits shall be payable to a
member who has suffered a non-service-connected disability.
   B.   Amount. A member’s disability retirement benefit shall be equal to 50%
of the member’s final average salary. However, the disability retirement
benefit shall not be reduced by the amount of any payments for which the member
shall be eligible under the Act of June 2, 1915 (P.L. 736, No. 338), known as
the “Pennsylvania Workers’ Compensation Act,” 4  or the Act of June 21, 1939
(P.L. 566, No. 284) known as the “Pennsylvania Occupational Disease Act.” 5
   C.   Form of benefit. The disability retirement benefit shall be a monthly
pension for life commencing on the first day of the month following the month
in which the member became totally disabled.
   D.   Pension Committee. The Pension Committee shall have discretion to
determine.
      (1)   Whether a member has a total disability, based on consultations
with a medical examiner, who shall have the right to make such physical
examinations and other investigations as may be reasonably required to
determine total disability; and
      (2)   Whether a member’s total disability is a service-connected
disability or a non-service- connected disability.
   E.   Total disability. A member has a total disability if he is permanently
unable to perform the normal duties of a police officer by reason of physical
or mental impairment.
   F.   Service-connected disability. A service-connected disability is a
permanent injury that occurs in the course of, or results from, a member’s
performance of his duties as a police officer.
   G.   Non-service-connected disability. A non-service-connected disability is
a disability that does not occur in the course of, or result from, a member’s
performance of his duties as a police officer. A member with a non-service-
connected total disability shall be entitled to the following, at his option:
      (1)   A single lump sum payment of the amount in his total required
contributions as defined in §
A261-50 on the date he terminates employment with the township; or
      (2)   Vesting of his normal retirement benefit in accordance with §
A261-44, provided that the member satisfies the years of service requirement
for such vesting on the date of his termination of employment.
4. Editor’s Note: See 77 P.S. § 1 et seq.
5. Editor’s Note; See 77 P.S. § 1201 et seq.
§ A261-41.   Cost-of-living allowance.
   A.   Subject to the limitations described in Subsection B, a member
currently receiving a normal retirement benefit or an accrued normal retirement
benefit shall receive an annual cost-of- living allowance. The Pension
Committee shall determine the amount of the cost-of-living adjustment based on
the percentage increase or decrease in the consumer price index for the
immediately preceding calendar year and applied as the Acts of the Commonwealth
proscribe.
   B.   Amount. A member’s disability retirement benefit shall be equal to 50%
of the member’s salary at the time the disability was incurred, reduced by the
amount of Social Security disability benefits received for the same injury.
      (1)   No cost-of-living allowance shall exceed the percentage increase in
the consumer price index from the year in which the member terminated his
employment with the township as a police officer.
      (2)   The maximum annual cost-of-living adjustment for any year shall be
3%.
      (3)   No cost-of-living allowance may increase a member’s normal
retirement benefit or accrued normal retirement benefit to an amount that would
exceed 30% of the final average salary used to compute the member’s benefit.
[Amended 1-9-2001 by Ord. No. 1054]
      (4)   No cost-of-living allowance shall be granted if such cost-of-living
allowance would impair the actuarial soundness of the pension fund.
§ A261-42.   Temporary service.
Retired police officers shall be subject to temporary service from time to
time, as a police reserve in cases of riot, tumult or preservation of the
public peace, until unfitted for such service, when they may be finally
discharged by reason of age or disability.
§ A261-42.1.   Killed in service benefit.
[Added 7-13-2004 by Ord. No. 1133; Amended 5-11-2010 by Ord. No. 10-1231]
   A.   Effective April 17, 2002, if a member is killed in the line of duty for
the Township, and he or she dies survived by a spouse or dependent child or
children, then a monthly pension benefit of 100% of the member’s monthly salary
at the time of his or her death shall be paid to the surviving spouse until the
surviving spouse dies. If there is no surviving spouse or if the surviving
spouse subsequently dies, then the child or children of the Member shall be
entitled to receive a monthly survivor’s benefit equal to 100% of the member’s
monthly salary at the time of his or her death. Such survivor’s benefit to the
child or children shall continue until the child or children reach the age of
18, or until age 23, if the child is “attending college.” At the time at which
any surviving spouse has died and any dependent children have reached age 18,
or age 23, if the child is attending college, the benefit created under this
section shall terminate. No other pension benefit shall be paid by the Township
to the surviving spouse or dependent child(ren) of an officer who is killed in
the line of duty.
   B.   For purposes of this section, the phrase “attending college” shall mean
being enrolled in an institution of higher learning and carrying a minimum
course load of seven credits per semester.
   C.   Effective January 1, 2010, the surviving family of an officer who is
killed in the line of duty shall receive the benefits provided for and subject
to the terms of Act 51 of 2009, which benefits are paid exclusively by the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania. With the exception of any pension benefit to
which the officer was entitled prior to the officer’s death, solely by virtue
of the officer’s age and service as a Township police officer, and any other
non- pension, contractual benefits to which the officer and/or the officer’s
family may have been entitled prior to the officer’s death, the Township shall
not be obligated to pay any benefit to the family of an officer as the result
of the officer’s death, including, but not limited to, the killed in service
pension benefit which previously existed under Act 600 prior to the passage of
Act 51 of 2009.
ARTICLE VII
Vesting
§ A261-43.   Treatment of terminated vested member.
A member who terminates his employment with the township as a full-time police
officer for any reason other than for a service-connected total disability
before reaching his normal retirement age shall be entitled to his accrued
normal retirement benefit payable beginning on his superannuation retirement
date, provided that the member satisfies the requirements described in §
A261-44.
§ A261-44.   Vesting requirements.
A terminated member may vest his accrued normal retirement benefit if he
satisfies the following requirements:
   A.   The member has completed 12 years of service prior to his termination
of employment.
   B.   The member files a written notice with the Pension Committee within 90
days of the date the member terminates his employment with the township
expressing his intention to vest.
§ A261-45.   Superannuation retirement date.
The “superannulation retirement date” is the date a member would have satisfied
the age and service requirements described in §
A261-31 for a normal retirement benefit had the member not terminated his
employment with the township as a police officer.
§ A261-46.   Accrued normal retirement benefit.
A member’s accrued normal retirement benefit shall be determined by multiplying
50% of the member’s final average salary by a fraction whose numerator is the
years of service actually earned by the member and whose denominator is the
years of service required for the member to reach his superannuation date.
   SAMPLE CALCULATION
 
Actual years of service earned:                        14
Years of service required to meet superannuation date: 30
Final average salary:                                  $1,500
Fifty percent of final average salary:                 $750
14      X      $750                        $350
30                                                      
Accrued normal retirement benefit      =         $350
 
§ A261-47.   Commencement of accrued normal retirement benefit.
A member’s accrued normal retirement benefit shall be payable as a monthly
pension for the life of the member beginning on the member’s superannuation
date.
§ A261-48.   Refund.
If a member fails to satisfy the requirements for an accrued normal retirement
benefit described in §
A261-44, such member shall receive a single lump sum refund of his required
contributions in accordance with §
A261-55.
§ A261-49.   Military service.
   A.   Subject to Subsection B, a member who has been employed by the township
as a police officer for at least six months, and who thereafter enters into the
military service of the United States, shall be credited with years of service
equal to the period of time that the member spent in such military service,
provided the member returns to his or her employment with the township as a
police officer within six months after his separation from military service.
   B.   A member shall only be credited with years of service for intervening
military service if he is not entitled to receive retirement benefits for such
military service under a retirement system administered and wholly or partially
paid for by any other governmental agency.
   C.   Subsection B shall not apply where a member is eligible to receive or
is receiving military retirement benefits earned by a combination of active
duty and nonactive duty with a reserve or national guard component of the armed
forces.
ARTICLE VIII
Members' Required Contributions
§ A261-50. Required contributions.
" Required contributions" means the total amount of contributions each member
is required to contribute to the pension fund under this pension plan.
§ A261-51. Amount.
The amount of required contributions that each member shall pay, monthly, into
the pension fund shall not exceed the maximum annual amount set by Act 600 or
the member's salary, or the annual compensation limit under Internal Revenue
Code Section 401(a)(17) as further described in §
A261-35 herein. The amount of required contributions shall be set by resolution
by the Board of Commissioners in accordance with an existing collective
bargaining agreement which shall have been initially established based upon
actuarial recommendations. The amount of required contributions is set forth in
Schedule A attached hereto which may be amended from time to time as a result
of collective bargaining negotiations. 6
6. Editor's Note: Contact township offices for said Schedule A.
§ A261-52. Payroll deductions.
The Township Secretary is hereby authorized to establish a system of payroll
deductions necessary for the administration of the pension fund.
§ A261-53. Reduction or elimination of required contributions.
Required contributions may be reduced or eliminated provided that all four of
the following conditions are met:
   A.   A current actuarial study indicates that the condition of the pension
plan is such that the pension fund remains actuarially sound without the
reduced or eliminated required contributions.
   B.   An appropriation by the township will not be required to keep the
pension fund actuarially sound.
   C.   The Board of Commissioners authorizes by ordinance or resolution, on an
annual basis, any reduction or elimination of required contribution.
   D.   The reduction or elimination of required contributions will not cause
an actuarial reduction in normal retirement benefits.
§ A261-54. Pick up contributions.
Effective January 1, 1997, the township shall pick up each member's required
contributions. No member shall have the option to forego his required
contributions and receive an equal amount as compensation. A corresponding
reduction in the member's salary shall be made in the amount of the picked-up
required contributions. For purposes of the Internal Revenue Code, such picked-
up required contributions shall be treated as employer contributions pursuant
to Section 414(h)(2) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986.
§ A261-55. Refund of required contributions.
   A.   Any member who, for any reason whatsoever, shall be ineligible to
receive pension benefits under this pension plan shall be entitled to a refund
of any required contributions he made to the pension fund when the member
discontinues his employment with the township as a police officer.
   B.   Amount of refund. All refunds pursuant to Subsection A shall be equal
to the total amount of a member's required contributions contributed pursuant
to §
A261-51, plus the prorated amount of the net interest earned by the member's
required contributions while in the pension fund.
   C.   Form of payment. All refunds of required contributions shall be in the
form of a single lump sum payment.
   D.   Death of member. If a member's discontinuance of employment with the
township is due to the member's death, any refund of required contributions
shall be paid to the deceased member's designated beneficiary or, in the
absence thereof, to his estate.
   E.   Termination of pension plan or complete discontinuance of required
contributing. In the event that the pension plan may be terminated under
applicable state law and is terminated, or in the event of a complete
discontinuance of all required members' contributions to the pension fund, the
right of each member to his required contributions shall be nonforfeitable. The
nonforfeitable amount of each member's required contributions shall be the
amount described in Subsection B. Members shall be entitled to receive their
nonforfeitable required contributions in accordance with the terms of the
pension plan.
ARTICLE IX
Rollovers
§ A261-56. Transfer of distribution.
   A.   Effective January 1, 1994, a member or a member's surviving spouse who
is to receive an eligible rollover distribution, as defined in §
A261-57, may elect to have the amount of such distribution transferred directly
in a direct rollover to an eligible retirement plan, as defined in §
A261-57.
   B.   If a member or surviving spouse is to receive an eligible rollover
distribution of more than $500, he may choose to have part of the distribution
transferred directly in a direct rollover to an eligible retirement plan and to
have the remainder paid to him. The amount which is to be transferred must be
at least $500.
§ A261-57. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
   ELIGIBLE RETIREMENT PLAN —
   A.   In the case of a member, one of the following:
   B.   An individual retirement account or an individual retirement annuity.
   C.   A qualified trust if it is part of a defined contribution plan.
   D.   An annuity plan described in Section 403(a) of the Internal Revenue
Code.
   E.   In the case of a member's surviving spouse, an individual retirement
account or an individual retirement annuity.
   ELIGIBLE ROLLOVER DISTRIBUTION — A distribution from the pension plan that
is a single-sum payment (i.e, refund of required contributions). The dollar
amount of an eligible rollover distribution shall not include the portion of
such distribution that is a required minimum distribution under Section 401(a)
(9) of the Internal Revenue Code.
§ A261-58. Explanation to be provided.
Within a reasonable period of time before an eligible rollover distribution is
to be made, the Pension Committee shall provide the member or surviving spouse
an explanation of his right to elect a direct rollover and the federal tax
withholding consequences to him if he does not elect a direct rollover.
§ A261-59. Member or surviving spouse to provide information.
A member or surviving spouse who elects a direct rollover must provide all
information that the Pension Committee may require to complete the direct
rollover.
§ A261-60. Failure to elect direct rollover option.
A member or surviving spouse who is entitled to elect a direct rollover with
respect to all or any portion of a refund of required contributions from the
pension plan but who does not make any election shall be deemed to have
rejected the direct rollover option.
ARTICLE X
Maximum Benefit
§ A261-61. Applicability.
The provisions of this article shall be effective January 1, 1987, and shall be
construed to comply with Section 415 of the Internal Revenue Code. The limits
on benefits described herein shall not apply to any benefit received on account
of disability.
§ A261-62. Limitation on combined annual benefit.
Notwithstanding anything in this article to the contrary, in no event shall the
combined annual benefit attributable to the township's contributions payable on
a single life basis (or, if applicable, as a qualified joint and survivor
annuity) under this and any other defined benefit plan to which the township
contributes exceed the lesser of:
   A.   Ninety thousand dollars (as adjusted by the Internal Revenue Service to
reflect cost-of-living increases); or
   B.   One hundred percent of the member's average limitation compensation
during the three consecutive calendar years of participation hereunder in which
his limitation compensation is the highest.
§ A261-63. Limitation on retirement benefit.
If the retirement income benefit under the pension plan begins at or after age
62 but prior to the member's social security retirement age (SSRA), the
retirement benefit may not exceed an annual benefit of $90,000 reduced by:
   A.   In the case of a member whose SSRA is 65, 5/9 of 1% for each month by
which benefits commence before the month in which the member attains age 65; or
   B.   In the case of a member whose SSRA is greater than 65, 5/9 of 1% for
each of the first 36 months and 5/12 of 1% for each of the additional months
(up to 24) by which benefits commence before the month in which the member
attains SSRA.
§ A261-64. Limitation on benefits for members under 62 years of age.
If the benefit begins before age 62, the benefit must be limited to the
actuarial equivalent of the member's limitation for benefits commencing at age
62, with the reduced dollar limitation for such benefits further reduced for
each month by which benefits commence before the month in which the member
attains age 62. In order to determine actuarial equivalence for this purpose,
the interest rate assumption used by the pension plan may not be less than 5%.
§ A261-65. Determination of social security retirement age.
   SSRA is age 65 if the member was born before January 1, 1938; age 66 if born
before January 1, 1955; and age 67 if born after December 31, 1954.
§ A261-66. Minimum.
The reduction under §§
A261-63 and
A261-64 shall not reduce the dollar limitation of §
A261-62 below:
   A.   Seventy-five thousand dollars if the benefits begin at or after age 55;
or
   B.   If the benefits begin before age 55, the equivalent of the $75,000
limitation for age 55.
§ A261-67. Adjustment for members whose benefits begin after age 65.
If a member's retirement benefits begin after the member has attained age 65,
the dollar limitation in §
A261-62A shall be increased to its actuarial equivalent at the date of
commencement, using an interest rate of 5%.
§ A261-68. Members with 15 years of service.
For a member with 15 years of service, §§
A261-63 through
A261-66 shall not reduce the dollar limitation of §
A261-62A to an amount less than $50,000.
§ A261-69. Other plans.
Notwithstanding the limitations set forth in the other provisions of §§
A261-62 through §
A261-75, the benefits payable under this pension plan with respect to a member
shall be deemed not to exceed the limitations of §§
A261-62 through
A261-75 if:
   A.   The benefits payable with respect to such member under this pension
plan and all other defined benefit plans maintained by the township do not
exceed $10,000 for the plan year or for any prior plan year; and
   B.   The township has not maintained a defined contribution plan in which
the member participated.
§ A261-70. Members with fewer than 10 years of service.
   A.   If the benefit is payable to a member who has fewer than 10 years of
service in the pension plan at the time that retirement benefits begin, the
dollar limitation described in §
A261-62A shall be multiplied by a fraction, the numerator of which is the
member's years of service in the pension plan (or part thereof) and the
denominator of which is 10.
   B.   If the benefit is payable to a member who has fewer than 10 years of
service at the time that retirement benefits begin, the percentage of earnings
limitation described in §§
A261-63 through
A261-66 and the special limits set forth in §§
A261-68 and
A261-69A shall be multiplied by a fraction, the numerator of which is the
member's years of service and the denominator of which is 10.
§ A261-71. Determination of years of service.
   A.   For purposes of determining a member's years of service for the
adjustment to the dollar limitation of §
A261-62A required by §
A261-69A, the member shall be credited with a year of service (computed to
fractional parts of a year) for each computation period for which the following
conditions are met:
      (1)   The member is credited with at least the number of hours of service
required under the terms of the pension plan in order to accrue a benefit for
the computation period; and
      (2)   The member is included as a member under the eligibility provisions
of the pension plan for at least one day of the computation period.
   B.   If these two conditions are met, the portion of a year of service
credited to the member shall equal the percentage of a full year of service
credited to the member for such computation period.
§ A261-72. Years of service for disabled members.
A member who is permanently and totally disabled within the meaning of Section
415(c)(3)(C)(i) of the Internal Revenue Code for a computation period shall
receive a year of service with respect to that period.
§ A261-73. Fractional years.
For a member to receive a year of service (or part thereof) for a computation
period, the pension plan must be established no later than the last day of such
period. In no event shall more than one year of service be credited for any
twelve-month period.
§ A261-74. Reduction of limitations.
In no event shall the provisions of §§
A261-70 through
A261-75 reduce any of the limitations described in §§
A261-62 and
A261-68 an amount less than 1/10 of such limitation.
§ A261-75. Change in benefit structure; effect on members with fewer than 10
years of service.
Section
A261-70A shall be applied separately with respect to each change in the benefit
structure of the pension plan
§ A261-76. Other employee contributions.
Any contributions made by a member other than those described in Article VIII
shall be deemed to constitute a separate defined contribution plan. The benefit
subject to the limit of §§
A261-62 through
A261-75 shall not include any benefit attributable to such employee
contributions. The portion of the benefit attributable to employer
contributions and subject to §§
A261-62 through
A261-75 shall be determined by converting the employee contributions to an
annual benefit amount pursuant to Section 411(c)(2)(B) of the Internal Revenue
Code and subtracting such amount from the total annual benefit.
§ A261-77. Annual additions.
   A.   The annual additions under any defined contribution plan shall not
exceed the lesser of:
      (1)   Thirty thousand dollars or, if greater, one-quarter of the dollar
limitation in effect under Section 415(b)(1)(A) of the Internal Revenue Code;
or
      (2)   Twenty-five percent of such member's limitation compensation for
the year.
   B.   "Annual additions" shall mean the sum of:
      (1)   Employer contributions.
      (2)   Forfeitures.
      (3)   The member's own after-tax contributions.
§ A261-78. Participation in other contribution plans during limitation years.
If in any limitation year a member is also a participant in one or more defined
contribution plans sponsored by the township, the annual benefit referred to in
§§
A261-79 and
A261-80 shall be reduced, if necessary, so that the sum of the fractions
described in §§
A261-79 and
A261-80 do not exceed 1.0 for such limitation year.
§ A261-79. Defined benefit fraction.
   A.   "Benefit fraction" is a fraction, the numerator of which is the
member's projected annual benefit under the defined benefit plans sponsored by
the township in which he has participated, determined as of the close of the
limitation years of such plans, and the denominator of which is the lesser of:
      (1)   One and twenty-five hundredths x $90,000 (as adjusted by the
Internal Revenue Service to reflect cost-of-living increases); or
      (2)   One hundred forty percent of the member's highest average
limitation compensation over any three consecutive calendar years.
   B.   In calculating the adjustments required by §
A261-69 for purposes of determining the denominator of the defined benefit
fraction for any limitation year, the years of service that are used shall
include future years occurring before the member's normal retirement age. For
purposes of the preceding sentence, years of service may include the future
year which includes the date on which the member will reach normal retirement
age, provided that it can be reasonably anticipated that the member will
receive a year of service for such year. In projecting years of service for
future years, it may be assumed that a member is a full-time employee if he is
currently a full-time employee.
§ A261-80. Defined contribution fraction.
" Contribution fraction" is a fraction, the numerator of which is the sum of
the annual additions to the member's accounts under all defined contribution
plans sponsored by the township for all limitation years, and the denominator
of which is the sum of the lesser of the following amounts, determined for each
limitation year of service with the township:
   A.   One and twenty-five hundredths x $30,000; or
   B.   Thirty-five percent of the member's limitation compensation for such
limitation year.
§ A261-81. Definitions.
The definitions in this section apply for purposes of §§
A261-78 through
A261-80:
   PROJECTED ANNUAL BENEF'I'T' — The annual benefit to which a member would be
entitled under the terms of a defined benefit plan if he had continued
employment until his normal retirement date under such plan and if his
compensation for the purpose of such plan had continued at the same rate.
   ANNUAL ADDITION — Annual additions to a member's accounts under any defined
contribution plan for any limitation year means the sum of employer
contributions, forfeitures and the member's own after-tax contributions. A
defined benefit plan sponsored by the township to which nondeductible employee
contributions are made is considered to be a separate defined contribution
plan, to the extent that the employee contributions constitute annual additions
in the current and prior limitation years.
   PLAN YEAR — The calendar year.
   LIMITATION YEAR — The calendar year.
   LIMITATION COMPENSATION —
   A.   The member's wages, salary, fees for professional services and other
amounts received for personal services rendered in the course of employment
with the township, to the extent that such amounts are includable in gross
income, and regardless of whether an amount is paid in cash, including (but not
limited to) commissions paid to salesmen, compensation for services on the
basis of a percentage of profits, commissions on insurance premiums, tips,
bonuses, fringe benefits, reimbursements and expense allowances; foreign earned
income, whether or not excludable from gross income under Section 911 of the
Internal Revenue Code; taxable amounts received by the member through accident
or health insurance for personal injury or sickness or from a self-insured
medical expense reimbursement plan; moving expenses paid or reimbursed by the
township in excess of any amount deductible by the member; and wages or
payments in lieu of wages received on account of absence from work for
permanent and total disability.
   B.   Limitation compensation shall exclude the following:
      (1)   Contributions made by an employer to a qualified plan to the extent
that, before the application of Section 415 of the Internal Revenue Code to
that plan, the contributions are not includable in the gross income of the
member for the year in which contributed.
      (2)   Employer contributions on behalf of an employee to a simplified
employee pension plan.
      (3)   Any distributions from a plan of deferred compensation, except that
any amounts received by an employee pursuant to an unfunded nonqualified plan
may be included in the year that such amounts are included in gross income.
      (4)   Other amounts which receive special tax benefits, such as premiums
for group term life insurance to the extent not includable in gross income, or
contributions made by an employer toward the purchase of an annuity contract
described in Section 403(b) of the Internal Revenue Code.
   C.   Notwithstanding any other provision of this pension plan, the annual
additions for any limitation year beginning before January 1, 1987, shall not
be recomputed to treat all of a member's own after-tax contributions as annual
additions.
§ A261-82. Adjustments for governmental pronouncements.
The dollar limitations described in §§
A261-62 through
A261-81 shall be adjusted in accordance with governmental pronouncements
stating the method and amount of such adjustments.
§ A261-83. Reduction of benefits accrued prior to limitation year.
   A.   The dollar limitations described in §§
A261-62 through
A261-81 shall not reduce any benefit which was accrued by a member under the
pension plan prior to the first day of its limitation year beginning in 1983,
using the applicable maximum dollar limitations then in effect; provided,
however, that this sentence shall not apply to any member unless he was a
member in the pension plan before January 1, 1983. For the purpose of this §
A261-83A, no change in the pension plan after July 1, 1982, and no cost-of-
living adjustment after July 1, 1982, shall be taken into account.
   B.   The dollar limitations described in §§
A261-61 through
A261-81 shall not reduce any benefit which was accrued by a member under the
pension plan prior to the first day of its limitation year beginning in 1987,
using the applicable maximum dollar limitations then in effect; provided,
however, that this sentence shall not apply to any member unless he was a
member in the pension plan on January 1, 1983. For the purpose of this §
A261-83B, no change in the prior plan after May 5, 1986, and no cost-of-living
adjustment after May 5, 1986, shall be taken into account. Any change in the
terms and conditions of this pension plan made pursuant to a collective
bargaining agreement ratified before May 6, 1986, shall be treated as a change
made before May 6, 1986.
§ A261-84. Plan years ending after December 31, 1982.
The township may elect to apply §
A261-83A with respect to any plan year ending after December 31, 1982, by
calculating the denominator under §
A261-80 using an alternate amount for all plan years ending before January 1,
1983. The alternate amount shall be equal to the amount determined for the
denominator under §
A261-80 as in effect for the plan year ending in 1982 multiplied by the
transition fraction. The transition fraction shall be a fraction determined as
follows:
   A.   The numerator shall consist of the lesser of:
      (1)   Fifty-one thousand eight hundred seventy-five dollars; or
      (2)   Thirty-five percent of the member's limitation compensation for the
plan year ending in 1981.
   B.   The denominator shall consist of the lesser of:
      (1)   Forty-one thousand five hundred dollars; or
      (2)   Twenty-five percent of 'the member's limitation compensation for
the plan year ending in 1981.
§ A261-85. Limitation years ending after December 31, 1986.
The township may elect to apply §
A261-80 with respect to any limitation year ending after December 31, 1986, by
adjusting the numerator under §
A261-80 by using an alternate amount for all limitation years beginning on or
before December 31, 1986. The adjustment is to subtract permanently from the
numerator of the defined contribution fraction an amount equal to the product
of Subsections A and B below:
   A.   The sum of the defined contribution fraction and the defined benefit
fraction as of the determination date, minus 1.0; times
   B.   The denominator of the defined contribution fraction as of the
determination date.
ARTICLE XI
Required Distributions
§ A261-86.   Latest commencement of benefits.
Distribution of a member’s benefits under this pension plan shall commence by
the April 1 that follows the end of the calendar year in which the member
attains age 70½ or retires, whichever is later.
§ A261-87.   Mandatory benefit commencement date.
“Mandatory benefit commencement date” means the April 1 described in §
A261-86 for each member.
ARTICLE XII
Miscellaneous
§ A261-88.   Payments to be free from all claims.
All payments under the pension plan shall not be subject to levy, attachment,
execution, garnishment or other legal process and shall be payable only to the
member or his designated beneficiary and shall not be subject to assignment or
transfer.
§ A261-89.   Modification.
The pension plan and pension fund established herein may be discontinued,
modified, altered, terminated or repealed according to law, by ordinance,
provided that Act 111 requirements have been met.
§ A261-90.   Gender.
As used in this pension plan, the masculine shall include the feminine and the
feminine shall include the masculine.
§ A261-91.   Revocation of prior enactments.
Any and all ordinances and resolutions heretofore enacted by the Board of
Commissioners providing for pensions and/or retirement benefits for police
officers employed by the township are hereby repealed, and any ordinance or
resolution or any part thereof conflicting with the provisions of this pension
plan shall be, and the same are, hereby repealed insofar as the same affects
this pension plan. Any police officer who shall have terminated employment
before the effective date of this pension plan and any dependent or beneficiary
shall be entitled to the benefits, if any, they were previously receiving.
§ A261-92.   Severability.
The provisions of this pension plan are severable, and if any section,
sentence, clause, part or provision thereof shall be held illegal, invalid or
unconstitutional by any court of competent jurisdiction, such decision of the
court shall not affect or impair the remaining sections, sentences, clauses,
parts or provisions of this pension plan. It is hereby declared to be the
intent of the Board that this pension plan would have been adopted as if such
illegal, invalid or unconstitutional section, sentence, clause, part or
provision had not been included herein.
ARTICLE XIII
Deferred Retirement Option Program
[Adopted 12-11-2012 by Ord. No. 12-1263]
§ A261-93.   Definitions.
   DROP—Deferred Retirement Option Program.
   DROP ACCOUNT—Separate account created to accept DROP participants’ monthly
pension check while a DROP participant.
   POLICE OFFICER OR OFFICER—Police officer of Upper Dublin Township.
§ A261-94.   Eligibility.
Effective January 1, 2013, any officer who has reached his/her normal
retirement date based on age and service may elect to become a DROP participant
on the first day of the month following the attainment of the requirements
which is a minimum 25 years of credited service and attaining at least the age
of 50.
§ A261-95.   Written DROP election and letter of resignation.
An officer of the Upper Dublin Police Department electing to participate in the
DROP must complete and file with the Township Manager a “DROP option form”
prepared by Upper Dublin Township which shall evidence the officer’s
participation in the DROP. The form must be signed by the officer and submitted
to the Township Manager at least 30 days prior to the date on which the member
wishes the DROP option to be effective. The DROP option notice shall include a
binding, irrevocable and notarized letter of resignation to the Township
Manager, by the officer, that the officer shall resign from employment with the
Upper Dublin Police Department effective on a specific date (the “resignation
date”). In no event shall the resignation date be no more than 48 months from
the commencement of the officer’s DROP participation period. A DROP participant
may change the DROP termination date to an earlier date and no penalty shall be
imposed for early termination of DROP participation. An officer shall cease to
work as a Township police officer on the officer’s resignation date, unless the
Township terminates or honorably discharges the officer prior to the
resignation date.
In addition, all retirement documents required by Upper Dublin Township must be
signed and presented to the Township Manager for approval of retirement and
payment of pension. Once a retirement application has been approved, it is
irrevocable. The documentation that must be completed before an officer may
participate in the DROP shall contain an acknowledgment that any fees,
commissions and administrative costs attributable to the DROP participation
shall be paid out of the police pension fund in accordance with the pension
plan. The officer must agree to hold the Township harmless for any consequences
of the officer’s decision to participate in DROP including, but not limited to,
any tax consequences or implications of DROP participation and/or any monetary
loss incurred as the result of DROP participation.
§ A261-96.   Limitations during DROP period.
After the effective date of the DROP option and during the DROP period, the
officer shall:
   A.   No longer earn or accrue additional years of continuous service for
pension purposes.
   B.   No longer be required to make any pension contributions to the Upper
Dublin Police Pension Fund.
   C.   No longer be eligible for tuition reimbursement pay.
   D.   No longer be eligible for longevity increases.
   E.   No longer be eligible to access funds from the Upper Dublin Police
Codicil until after his/her resignation date.
§ A261-97.   Benefit Calculation.
For all retirement fund purposes, the length of service of a police officer
participating in DROP shall remain as it existed on the effective date of
commencement of participation in the DROP. Service thereafter shall not be
recognized or used for the calculation or determination of any benefits payable
by the Upper Dublin Township Police Pension Fund. The monthly average salary of
the police officer for pension calculation purposes shall remain, as it existed
on the effective date of commencement of participation in the DROP. Earnings,
increases in earnings and length of service increments after the DROP election
date or increases in earnings thereafter shall not be recognized or used for
the calculation or determination of any benefits payable by the pension fund.
§ A261-98.   Payments to the DROP account.
The monthly retirement benefits that would have been payable to the police
officer had the member elected to cease employment and receive a normal
retirement benefit, shall, upon the member commencing participation in DROP, be
paid into an account established to receive the participant’s monthly pension
payments. This account shall be designated the DROP account.
§ A261-99.   DROP account.
The Township shall establish a DROP account as an interest-bearing ledger
account in its police pension trust fund. The DROP account balance shall be
accounted for separately but shall not be physically segregated from other
pension trust fund assets. Interest shall be credited into the DROP account
monthly and shall be equal to the police pension fund’s actual interest earned
each month, but not less the 0% or more than 4.5% annually.
§ A261-100.   Accrual of non-pension benefits.
After a police officer elects to participate in the DROP, all other contractual
benefits shall continue to accrue with the exception of those provisions
relating to the police pension plan and those provisions listed in §
A261-96 above.
§ A261-101.   Payout.
Upon the resignation date set forth in the police officer’s DROP option notice
or such date as the Township separates the officer from employment, the
retirement benefits payable to the officer or officer’s designated beneficiary,
if applicable, shall be paid to the officer or beneficiary and shall no longer
be paid to the officer’s DROP account. Within 30 days following termination of
an officer’s employment pursuant to their participating in the DROP, the total
accumulated benefits in the officer’s DROP account shall be calculated and paid
out of the Upper Dublin Police Pension Fund to the officer in a single lump sum
payment or at the member’s option, in any fashion permitted by law. By
participating in the DROP, each officer must agree to hold the Township
harmless for any tax or other consequences flowing from the officer’s
disposition of the payout under this article.
§ A261-102.   Disability during DROP.
If a police officer becomes temporarily disabled during his/her participation
in DROP, that officer shall continue to participate in the DROP as if fully
employed. The officer shall receive disability pay in the same amount as
disabled officers that are not participating in DROP. In no event shall an
officer on temporary disability have the ability to draw from his DROP account.
However, notwithstanding any other provision in this section, if an officer is
disabled and has not returned to work as of his/her required resignation date,
then such resignation shall take precedence over all other provisions herein
and said officer shall be required to resign.
If an officer becomes permanently disabled during the DROP period, the officer
shall be honorably discharged from employment after the injury that prevents
the DROP participant from performing full police duties is deemed to be
permanent. On the date that the officer is deemed to be permanently disabled,
the officer shall, within 30 calendar days, obtain the contents of his/her DROP
account and, thereafter, commence receiving his/her normal pension benefit. An
officer who is participating in DROP must waive any claim to a disability
pension benefit should the officer become permanently disabled during the DROP
period.
§ A261-103.   Death during DROP.
If a DROP participant dies before the DROP account balances are paid, the
participant’s designated beneficiary shall have the same rights as the police
officer to withdraw or direct the DROP account balance. If a DROP participant
is killed in the line of duty, the participant’s survivors shall receive the
killed-in-service benefit pursuant to Act 51 of 2009. All amounts in the
participant’s DROP account at the time of his/her death shall be paid to the
participant’s survivors.
§ A261-104.   Forfeiture of benefits.
Notwithstanding an officer’s participation in the DROP, an officer who is
convicted or pleads guilty to engaging in criminal misconduct which constitutes
a “crime related to public office or public employment,” as that phrase is
defined in Pennsylvania’s Pension Forfeiture Act, 43 P.S. §§ 1311–1314, shall
forfeit his right to receive a pension, including any amounts currently
deposited in the DROP account. In such a case, the member shall only be
entitled to receive the contributions, if any, made by the member to the fund,
without interest.
§ A261-105.   Effect of qualified domestic relations order.
Rights under this plan shall be subject to attachment in favor of an alternate
payee as set forth in a qualified domestic relations order.
§ A261-106.   Construal of provisions.
An officer’s election to participate in the DROP shall in no way be construed
as a limitation on the Township’s right to suspend or terminate an officer for
just cause or to grant the officer an honorable discharge based upon a physical
or mental inability to perform his or her duties.
ARTICLE XIV
Non-Intervening Military Buy Back
§ A261-107.   Non-intervening military service time buy back. [Added 12-10-2024
by Ord. No. 24-1399]
The pension plan provides full-service credit for each year of active-duty
military service or fraction thereof based on the member’s Form DD214, not to
exceed five years, to a member who was not employed by the Township prior to
such military service, payable by the member.
The member shall pay the amount for the purchase of credit for military service
other than intervening military service that shall be computed by applying the
average normal cost rate for the pension plan as based upon the most recent
actuarial valuation, but not to exceed ten per centum, to the member’s average
annual rate of compensation over the first three years of service with the
Township and multiplying the result by the number of years and fractional part
of a year of creditable non-intervening military service being purchased,
together with interest at the rate of four and three-quarters per centum
compounded annually from the date of initial entry into service to the date of
payment. The members must pay for the purchase of non-intervening military
service time as a lump-sum deposit to the pension plan.
A member of the pension plan shall be eligible to receive service credit for
intervening or non-intervening military service provided that he is not
entitled to receive, eligible to receive then or in the future, or is receiving
retirement benefits for such service under a retirement system administered and
wholly or partially paid for by any other governmental agency with the
exception of a member eligible to receive or is receiving military retirement
pay earned by a combination of active duty and non-active duty with a reserve
or national guard component of the armed forces which retirement pay is payable
only upon the attainment of a specified age and period of service under 10
U.S.C. Ch 67 (relating to retired pay for non-regular service).
Chapter A262
NONUNIFORMED EMPLOYEES PENSION PLAN
ARTICLE I
Introduction
§
A262-1.   Establishment of Pension Plan and Pension Fund.
§
A262-2.   Contributions to the Pension Fund.
ARTICLE II
Definitions
§
A262-3.   Definitions.
ARTICLE III
Membership
§
A262-4.   Provisions for Membership.
ARTICLE IV
Retirement Benefits
§
A262-5.   Normal Retirement Pension.
§
A262-6.   Early Retirement Pension.
§
A262-7.   Late Retirement Pension.
§
A262-8.   Benefits upon reemployment.
§
A262-9.   Maximum benefit payments.
ARTICLE V
Vesting and Benefits Upon Termination of Employment
§
A262-10.   Benefits upon termination of employment.
§
A262-11.   Vesting schedule.
§
A262-12.   Forfeitures.
ARTICLE VI
Death Benefit
§
A262-13.   Death Benefit.
ARTICLE VII
Payment of Benefits Upon Retirement, Death or Other Termination of Employment
§
A262-14.   Normal form of benefit payments.
§
A262-15.   Optional forms of benefit payments.
§
A262-16.   Application for benefit payments.
§
A262-17.   Small benefit cash-out.
§
A262-18.   Payment of Death Benefits.
§
A262-19.   Direct rollovers.
§
A262-20.   Required Distribution of Benefits.
ARTICLE VIII
Members' Required Contributions
§
A262-21.   Required contributions.
§
A262-21.1.   Amount.
§
A262-21.2.   Refund of required contributions.
ARTICLE IX
Maintenance of Pension Fund
§
A262-22.   Types of contributions.
§
A262-23.   Pension Fund sole source of Pension Plan benefits.
§
A262-24.   Payments from Commonwealth Treasurer.
§
A262-25.   Normal cost.
ARTICLE X
Administration of Pension Plan
§
A262-26.   Administrative provisions.
§
A262-27.   Powers of Nonuniformed Pension Board.
§
A262-28.   Duties of the Nonuniformed Pension Board.
§
A262-29.   Finality of Nonuniformed Pension Board decisions.
ARTICLE XI
Miscellaneous
§
A262-30.   Payments to be free from all claims.
§
A262-31.   Incompetency; minors.
§
A262-32.   Missing persons.
§
A262-33.   Amendment and termination.
§
A262-34.   Employment rights.
§
A262-35.   Severability.
§
A262-36.   Applicable law.
§
A262-37.   Gender and number.
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Board of Commissioners of the Township of Upper Dublin
2-9-1999 by Res. No. 1690. Amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
 
Nonuniformed Employers Pension Plan — See
Ch. 35, Art. II.
ARTICLE I
Introduction
§ A262-1. Establishment of Pension Plan and Pension Fund.
The Township previously established and continues to maintain the Pension Plan
to provide pension benefits for its Members. In addition, the Township
previously established and continues to maintain the Pension Fund to hold
moneys set aside to provide pension benefits under the Pension Plan. All
pension benefits paid to Members and their Survivors shall be paid from such
Pension Fund. Unless otherwise specifically provided below, the terms of the
Pension Plan, as of the Effective Date and as may be amended from time to time
in the future, shall not apply to members who terminated employment with the
Township prior to the Effective Date; their benefits are determined in
accordance with the terms of the Pension Plan in effect at the time of their
termination of employment.
§ A262-2. Contributions to the Pension Fund.
[Amended 1-9-2001 by Ord. No. 1055]
Required contributions, as described in Article VIII, as well as annual
appropriations of the Township, payments from the Commonwealth Treasurer and
all other funding sources, as described in Article X, shall be paid into the
Pension Fund.
ARTICLE II
Definitions 1
1 Editor's Note: See also §
A262-35, Gender and number.
§ A262-3. Definitions.
The following words, when capitalized, shall have the following meanings unless
the context clearly indicates otherwise:
   ACCRUED PENSION — The monthly amount payable in the form of a Fixed Period
Single Life Annuity for 10 years, calculated by multiplying 1.35% of a Member's
Average Monthly Salary by a Member's total Years of Service as a Nonuniformed
Employee, provided that the number of Years of Service used in this calculation
may not exceed 30. [Amended 1-9-2001 by Ord. No. 1055]
   ACT 205 — The Municipal Pension Plan Funding Standard and Recovery Act,
Title 53 of the Pennsylvania Statutes 53 P.S. § 895.101 et seq., as amended,
which governs the operation and administration of the Pension Plan.
   ACTUARIAL EQUIVALENT — The equivalent value of different benefits under the
Pension Plan determined by using a 7% interest rate and the UP-1984 Mortality
Table.
   APPROVED ACTUARY — A person who has at least five years of actuarial
experience with public pension plans and who is either enrolled as a member of
the American Academy of Actuaries or enrolled as an actuary pursuant to Section
3042 of the Employee Retirement Income Security Act of 1974 ("ERISA").
   AVERAGE MONTHLY SALARY — The average of a Member's monthly Salary during the
60 consecutive calendar months of active employment immediately preceding the
Member's termination of employment whether or not as a Nonuniformed Employee.
If a Member has been employed for less than 60 consecutive calendar months of
active employment upon his termination of employment, the average of his
monthly Salary during such months of active employment shall be used instead of
60 months. Calendar months during the sixty-consecutive-month period (or
shorter period, if applicable) for which a Member earns no Salary shall be
disregarded for the purpose of making this determination.
   BENEFIT COMMENCEMENT DATE — The first day for which a benefit is payable to
a Member under the terms of the Pension Plan.
   BOARD OF COMMISSIONERS — The Township of Upper Dublin Board of
Commissioners.
   CODE — The Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as amended, or any successor
statute.
   DEATH BENEFIT — The death benefits provided to Survivors in accordance with
the terms of §
A262-13.
   DIRECT ROLLOVER — The direct transfer of certain lump-sum payments made
under the Pension Plan to:
   A.   Another retirement plan which is qualified under Code Section 401 (a);
or
   B.   An individual retirement account as described in Code Section 408.
   EARLY RETIREMENT AGE — The first age at which a Member is both at least age
55 and has completed at least 10 Years of Service as a Nonuniformed Employee.
   EARLY RETIREMENT DALE — The first day of the month coinciding with or next
following the Member's Early Retirement Age which is prior to Normal Retirement
Age.
   EARLY RETIREMENT PENSION — The early retirement benefits provided to a
Member in accordance with the terms of §
A262-6.
   EFFECTIVE DATE — For this amended and restated Pension Plan, February 1,
1999. The original effective date of the Pension Plan is May 1, 1968.
   FIXED PERIOD SINGLE LIFE ANNUITY — A Single Life Annuity with continued
monthly payments to a Member's Survivor for the remainder of the fixed period
in the event the Member dies, for a period of either five, 10 or 15 calendar
years as elected by the Member.
   HOURS OF SERVICE:
   A.   The Hours of Service credited to a Nonuniformed Employee under one or
more of the following categories:
      (1)   PERFORMANCE OF DUTIES — Each hour for which a Nonuniformed Employee
is paid by the Township for the performance of services for the Township.
      (2)   PAID ABSENCES — Each hour (not to exceed eight hours per calendar
day) for which a Nonuniformed Employee is paid by the Township for a time
period during which no duties are performed, due to vacation, holiday, illness,
incapacity, layoff, military leave, jury duty, maternity or paternity or
adoption leave, or any other approved leave of absence (as determined in the
sole discretion of the Township); provided, however, that a Nonuniformed
Employee shall not be credited for any Hours of Service for which payment is
made solely for the purpose of complying with any applicable workers'
compensation, unemployment compensation or statutory disability insurance law,
or for payment made to reimburse a Nonuniformed Employee for medical or
medically related expenses incurred by such Nonuniformed Employee.
      (3)   UNPAID ABSENCES — Each hour (not to exceed eight hours per calendar
day) for which a Nommiformed Employee is not paid by the Township for a time
period during which no duties are performed because such Nonuniformed Employee
is on an unpaid leave of absence which has been approved by the Township in
accordance with the Township's uniformly applied leave of absence policies. A
person will not receive credit for Hours of Service during an unpaid leave of
absence to the extent such person's unpaid leave of absence extends beyond the
time limit established by the Township in accordance with its uniformly applied
leave of absence policies.
      (4)   BACKPAY — Each hour not already counted under Subsection A(1) or
(2) of this definition above for which backpay to a Nonuniformed Employee is
either awarded or agreed to by the Township.
      (5)   FMLA LEAVE — Each hour of work (not to exceed eight hours per
calendar day) a Nonuniformed Employee would have completed on or after August
5, 1993, but for the fact that such Nonuniformed Employee was absent from work
due to unpaid leave under the Family and Medical Leave Act of 1993, but only to
the extent required to be credited under such Act.
      (6)   MILITARY SERVICE — Subject to any stricter requirements that may be
required by applicable law [including, but not limited to, the Uniformed
Services Employment and Reemployment Rights Act (USERRA)], each hour of work
(not to exceed eight hours per calendar day) a Nonuniformed Employee would have
completed but for the fact that such Nonuniformed Employee was absent from work
due to a military leave of absence; provided that the Member returns to his
employment with the Township as a Nonuniformed Employee within six months after
his separation from military service. A Nonuniformed Employee shall only be
credited with Hours of Service for intervening military service if he is not
entitled to receive retirement benefits for such military service under a
retirement system administered and wholly or partially paid for by any other
governmental agency. The foregoing sentence shall not apply where a
Nonuniformed Employee is eligible to receive or is receiving military
retirement benefits earned by a combination of active duty and nonactive duty
with a reserve or national guard component of the armed forces.
   B.   Hours of Service credited under Subsection A(1) through (6) above shall
be credited to the calendar year in which the hours were worked or would have
been worked but for a leave of absence.
   JOINT AND SURVIVOR ANNUITY — A reduced monthly annuity for a Members life
with a survivor annuity which provides monthly payments to the Members Survivor
after the Member's death, equal to either 50%, 75% or 100%, at the election of
the Member, of the reduced monthly payments provided to the Member before his
death.
   LATE RETIREMENT AGE — A Member's age after Normal Retirement Age.
   LATE RETIREMENT DATE — The first day of the month coinciding with or next
following the Member's Late Retirement Age.
   LATE RETIREMENT PENSION — The late retirement benefits provided to a Member
in accordance with the terms of §
A262-7.
   MEMBER — Any Nonuniformed Employee who is a Member pursuant to §
A262-4.
   NONUNIFORMED EMPLOYEE — Any individual who is employed by the Township and
is classified by the Township as a Nonuniformed Employee.
   NONUNIFORMED PENSION BOARD — The Township of Upper Dublin Nonuniformed
Pension Plan and Pension Fund Board of Trustees, a board established by the
Board of Commissioners to administer the terms of the Pension Plan and the
Pension Fund.
   NORMAL RETIREMENT AGE — The date upon which a Member attains age 60.
   NORMAL RETIREMENT DATE — The first day of the month coinciding with or next
following the Member's Normal Retirement Age.
   NORMAL RETIREMENT PENSION — The normal retirement benefit provided to a
Member in accordance with the terms of §
A262-5.
   PENSION FUND — The trust fund established by the Township to hold and
administer the Pension Plan's assets.
   PERIOD OF EMPLOYMENT or PERIOD OF REEMPLOYMENT — Any uninterrupted period of
time during which a Nonuniformed Employee is employed by the Township as a
Nonuniformed Employee.
   PLAN ADMINISTRATOR — The person or entity that may be appointed by the
Nonuniformed Pension Board to administer the terms of the Pension Plan and the
Pension Fund on a day-to-day basis. Any such Plan Administrator shall have such
authority to administer the Pension Plan as explicitly delegated to it by the
Nonuniformed Pension Board.
   PLAN YEAR — The twelve-month period commencing each January 1 and ending the
following December 31.
   RETIRES or RETIREMENT — A Member who ceases active employment with the
township after reaching his Early Retirement Age, Normal Retirement Age or Late
Retirement Age, whichever applies.
   SALARY:
   A.   The monthly sum of the following amounts:
      (1)   All base wages paid to a Nonuniformed Employee by the Township,
including overtime, but excluding certain special payments (such as bonuses,
expense reimbursements and other types of nonperiodic compensation); plus
      (2)   Any pre-tax contributions to a Township deferred compensation plan
under Code Sections 457 or 414(h) on behalf of a Nonuniformed Employee and any
pre-tax contributions to a Code Section 125 plan; plus
      (3)   Any payments made by the Township to a Nonuniformed Employee
pursuant to the Heart and Lung Act, 53 P.S. §§ 637 and 638.
   B.   In no event shall a Member's Salary used to compute his Average Monthly
Salary exceed $160,000 for the 1997 Plan Year, and for all Plan Years after
1997, shall not exceed the compensation limit set forth in Code Section 401 (a)
(17), as adjusted for cost-of-living increases.
   SINGLE LIFE, ANNUITY — An annuity providing monthly payments for a Member's
life with all benefits ceasing upon such Member's death.
   SURVIVOR:
   A.   For the purpose of Death Benefits under the Pension Plan:
      (1)   The surviving spouse of a Member;
      (2)   If no surviving spouse, the Members surviving minor children, with
such minor children sharing equally in any benefits provided under the Pension
Plan if there is more than one child; or
      (3)   The individual(s) designated by the Member in accordance with the
procedures established and uniformly applied by the Nonuniformed Pension Board
or the Plan Administrator, if applicable.
   B.   "Survivor" means, for the purpose of determining annuity payments for a
Fixed Period Single Life Annuity or a Joint and Survivor Annuity, the
individual designated by the Member at the time he elects the form of his
payment under Article VII.
   TOWNSHIP — The Township of Upper Dublin.
   YEAR OF SERVICE — Any calendar year in which a Nonuniformed Employee earns
1,000 or more Hours of Service.
ARTICLE III
Membership
§ A262-4. Provisions for Membership.
Nonuniformed Employees shall become Members in the Plan in accordance with the
following provisions:
   A.   Continuing Members. Each Nonuniformed Employee who was a Member in the
Plan before the Effective Date shall continue to be a Member on and after the
Effective Date while a Nonuniformed Employee.
   B.   New Members. Each Nonuniformed Employee not covered under Subsection A
above shall become a Member in the Plan as of the last day of the Plan Year
immediately following his date of hire.
   C.   Reemployment of former Members. Any Member who Retires or terminates
employment with the Township, or transfers to a class of employment not covered
under the terms of the Pension Plan, and later resumes employment as a
Nonuniformed Employee of the Township shall again become a Member as of the
last day of the Plan Year following his date of rehire or reinstatement as a
Nonuniformed Employee.
ARTICLE IV
Retirement Benefits
§ A262-5. Normal Retirement Pension.
A Member who Retires upon attaining his Normal Retirement Age shall receive a
monthly amount of retirement income commencing as of his Normal Retirement Date
in an amount equal to his Accrued Pension determined as of the Member's Normal
Retirement Date, subject to the forms of payment and election requirements
discussed in Article VII.
§ A262-6. Early Retirement Pension.
A Member who Retires on or after Early Retirement Age, but before Normal
Retirement Age, shall receive a monthly amount of retirement income:
   A.   Commencing as of the Member's Normal Retirement Date in an amount equal
to the Member's Accrued Pension determined as of the Member's Early Retirement
Date, subject to the forms of payment and election requirements discussed in
Article VII; or
   B.   At the Member's election, as of the Member's Early Retirement Date, or
the first day of any month thereafter prior to the Member's Normal Retirement
Date, in an amount equal to the Member's Accrued Pension determined as of the
Members Early Retirement Date, reduced by 1/2 of 1% for each calendar month by
which the Member's Benefit Commencement Date precedes the Members Normal
Retirement Date, subject to the forms of payment and election requirements
discussed in Article VII.
§ A262-7. Late Retirement Pension.
A Member who Retires on or after Late Retirement Age shall receive a monthly
amount of retirement income commencing as of the Member's Late Retirement Date
in an amount equal to the greater of his Accrued Pension determined as of the
Member's Late Retirement Date; or the Actuarial Equivalent of the Accrued
Pension calculated as of the Member's Normal Retirement Date, subject to the
forms of payment and election requirements discussed in Article VII.
§ A262-8. Benefits upon reemployment.
A Member who is reemployed by the Township as a Nonuniformed Employee shall be
subject to the following provisions:
   A.   No suspension of payments. If a Member is reemployed after a Benefit
Commencement Date, the Member's monthly benefit payments shall continue
uninterrupted during the Period of Reemployment.
   B.   Retention or Loss of prior Years of Service for vesting purposes.
Subject to Subsection C below, if a Member is reemployed by the Township as a
Nonuniformed Employee within two years, whether before or after a Benefit
Commencement Date, the Member's Years of Service attributable to the prior
Period of Employment will be aggregated with the Member's Years of Service
attributable to the Period of Reemployment for purposes of determining the
Member's vested interest under §
A262-11 and Years of Service for determining the Member's Early or Normal
Retirement Age, with respect to the benefits payable to the Member upon
subsequent termination of employment or Retirement. Otherwise, the Member's
Years of Service attributable to the prior Period of Employment shall be
disregarded.
   C.   Form of Payment. Years of Service attributable to a Period of
Employment for which a Member has received, or is deemed to have received, a
distribution pursuant to §
A262-17 shall not be taken into account for any purpose following a Member's
reemployment with the Township. Except with respect to a payment under §
A262-17, the form of payment in effect for the Member on the Benefit
Commencement Date prior to reemployment, if applicable, shall apply to all
future benefits payable from the Pension Plan to the Member.
   D.   Calculation of benefit upon termination or Retirement after
reemployment. A Member's benefit following termination or Retirement after
Reemployment shall equal the sum of:
      (1)   The pension being paid to the Member; plus
      (2)   The pension attributable to any increase in the Member's vested
percentage in the pension based on the Member's prior Period of Employment,
determined as of the Benefit Commencement Date for the pension attributable to
the Period of Reemployment under Subsection D(3) below, determined under the
same provision of Article VI or VII as applied to the prior pension; plus
      (3)   The pension attributable to the Period of Reemployment, determined
under Article VI or VII as of the subsequent Benefit Commencement Date as if
the Period of Employment had been the Member's only employment with the
Township, subject to Subsection C above in regard to aggregating Years of
Service for vesting and determining Early Retirement Age and Normal Retirement
Age; provided that the pension attributable to the Period of Reemployment shall
be offset by the Actuarial Equivalent of any prior distributions made to a
Member pursuant to §
A262-15C of
A262-17.
§ A262-9. Maximum benefit payments.
Notwithstanding any other provision of the Pension Plan to the contrary, a
Member's annual benefit, together with the Member's annual benefit under any
other plan(s) required to be aggregated with the Pension Plan under Code
Section 415, may not exceed the annual limitations on benefits imposed by Code
Section 415. In the event that the Code Section 415 limitations are exceeded in
any calendar year for a Member, such Member's benefits shall be reduced under
this Pension Plan to the extent necessary to satisfy the applicable Code
Section 415 annual limitations. If a Member's benefits are reduced under the
Pension Plan to satisfy the limitations of Code Section 415 and the Code
Section 415 limitations are subsequently increased, such Member's benefits also
shall be increased to the extent permitted under the increased Code Section 415
limitations.
ARTICLE V
Vesting and Benefits Upon Termination of Employment
§ A262-10. Benefits upon termination of employment.
A member who terminates employment with the Township and is not eligible for a
benefit under Article IV shall receive a monthly amount of retirement income:
   A.   Commencing as of the Member's Normal Retirement Date in an amount equal
to the Members Accrued Pension determined as of the Members employment
termination date as vested in accordance with §
A262-11, subject to the forms of payment and election requirements discussed in
Article VII; or
   B.   At the Member's election, if the Member has at least 10 Years of
Service, commencing as of the Member's Early Retirement Date, or the first day
of any month thereafter prior to the Member's Normal Retirement Date, in an
amount equal to the Member's Accrued Pension determined as of the Member's
employment termination date, reduced by V2 of 1% for each calendar month by
which the Member's Benefit Commencement Date precedes the Member's No,. mai
Retirement Date, subject to the forms of payment and election requirements
discussed in Article VII.
§ A262-11. Vesting schedule.
   A.   A Member's Accrued Pension shall vest in accordance with the following
schedule:
Years of Service Vesting Percentage
Years of Service Vesting Percentage
3 or less        0%
4                40%
5                50%
6                60%
7                70%
8                80%
9                90%
10 or more       100%
 
   B.   Notwithstanding the vesting schedule set forth above, a Member who
terminates employment with the Township because of death or Retirement shall be
fully vested in his Accrued Benefit.
§ A262-12. Forfeitures.
A Member shall forfeit the nonvested portion of his Accrued Pension as of the
end of the Plan Year following his termination of employment.
ARTICLE VI
Death Benefit
§ A262-13. Death Benefit.
The Survivor of a Member, if any, who dies before the Member's Benefit
Commencement Date shall receive a Death Benefit under the Pension Plan in an
amount equal to the Actuarial Equivalent of such Member's vested Accrued
Pension. The Death Benefit, if any, for the Survivor of a Member who dies after
a Benefit Commencement Date shall be determined in accordance with Article VII,
based upon the applicable form of payments of the Member's pension.
ARTICLE VII
Payment of Benefits Upon Retirement, Death or Other Termination of Employment
§ A262-14. Normal form of benefit payments.
Unless §
A262-17 applies or the Member elects an optional form of payment as described
under §
A262-15 below, the normal form of payment of a pension to the Member is a Fixed
Period Single Life Annuity for a period of 10 years.
§ A262-15. Optional forms of benefit payments.
A Member may elect, in accordance with §
A262-16 below, to have his benefit adjusted to the Actuarial Equivalent of the
normal form under §
A262-14 and paid to him in one of the following optional forms:
   A.   A Single Life Annuity.
   B.   A Joint and Survivor Annuity.
   C.   A single lump sum.
§ A262-16. Application for benefit payments.
Except as otherwise provided under §§
A262-17 and
A262-18 below, benefit payments under the Pension Plan will not commence until
a Member has completed an application form in accordance with the uniform
procedures established by the Nonuniformed Pension Board or the Plan
Administrator, if applicable. After a Member commences receipt of benefit
payments under the Pension Plan, the Member shall not be permitted to elect a
different form of payment at a later date.
§ A262-17. Small benefit cash-out.
Notwithstanding any other provision of the Plan to the contrary, if the
Actuarial Equivalent lump sum value of a Member's vested Accrued Pension is
$5,000 or less as of the Member's Benefit Commencement Date, payment shall be
made in a single lump sum (or deemed to have been made in a single lump sum if
zero) as soon as administratively practicable following his termination of
employment; provided that a Member shall have the opportunity to elect a Direct
Rollover of such lump sum payment in accordance with §
A262-19 below.
§ A262-18. Payment of Death Benefits.
As soon as administratively practicable after a Member's death, the Actuarial
Equivalent lump sum value of the Member's Death Benefit shall be paid to the
Member's Survivor in a single lump sum payment; provided that, if the Member's
Survivor is the Member's spouse, such Member's spouse shall have the
opportunity to elect a Direct Rollover of such lump sum payment in accordance
with §
A262-19 below.
§ A262-19. Direct rollovers.
A Member or a Member's spouse may elect a Direct Rollover of lump sum payments
distributed under the Pension Plan pursuant to §§
A262-15C,
A262-17 and
A262-18 above. Any such Direct Rollover shall be made in accordance with the
requirements of Code Section 401 (a)(31).
§ A262-20. Required Distribution of Benefits.
Notwithstanding any other provision of the Pension Plan to the contrary,
distribution of a Member's benefits under the Pension Plan shall commence no
later than April 1 of the calendar year following the calendar year in which
the Member attains age 701/2 or retires, whichever is later. Distributions made
pursuant to this §
A262-20 shall not be eligible for Direct Rollover.
ARTICLE VIII
Members' Required Contributions
[Amended 1-9-2001 by Ord. No. 1055]
§ A262-21. Required contributions.
"Required contributions" means the total amount of contributions each Member is
required to contribute to the Pension Fund under this Pension Plan.
§ A262-21.1. Amount.
Effective January 1, 2002, employees shall contribute 1% of their gross monthly
wages to the Township Pension Plan. These contributions shall be made by
payroll deduction on a per pay basis.
§ A262-21.2. Refund of required contributions.
   A.   Any Member who, for any reason whatsoever, shall be ineligible to
receive pension benefits under this Pension Plan shall be entitled to a refund
of any required contributions he made to the Pension Fund when the Member
discontinues his employment with the Township.
   B.   Amount of refund. All refunds pursuant to Subsection A shall be equal
to the total amount of a Member's required contributions contributed pursuant
to §
A262-21.1 plus the prorated amount of the net interest earned by the Member's
required contributions while in the Pension Fund.
   C.   Form of payment. All refunds of required contributions shall be in the
form of a single lump sum payment.
   D.   Death of Member. If a Member's discontinuance of employment with the
Township is due to the Member's death, any refund of required contributions
shall be paid to the deceased Member's designated beneficiary or, in the
absence thereof, to his estate.
   E.   Termination of Pension Plan or Complete Discontinuance of required
contributions. In the event that the Pension Plan is terminated pursuant to
state law, the right of each Member to his required contributions shall be
nonforfeitable. The nonforfeitable amount of each Member's required
contributions shall be the amount described in Subsection B. Members shall be
entitled to receive their nonforfeitable required contributions in accordance
with the terms of the Pension Plan.
ARTICLE IX
Maintenance of Pension Fund
§ A262-22. Types of contributions.
   A.   The Pension Fund shall be maintained through the following types of
contributions:
      (1)   Payments made by the Commonwealth Treasurer to the Township
Treasurer from moneys received pursuant to Act 205 2 and allocated for benefits
for Members.
      (2)   Annual appropriations to the Pension Fund made by the Township.
      (3)   Any other contributions made to the Pension Plan in accordance with
applicable law.
   B.   All payments described in this §
A262-22 shall be part of the Pension Fund and shall not be applied to any other
pension fund or account or disbursed in any manner, except as provided herein.
2 Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 895.101 et seq.
§ A262-23. Pension Fund sole source of Pension Plan benefits.
The obligation to make payments for pension benefits under the Pension Plan
shall be a charge only upon the Pension Fund and not upon other moneys or funds
of the Township.
§ A262-24. Payments from Commonwealth Treasurer.
The annual payment made by the Commonwealth Treasurer to the Township Treasurer
pursuant to Act 205 3 for benefits under the Pension Plan shall be used to
reduce the Pension Plan's annual normal cost as defined in Section 102 of Act
205 4 and described under §
A262-25 below.
3 Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 895.101 et seq.
4 Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 895.102.
§ A262-25. Normal cost.
   A.   The Pension Plan's normal cost is comprised of the following amounts:
      (1)   The unfunded liability of the Pension Plan. The "unfunded
liability" means the present value of the unfunded pension benefits accrued
under the Pension Plan during all years prior to the current year. The unfunded
liability of the Pension Plan shall be amortized over 25 years.
      (2)   The future service liability of the Pension Plan. The "future
service liability" means the present value of pension benefits accrued during
the current year.
      (3)   Administrative costs. Each year the management and administration
of the Pension Plan and the Pension Fund result in certain administrative
costs. Only administrative costs which meet the following criteria are
allowable as part of the Pension Plan's normal cost:
         (a)   The administrative costs are directly associated with the
Pension Plan.
         (b)   The Nonuniformed Pension Board monitors the services provided to
ensure that the administrative costs are necessary, reasonable and beneficial
for the Pension Plan and Pension Fund.
         (c)   Appropriate records of the administrative costs are kept as
necessary for the Auditor General audit.
   B.   Any administrative costs that do not satisfy the criteria described
above shall be provided for by appropriation made by the Board of
Commissioners.
ARTICLE X
Administration of Pension Plan
§ A262-26. Administrative provisions.
The Pension Plan shall be administered in accordance with the provisions of
Chapter 35, Article II, of the Upper Dublin Township Code as amended by
Ordinance No. 939.
§ A262-27. Powers of Nonuniformed Pension Board.
To the extent not otherwise inconsistent with the terms of
Chapter 35, Article II, of the Upper Dublin Township Code, the Nonuniformed
Pension Board and the Plan Administrator, if applicable, shall have the full
discretionary authority to determine all questions arising in connection with
the administration, interpretation and application of the Pension Plan,
including, without limitation, the full discretionary authority to determine
any claims for benefits under the Pension Plan. The Nonuniformed Pension
Board's powers include, but are not limited to, the full discretionary
authority to:
   A.   Prescribe rules for the operation of the Pension Plan.
   B.   Determine all questions (including any and all questions of fact)
affecting eligibility to participate in and receive benefits under the Pension
Plan.
   C.   Prepare and distribute communications to Nonuniformed Employees as a
part of Pension Plan operations.
   D.   Prescribe forms to facilitate the operation of the Pension Plan.
   E.   Construe and interpret the terms of the Pension Plan, including the
power to remedy possible ambiguities, inconsistencies or omissions.
   F.   Determine the amount of benefits and authorize payments from Pension
Fund assets.
   G.   Obtain from the Township and from Nonuniformed Employees and former
Nonuniformed Employees such information as may be necessary or appropriate to
administer the Pension Plan.
   H.   Maintain Pension Plan records.
   I.   Litigate, settle claims and respond to and comply with court
proceedings and orders on the Pension Plan's behalf.
   J.   Enter into contracts on the Pension Plan's behalf.
   K.   Exercise all other powers given to the Nonuniformed Pension Board as
may be delegated to it by the Board of Commissioners.
§ A262-28. Duties of the Nonuniformed Pension Board.
The Nonuniformed Pension Board shall administer the Pension Plan and adopt such
rules and regulations as are necessary or advisable to implement and administer
the Pension Plan and to transact its business.
§ A262-29. Finality of Nonuniformed Pension Board decisions.
The Nonuniformed Pension Board shall exercise its powers hereunder in a uniform
and nondiscriminatory manner Any and all disputes with respect to the Pension
Plan which may arise shall be referred to the Nonuniformed Pension Board, and
its decision shall be final, conclusive and binding. Furthermore, if any
question arises as to the meaning, interpretation or application of any
provision hereof, the decision of the Nonuniformed Pension Board with respect
thereto shall be final and conclusive.
ARTICLE XI
Miscellaneous
§ A262-30. Payments to be free from all claims.
No benefits payable under the Pension Plan shall be subject to the debts or
liabilities of a Member or a Survivor, and any attempt to alienate, sell,
transfer, assign, pledge or otherwise encumber any such benefit, whether
presently or thereafter payable, shall be void, and no benefit under the
Pension Plan shall be subject in any manner to attachment, garnishment or
encumbrance of any kind.
§ A262-31. Incompetency; minors.
Every person receiving or claiming benefits under the Pension Plan shall be
conclusively presumed to be mentally competent and of age until the date on
which the Nonuniformed Pension Board receives a written notice, in a form and
manner acceptable to the Nonuniformed Pension Board, that such person is
incompetent or a minor, for whom a guardian or other person legally vested with
the care of the person or estate has been appointed. However, if the
Nonuniformed Pension Board finds that any person to whom a benefit is payable
under the Pension Plan is unable to care for his or her affairs because of
incompetency, or is a minor, any payment due (unless a prior claim therefor
shall have been made by a duly appointed legal representative) may be paid to
the spouse, a child, a parent or other person who is eligible to receive
payment from the Pension Plan for the account of such person. To the extent
permitted by law, any such payment so made shall be a complete discharge of any
liability therefor under the Pension Plan.
§ A262-32. Missing persons.
If the Nonuniformed Pension Board is unable to make payment because the
identity or whereabouts of a Member or his Survivor(s) is unknown, the Member's
Accrued Pension shall be forfeited and all further benefits with respect to
such person shall be discontinued, and all liability for the payment thereof
shall terminate. In the event of the subsequent reappearance of the Member or
his Survivor prior to termination of the Pension Plan, the benefits which were
due and payable and which such person missed shall be paid in a single sum, and
any future benefits due such person shall be reinstated in full. The amount
payable to such person shall be equal to the benefit forfeited, without
interest on such amount for the period commencing on the date such benefit was
forfeited and ending on the date of the claim.
§ A262-33. Amendment and termination.
The Pension Plan and Pension Fund established herein may be discontinued,
modified, altered, terminated or repealed according to law, through an
appropriate ordinance or resolutions adopted by the Board of Commissioners;
provided, however, that any such amendment or action shall not reduce the
vested rights of any Member in his benefits under the Pension Plan. In the
event that the Board of Commissioners terminates the Pension Plan or otherwise
causes the discontinuance of contributions to the Pension Plan, all Members
(including both actively employed Members and terminated Members entitled to,
or receiving, benefits under the Pension Plan), to the extent not vested, shall
become fully vested in their Accrued Pensions upon the occurrence of any such
event.
§ A262-34. Employment rights.
Nothing contained in the Pension Plan or any modification of the Pension Plan
shall be construed as a guaranty of employment or shall enlarge, diminish or
otherwise affect a Nonuniformed Employee's right, or lack thereof, with respect
to his or her employment with the Township.
§ A262-35. Severability.
In the event that any provision of the Pension Plan shall be held illegal or
invalid for any reason, such illegality or invalidity shall not affect the
remaining parts of this Pension Plan, and it shall be construed and enforced as
if such illegal or invalid provision had never been included.
§ A262-36. Applicable law.
Except to the extent superseded or preempted by federal law, the Pension Plan
and all rights hereunder shall be governed, construed and administered in
accordance with the laws of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
§ A262-37. Gender and number. 5
As used in the Pension Plan, the masculine shall include the feminine, and the
feminine shall include the masculine; and the use of the singular shall include
the use of the plural, and the use of the plural shall include the use of the
singular.
5 Editor's Note: See also Art. II, Definitions.
Chapter A263
SHADE TREE COMMISSION RULES AND REGULATIONS
§
A263-1.   Shade Tree Commission operating procedures.
§
A263-2.   Tree trimming and removal operations.
§
A263-3.   Enforcement.
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Shade Tree Commission 8-2-2001. These regulations were
approved by the Board of Commissioners 4-9-2002. Amendments noted where
applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
 
Shade trees — See
Ch. 195.
§ A263-1. Shade Tree Commission operating procedures.
   A.   Organization; quorum.
      (1)   The Shade Tree Commission (STC) shall organize at its first
regularly scheduled meeting in each calendar year by the election of one of its
members to serve as Chairperson, one as Vice Chairperson and one as Secretary.
The Vice Chairperson and the Secretary may be the same person.
      (2)   Three members of the STC shall constitute a quorum, and no action
of the STC shall be valid unless it shall have the concurrence of at least two
members.
   B.   Duties of officers.
      (1)   The Chairperson or, in his or her absence, the Vice Chairperson
shall preside at all meetings and hearings of the STC, decide all points of
order or procedure and perform any duties required by law or these rules and
regulations.
      (2)   The Secretary shall carry on at the direction of the STC all
official correspondence of the STC, send out all notices required by law and
these rules and regulations, keep a record of each official action of the STC
and perform all other duties required by law or these rules and regulations.
Any other STC Commissioner may likewise issue correspondence on behalf of the
STC if directed by the Chairperson, the Vice Chairperson or the STC to do so.
   C.   Meetings. All meetings shall be held either at the call of the
Chairperson or at the call of two members of the STC. All meetings of the STC
shall be held in compliance with the Sunshine Act (53 Pa.C.S.A. §§ 701 through
716). The Secretary of the STC shall give the Township Manager and each member
of the STC no less than 24 hours' notice of each and every meeting of the STC.
   D.   Administrative assistance. The Board of Commissioners may approve such
administrative assistance as may be necessary for the STC to fulfill its
duties. In addition, the STC may request the assistance of such other
consultants or experts as it deems necessary.
   E.   Amendment of rules and regulations. The STC may amend, revise, void or
replace these rules and regulations for any reason by action of a majority of
the STC at any properly convened meeting of the STC. Before any changes to
these rules and regulations become effective, those changes must be reviewed by
the Township Manager, approved by the Township Board of Commissioners and
advertised twice in a newspaper in general circulation in the Township. These
rules and regulations and any amendments thereto shall be made available to the
public for distribution or inspection.
§ A263-2. Tree trimming and removal operations.
   A.   Statement of policy.
      (1)   Severe tree trimming poses a significant threat to the health of
street trees in the Township, endangers the welfare and property of those using
public rights-of-way and creates adverse aesthetic effects which denigrate the
quality of life in the community and negatively impact property values.
      (2)   Healthful trees constituting the urban forest can aid in the
conservation of vital energy resources and natural resources in the Township.
      (3)   Healthful trees are a valuable amenity to the urban environment,
creating greater human comfort by providing shade, cooling the air through
evaporation, restoring oxygen to the atmosphere, reducing glare, reducing noise
levels, providing an ecological habitat for songbirds and other animal and
plant species, providing for more effective transitions between different land
uses and breaking the monotony of urbanized development.
      (4)   While it is recognized that the public rights-of-way are shared by
the Township, the traveling public, the owners of adjacent properties, public
utility companies and others using them with permission, it is the Shade Tree
Commissiou's obligation to assure that all using the public rights-of-way do so
in a manner which respects, preserves and enhances that portion of the urban
forest made up of street trees growing within or adjacent to such rights-of-
way.
      (5)   The most effective way the Shade Tree Commission can fulfill its
obligation is to carefully regulate the activities of those using the public
rights-of-way and to assure that they do so responsibly by the promulgation and
enforcement of these regulations.
   B.   Permits.
      (1)   Any person or entity seeking to cut, trim, prune or remove all or
part of any tree in the public right-of-way shall first apply for and receive a
permit therefore from the STC. The application fee shall be $10 per tree or
$500 for a blanket permit. Applications shall be submitted on a form available
from the Secretary of the STC and from the Township Director of Public Works.
The Secretary may reject any application which is not accompanied by all of the
information requested on the form.
      (2)   No permit shall be required to remove all or part of any tree
constituting an immediate hazard to life or property or to those using or
occupying the public-right-of-way or where such removal is necessitated by
reason of damage to the tree from storm, wind, earthquake, fire or accident.
The STC may waive the requirement for a permit in cases of hardship or where
the public interest requires.
      (3)   Permits may be granted outright or granted subject to conditions
consistent with the provisions of the Township Code and these regulations.
Unless specifically set forth on the permit, no permit shall be valid for a
period greater than 90 days after the date of its issuance. No permit shall be
granted unless the following minimum conditions are met (in all cases where the
STC is referenced, that shall be taken to mean the STC, or its authorized
representative):
         (a)   The STC has determined that there is a need for the proposed
work on the tree; and
         (b)   The STC is satisfied that the persons who are to perform the
work are qualified to do so, although the issuance of the permit shall not be
construed as a warranty of the qualifications of such person; and
         (c)   The STC has determined that any potential detriment to the
Township tree population entailed by the proposed work is justified in the
individual case. In making this determination, the STC shall consider factors
such as the probability that the proposed work will destroy or seriously injure
the tree, the tree's health, the desirability of that species as a street tree,
whether the tree's condition and size threaten serious damage to life or
property, the condition and number of other street trees in the vicinity and
whether there are other less onerous means of accomplishing the applicant's
goals, and other criteria derived from the application of the policy statement
set forth hereinabove to the individual application.
      (4)   The STC may condition any permit granted for the removal of a shade
tree on the permitee replacing the tree with one of a size and specie approved
by the STC. The cost of removal and the cost of replacemeut, if required, shall
be borne by the permitee.
      (5)   No work pursuant to a permit may be performed where the permitee is
not the owner of the property adjacent to the public right-of-way where the
work is to performed unless a sign has been posted in a prominent location
adjacent to the work site and visible from the public right-of-way for a period
of not less than five days beforehand. Where work is to be performed on or
adjacent to several properties in the same block, only one sign per block must
be posted. The sign must state that tree trimming work is to be performed, the
approximate date when it will be performed, the name of the entity performing
it or on whose behalf it is being performed and a telephone number where
interested parties may call a representative of the permitee to discuss the
work. In lieu of such a sign, the permitee may provide the owners of property
abutting the work with actual written notice, containing this same information,
no less than five days beforehand A copy of the notice, when posted or written,
shall be forwarded to the STC and the Township Manager.
      (6)   Public utility companies subject to the jurisdiction of the
Pennsylvania Public Utility Commission (PUC) are subject to this permitting
requirement. Utilities may apply for a blanket permit to prune around utility
lines, the fee for which shall be $500. Public utilities may perform such
pruning as is necessary to comply with the safety regulations of the PUC and to
maintain a safe operation of their facilities, provided they shall comply with
the provisions of these regulations, including the notification provisions and
the specific pruning standards set forth herein. The Shade Tree Commission will
modify such specific pruning standards, upon application, where the public
utility company demonstrates to its satisfaction that such pruning standards
will not permit it to comply with the PUC's safety regulations for a period of
three years of normal tree growth following completion of such pruning.
   C.   Trimming standards. The primary aim of trimming is to preserve the
health, beauty and longevity of trees Trimming for such purpose will also make
trees safer, more functional and valuable. Practices such as stub cuts, random
branch removal and topping (stubbing back the entire crown) defeat the primary
aim, create hazards and drastically reduce the monetary value of trees.
Therefore, such practices shall not be employed. The following standards
identify trimming methods which will give maximum benefits to both trees and
people and must be employed when trimming and pruning within the public right-
of-way:
      (1)   Types of cuts.
         (a)   Removal of laterals.
            [1]   Shoulder cuts. The final cut in removing a lateral branch
should be immediately beyond the branch bark ridges, preserving the branch
collar. Do not make stub cuts (an inch or more beyond the branch collar). Do
not make flush cuts (through the branch collar).
            [2]   Triple cuts. For any branch too large to be held while being
cut, remove by means of the following cuts:
               [a]   Undercut the branch four inches to 10 inches beyond the
base.
               [b]   Cut off the branch beyond the undercut.
               [c]   Remove the remaining stub via a shoulder cut as described
above.
         (b)   Removal of terminals (tip thinning and drop crotching).
            [1]   Thinning "Lace out" the terminal portions of branches by
cutting the terminals back to the laterals. (The basal diameter of the
remaining lateral should be V3 the diameter of the terminal being removed.)
Remove numerous small terminals and laterals rather than taking out a few large
ones.
            [2]   Size reduction. To take out portions of the crown for
reducing height, remove the terminals back to the laterals. Each lateral should
be suitably situated to serve as the new terminal, thus establishing the crown
at a lower level. The basal diameter of a lateral should be at least 1/3 the
basal diameter of the terminal being removed. (Laterals smaller than this
cannot function effectively as new terminals, and the effect is then similar to
a stub cut.)
      (2)   Pruning functions. Not all of the following procedures will apply
to any one tree, and two or more may be performed more or less simultaneously.
In most cases, however, trimming done in the following general sequence will be
more efficient and will help avoid unnecessary trimming.
         (a)   As a rule, not more than 1/4 of the total foliage mass should be
removed at one trimming. Exceptions are:
            [1]   Extreme thinning of heavy crowns of brittle trees, and
            [2]   Severe thinning of crowns to prevent blow-down when root
pruning is done.
         (b)   Remove branches as needed and redirect new growth to clear
utility lines, pedestrian and vehicular traffic areas, buildings, streetlights,
walls and other objects, as well as trees and shrubs. Do not make stub cuts. Do
not cut terminals back to very small laterals. Retain a screen effect as much
as possible.
         (c)   Remove dead, broken, diseased or markedly unthrifty brauches.
         (d)   Remove crossing branches and those which will become crossing
branches (such as suckers, water sprouts and branches growing vigorously into
the interior of the crown).
         (e)   Remove sharp-angled branches. Remove most branches arising at
angles of less than 30°, with the exception of species which fuse at branch
bases. If a narrow- angled branch needs to be retained for the sake of form, it
should be lightened and restricted in growth to reduce the danger of wind
breakage.
         (f)   Remove parallel branches. If two branches within a foot or so of
each other run parallel for several feet along their main stems, the less
desirable one should be taken out.
         (g)   Trim for balance and form. To maintain the natural shape, if a
tree grows in an unbalanced manner which is atypical and unattractive, or which
poses a potential hazard, remove such branches as may need to be eliminated to
restore more typical form or to minimize the perceived hazard.
         (h)   Trim to reduce wind resistance. If a tree is shallow rooted or
has a high or heavily foliaged crown, such that it is susceptible to blow-down
or limb breakage in high winds, trim more frequently. It does not call for
topping; beheading tall or dense trees ruins their form and vitality and
intensifies wind hazards in subsequent years. This type of thinning should be
done by removing a large number of small branches rather than a few large
branches. The end effect should maintain most of the original form, but with a
lacy openness.
         (i)   Exceptions. The STC may approve trimming trees in a manner not
typical of the natural form of the tree specie. Such approval shall be based
upon a finding that the resulting shape is necessary for the public health and
safety or the health and safety of the tree.
      (3)   Severe tree trimming is prohibited. "Severely trimmed" shall mean
the cutting of the branches and/or trunk of a tree in a manner which will
substantially reduce the overall size of the tree area so as to destroy the
existing symmetrical appearance or natural shape of the tree in a manner which
results in the removal of main lateral branches leaving the trunk of the tree
in a stub appearance.
      (4)   Other prohibited activities. Those activities set forth in the
Upper Dublin Township Code, §
195-10, are considered prohibited activities, and, in addition, the following:
         (a)   Damaging or cutting the roots of a shade tree;
         (b)   Anchoring heavy equipment to a shade tree;
         (c)   Dropping or lowering any object or tree section through the
canopy of a shade tree, except such as are securely fastened to ropes to
control damage.
      (5)   Utility line clearance standards. The STC recognizes that public
utilities provide a service to the public, that such service should not be
subject to interruption, and that the trimming of street trees is necessary to
forestall such interruption. The STC also recognizes that public utilities can
trim street trees and accomplish the utility's goals while adhering to the
standards set forth in these regulations. It is expected that public utilities
will maintain a schedule of line clearance that will minimize interruptions
while at the same time minimizing the clearance distances required from tree
branches. It is the STC's view that repeating line clearance activities no less
frequently than every three years is a reasonable expectation, and that the
clearances set forth on the following chart represent an appropriate
accommodation to the needs of public utilities if such a schedule is adhered
to. Pruning to accomplish greater line clearances than are set forth below will
be considered a violation of these regulations (Note: all measurements are in
feet):
 
Rate of Tree All Public Utilities 13.2 KV Electric Line 34 KV Electric Line
Growth       Over Side Under      Over Side Under       Over Side Under
Fast         6    6    6          8    8    8           10   8    8
Medium       6    4    4          8    6    6           10   6    6
Slow         6    4    4          8    4    4           10   4    4
Compatible   4    2    2          4    3    3           6    3    3
 
§ A263-3. Enforcement.
   A.   The STC will consider a violation of the trimming and removal standards
set forth in these regulations to constitute a public nuisance. Upon finding
that any person or entity has caused such a violation, the STC shall give
notice to the violator to immediately cease and desist from further violations.
If the nature of the violation is that a tree has been severely trimmed, the
permit or, in the case of a public utility, the privilege to trim in the public
right-of-way shall immediately be suspended until such time as the violator
removes the damaged tree and replaces it with a suitable species of comparable
maturity, or as nearly so as reasonably possible. The STC, in its sole
discretion, and in lieu of the violator replacing the damaged tree, can accept
from the violator the payment of a sum of money which the STC determines to be
required to accomplish the same purpose, plus an additional payment of 10% for
administration expenses.
   B.   The STC reserves the right to seek such further legal and equitable
remedies as it deems appropriate to remedy the violation and/or to prevent
further violations.
   C.   Any person or entity objecting to an enforcement decision or action of
the STC, including the STC's determination of the cost of replacement of any
tree, may, within 30 days of receipt of notice from the STC, appeal to the
Board of Commissioners which shall hold a hearing thereon within 30 days and
promptly render a decision.
Chapter A264
HISTORIC RESOURCE INVENTORY
§
A264-1.   Historic Resource Inventory.
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Board of Commissioners of the Township of Upper Dublin
11-14- 2006 by Ord. No. 1175. Amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
 
Planning Agency — See        Historic preservation — See
Ch. 39.                        Ch. 127.
Building construction; Uniform Subdivision and land development — See
Construction                   Ch. 212.
Code — See                   Zoning — See
Ch. 73.                        Ch. 255
 
§ A264-1. Historic Resource Inventory. 
[Amended 3-11-2008 by Ord. No. 1196, §§ 1-3; 5-12-2009 by Ord. No. 09-1212, §§
1, 2; 2-11-2014 by Ord. No. 14-1283, § 1]
The buildings, structures and sites identified and/or located on the properties
set forth below, as more fully described in the Township’s Historic Resource
Database and any Pennsylvania Historic Resource Form associated with such
properties, shall comprise the Historic Resource Inventory of Upper Dublin
Township:
House # Street Post Office Class
House #                      Street                       Post Office     Class
1404 E.                      Butler Pike                  Ambler          C1
190-200                      Camp Hill Road               Fort Washington C1
1704                         Dreshertown Road             Fort Washington C1
528                          Fort Washington Avenue       Ambler          C1
709 E.                       Pennsylvania Avenue          Fort Washington C1
1165                         Pinetown Road                Fort Washington C1
875                          Welsh Road                   Maple Glen      C1
1425                         Welsh Road                   Maple Glen      C1
7                            Aiman Circle                 Dresher         C2
906                          Alma Avenue                  Ambler          C2
1                            Ambler Road                  Ambler          C2
3                            Ambler Road                  Ambler          C2
5                            Ambler Road                  Ambler          C2
7                            Ambler Road                  Ambler          C2
9                            Ambler Road                  Ambler          C2
11                           Ambler Road                  Ambler          C2
13                           Ambler Road                  Ambler          C2
15                           Ambler Road                  Ambler          C2
17                           Ambler Road                  Ambler          C2
19                           Ambler Road                  Ambler          C2
21                           Ambler Road                  Ambler          C2
23                           Ambler Road                  Ambler          C2
25                           Ambler Road                  Ambler          C2
27                           Ambler Road                  Ambler          C2
29                           Ambler Road                  Ambler          C2
31                           Ambler Road                  Ambler          C2
33                           Ambler Road                  Ambler          C2
35                           Ambler Road                  Ambler          C2
210                          Ambler Road                  Ambler          C2
385 and garage               Ambler Road                  Ambler          C2
425                          Ambler Road                  Ambler          C2
465 and barn                 Ambler Road                  Fort Washington C2
485                          Ambler Road                  Fort Washington C2
489                          Ambler Road                  Fort Washington C2
118 [Added 6-9-2015 by Ord.  Apel Avenue                  Oreland         C2
No. 15-1304]
120 [Added 6-9-2015 by Ord.  Apel Avenue                  Oreland         C2
No. 15-1304] 
121                          Apel Avenue                  Oreland         C2
605                          Ardross Avenue               Ambler          C2
607                          Ardross Avenue               Ambler          C2
609                          Ardross Avenue               Ambler          C2
502                          Argyle Avenue                Ambler          C2
504                          Argyle Avenue                Ambler          C2
508                          Argyle Avenue                Ambler          C2
510                          Argyle Avenue                Ambler          C2
512                          Argyle Avenue                Ambler          C2
514                          Argyle Avenue                Ambler          C2
516                          Argyle Avenue                Ambler          C2
518                          Argyle Avenue                Ambler          C2
520                          Argyle Avenue                Ambler          C2
522                          Argyle Avenue                Ambler          C2
524                          Argyle Avenue                Ambler          C2
526                          Argyle Avenue                Ambler          C2
528                          Argyle Avenue                Ambler          C2
530                          Argyle Avenue                Ambler          C2
532                          Argyle Avenue                Ambler          C2
534                          Argyle Avenue                Ambler          C2
536                          Argyle Avenue                Ambler          C2
538                          Argyle Avenue                Ambler          C2
540                          Argyle Avenue                Ambler          C2
542                          Argyle Avenue                Ambler          C2
544                          Argyle Avenue                Ambler          C2
546                          Argyle Avenue                Ambler          C2
548                          Argyle Avenue                Ambler          C2
550                          Argyle Avenue                Ambler          C2
552                          Argyle Avenue                Ambler          C2
554                          Argyle Avenue                Ambler          C2
556                          Argyle Avenue                Ambler          C2
558                          Argyle Avenue                Ambler          C2
560                          Argyle Avenue                Ambler          C2
113                          Bala Avenue                  Oreland         C2
116                          Bala Avenue                  Oreland         C2
121                          Bala Avenue                  Oreland         C2
125                          Bala Avenue                  Oreland         C2
128                          Bala Avenue                  Oreland         C2
129                          Bala Avenue                  Oreland         C2
200 and garage               Bala Avenue                  Oreland         C2
204                          Bala Avenue                  Oreland         C2
212                          Bala Avenue                  Oreland         C2
216                          Bala Avenue                  Oreland         C2
221                          Bala Avenue                  Oreland         C2
222                          Bala Avenue                  Oreland         C2
223                          Bala Avenue                  Oreland         C2
224                          Bala Avenue                  Oreland         C2
228                          Bala Avenue                  Oreland         C2
231                          Bala Avenue                  Oreland         C2
400                          Bannockburn Avenue           Ambler          C2
402                          Bannockburn Avenue           Ambler          C2
429                          Bannockburn Avenue           Ambler          C2
431                          Bannockburn Avenue           Ambler          C2
433                          Bannockburn Avenue           Ambler          C2
435                          Bannockburn Avenue           Ambler          C2
439                          Bannockburn Avenue           Ambler          C2
443                          Bannockburn Avenue           Ambler          C2
1501 (5 structures)          Beecham Drive (North)        Ambler          C2
619                          Bellaire Avenue              Ambler          C2
621                          Bellaire Avenue              Ambler          C2
639                          Bellaire Avenue              Ambler          C2
320                          Bellaire Avenue              Fort Washington C2
325                          Bellaire Avenue              Fort Washington C2
405                          Bellaire Avenue              Fort Washington C2
408                          Bellaire Avenue              Fort Washington C2
413                          Bellaire Avenue              Fort Washington C2
415                          Bellaire Avenue              Fort Washington C2
501                          Bellaire Avenue              Fort Washington C2
503                          Bellaire Avenue              Fort Washington C2
504                          Bellaire Avenue              Fort Washington C2
506                          Bellaire Avenue              Fort Washington C2
509                          Bellaire Avenue              Fort Washington C2
511                          Bellaire Avenue              Fort Washington C2
512                          Bellaire Avenue              Fort Washington C2
513                          Bellaire Avenue              Fort Washington C2
1402                         Bernard Avenue               Willow Grove    C2
1409                         Bernard Avenue               Willow Grove    C2
516                          Bethlehem Pike               Ambler          C2
602, original part only      Bethlehem Pike               Ambler          C2
615                          Bethlehem Pike               Ambler          C2
617                          Bethlehem Pike               Ambler          C2
619                          Bethlehem Pike               Ambler          C2
620 S.                       Bethlehem Pike               Ambler          C2
623                          Bethlehem Pike               Ambler          C2
625 S.                       Bethlehem Pike               Ambler          C2
701                          Bethlehem Pike               Ambler          C2
708                          Bethlehem Pike               Ambler          C2
901                          Bethlehem Pike               Ambler          C2
1111                         Bethlehem Pike               Ambler          C2
1217 S.                      Bethlehem Pike               Ambler          C2
1219 S.                      Bethlehem Pike               Ambler          C2
1407                         Bethlehem Pike               Ambler          C2
1411                         Bethlehem Pike               Ambler          C2
1417                         Bethlehem Pike               Ambler          C2
1423                         Bethlehem Pike               Ambler          C2
1425                         Bethlehem Pike               Ambler          C2
1427                         Bethlehem Pike               Ambler          C2
1429                         Bethlehem Pike               Ambler          C2
1433                         Bethlehem Pike               Ambler          C2
1435                         Bethlehem Pike               Ambler          C2
1509 N.                      Bethlehem Pike               Ambler          C2
203                          Bethlehem Pike               Fort Washington C2
206                          Bethlehem Pike               Fort Washington C2
212                          Bethlehem Pike               Fort Washington C2
214                          Bethlehem Pike               Fort Washington C2
215                          Bethlehem Pike               Fort Washington C2
222                          Bethlehem Pike               Fort Washington C2
225                          Bethlehem Pike               Fort Washington C2
228                          Bethlehem Pike               Fort Washington C2
229                          Bethlehem Pike               Fort Washington C2
233                          Bethlehem Pike               Fort Washington C2
301                          Bethlehem Pike               Fort Washington C2
302 and barn/garage          Bethlehem Pike               Fort Washington C2
303                          Bethlehem Pike               Fort Washington C2
305                          Bethlehem Pike               Fort Washington C2
306 and barn/garage          Bethlehem Pike               Fort Washington C2
318                          Bethlehem Pike               Fort Washington C2
403                          Bethlehem Pike               Fort Washington C2
405                          Bethlehem Pike               Fort Washington C2
407                          Bethlehem Pike               Fort Washington C2
409                          Bethlehem Pike               Fort Washington C2
500                          Bethlehem Pike               Fort Washington C2
501                          Bethlehem Pike               Fort Washington C2
503                          Bethlehem Pike               Fort Washington C2
505                          Bethlehem Pike               Fort Washington C2
508                          Bethlehem Pike               Fort Washington C2
Mile marker                  Bethlehem Pike at NE corner  Fort Washington C2
                             of Fairview Avenue
Mile marker                  Bethlehem Pike at terminus   Fort Washington C2
                             of Stuart Lane
230                          Birch Lane                   Fort Washington C2
1205                         Boden Place                  Fort Washington C2
1212 and barn                Boden Place                  Fort Washington C2
1451, barn, springhouse      Broad Street                 Dresher         C2
1301                         Butler Avenue                Ambler          C2
400 W.                       Butler Pike                  Ambler          C2
403 W.                       Butler Pike                  Ambler          C2
407 W.                       Butler Pike                  Ambler          C2
907 E.                       Butler Pike                  Ambler          C2
909 E.                       Butler Pike                  Ambler          C2
915 E.                       Butler Pike                  Ambler          C2
920 E.                       Butler Pike                  Ambler          C2
922 E.                       Butler Pike                  Ambler          C2
930 E.                       Butler Pike                  Ambler          C2
934 E.                       Butler Pike                  Ambler          C2
1000 E.                      Butler Pike                  Ambler          C2
1001 E.                      Butler Pike                  Ambler          C2
1004 E.                      Butler Pike                  Ambler          C2
1120 E.                      Butler Pike                  Ambler          C2
1229 E.                      Butler Pike                  Ambler          C2
1245 E.                      Butler Pike                  Ambler          C2
1306 E.                      Butler Pike                  Ambler          C2
1404 E.                      Butler Pike                  Ambler          C2
1410 E.                      Butler Pike                  Ambler          C2
1411 E.                      Butler Pike                  Ambler          C2
1415 E.                      Butler Pike                  Ambler          C2
1419 E.                      Butler Pike                  Ambler          C2
1617 E.                      Butler Pike                  Ambler          C2
1624 E.                      Butler Pike                  Ambler          C2
1626 E.                      Butler Pike                  Ambler          C2
1630 E.                      Butler Pike                  Ambler          C2
1634 E.                      Butler Pike                  Ambler          C2
1636 E.                      Butler Pike                  Ambler          C2
1638 E.                      Butler Pike                  Ambler          C2
1644 E.                      Butler Pike                  Ambler          C2
1646 E.                      Butler Pike                  Ambler          C2
1648 E.                      Butler Pike                  Ambler          C2
1650 E.                      Butler Pike                  Ambler          C2
1654 E.                      Butler Pike                  Ambler          C2
1704 E.                      Butler Pike                  Ambler          C2
1718 E.                      Butler Pike                  Ambler          C2
1800 E.                      Butler Pike                  Ambler          C2
1815 E.                      Butler Pike                  Ambler          C2
Rose Hill Cemetery           Butler Pike                  Ambler          C2
206                          Camp Hill Road               Fort Washington C2
1080                         Camp Hill Road               Fort Washington C2
1110                         Camp Hill Road               Fort Washington C2
1120                         Camp Hill Road               Fort Washington C2
1220                         Camp Hill Road               Fort Washington C2
1300                         Camp Hill Road               Fort Washington C2
Indian burial ground         Camp Hill Road               Fort Washington C2
1230                         Cedar Road                   Ambler          C2
1326                         Cedar Road                   Ambler          C2
116                          Chelsea Avenue               North Hills     C2
336                          Chelsea Avenue               North Hills     C2
338                          Chelsea Avenue               North Hills     C2
401                          Church Street                Ambler          C2
405                          Church Street                Ambler          C2
407                          Church Street                Ambler          C2
409                          Church Street                Ambler          C2
411                          Church Street                Ambler          C2
413                          Church Street                Ambler          C2
415                          Church Street                Ambler          C2
417                          Church Street                Ambler          C2
419                          Church Street                Ambler          C2
421                          Church Street                Ambler          C2
423                          Church Street                Ambler          C2
425                          Church Street                Ambler          C2
427                          Church Street                Ambler          C2
429                          Church Street                Ambler          C2
431                          Church Street                Ambler          C2
433                          Church Street                Ambler          C2
435                          Church Street                Ambler          C2
437                          Church Street                Ambler          C2
439                          Church Street                Ambler          C2
441                          Church Street                Ambler          C2
443                          Church Street                Ambler          C2
Garage                       Church Street & Renfrew Ave  Ambler          C2
                             (alleyway)
285                          Commerce Drive               Fort Washington C2
1008                         Denston Drive                Ambler          C2
1408                         Dillon Road                  Maple Glen      C2
1500                         Dillon Road                  Maple Glen      C2
1601                         Dillon Road                  Maple Glen      C2
1677                         Dillon Road                  Maple Glen      C2
1851                         Dillon Road                  Maple Glen      C2
409                          Dogwood Drive                Maple Glen      C2
15                           Dorsey Place                 Fort Washington C2
1                            Douglass Street              Ambler          C2
3                            Douglass Street              Ambler          C2
5                            Douglass Street              Ambler          C2
7                            Douglass Street              Ambler          C2
9                            Douglass Street              Ambler          C2
11                           Douglass Street              Ambler          C2
13                           Douglass Street              Ambler          C2
15                           Douglass Street              Ambler          C2
17                           Douglass Street              Ambler          C2
19                           Douglass Street              Ambler          C2
21                           Douglass Street              Ambler          C2
23                           Douglass Street              Ambler          C2
25                           Douglass Street              Ambler          C2
27                           Douglass Street              Ambler          C2
29                           Douglass Street              Ambler          C2
31                           Douglass Street              Ambler          C2
33                           Douglass Street              Ambler          C2
Dresher Cemetery             Dreshertown Rd               Fort Washington C2
440 [Added 1-8-2013 by Ord.  Dreshertown Road             Fort Washington C2
No. 13-1266]
495- three buildings         Dreshertown Road             Fort Washington C2
515 [Added 2-11-2014 by Ord. Dreshertown Road             Fort Washington C2
No. 14-1283]
1434                         Dreshertown Road             Fort Washington C2
1570                         Dreshertown Road             Fort Washington C2
1605                         Dreshertown Road             Fort Washington C2
1609                         Dreshertown Road             Fort Washington C2
1410                         Dundee Drive                 Dresher         C2
400                          Ellerslie Avenue             Ambler          C2
401 [Added 2-11-2014 by Ord. Ellerslie Avenue             Ambler          C2
No. 14-1283]
404                          Ellerslie Avenue             Ambler          C2
405                          Ellerslie Avenue             Ambler          C2
408                          Ellerslie Avenue             Ambler          C2
411                          Ellerslie Avenue             Ambler          C2
413                          Ellerslie Avenue             Ambler          C2
414                          Ellerslie Avenue             Ambler          C2
415                          Ellerslie Avenue             Ambler          C2
418                          Ellerslie Avenue             Ambler          C2
420                          Ellerslie Avenue             Ambler          C2
421                          Ellerslie Avenue             Ambler          C2
423                          Ellerslie Avenue             Ambler          C2
424                          Ellerslie Avenue             Ambler          C2
204                          Elliger Avenue               Fort Washington C2
209 [Added 1-8-2013 by Ord.  Elliger Avenue               Fort Washington C2
No. 13-1266]
214                          Elliger Avenue               Fort Washington C2
217 [Added 6-9-2015 by Ord.  Elliger Avenue               Fort Washington C2
No. 15-1304] 
218                          Elliger Avenue               Fort Washington C2
310 [Added 1-8-2013 by Ord.  Elliger Avenue               Fort Washington C2
No. 13-1266]
31                           Elliott Avenue               Willow Grove    C2
410                          Fairview Avenue              Ambler          C2
418                          Fairview Avenue              Ambler          C2
422                          Fairview Avenue              Ambler          C2
933                          Farm Lane                    Ambler          C2
1005                         Farm Lane                    Ambler          C2
1030                         Farm Lane                    Ambler          C2
901                          Fitzwatertown Road           Glenside        C2
905                          Fitzwatertown Road           Glenside        C2
912                          Fitzwatertown Road           Glenside        C2
1001                         Fitzwatertown Road           Glenside        C2
1183                         Fitzwatertown Road           Roslyn          C2
1358                         Fitzwatertown Road           Roslyn          C2
1506                         Fort Washington Avenue       Ambler          C2
1523                         Fort Washington Avenue       Ambler          C2
1580- all buildings          Fort Washington Avenue       Ambler          C2
113                          Fort Washington Avenue       Fort Washington C2
117                          Fort Washington Avenue       Fort Washington C2
123                          Fort Washington Avenue       Fort Washington C2
125                          Fort Washington Avenue       Fort Washington C2
209                          Fort Washington Avenue       Fort Washington C2
211                          Fort Washington Avenue       Fort Washington C2
213                          Fort Washington Avenue       Fort Washington C2
217                          Fort Washington Avenue       Fort Washington C2
223                          Fort Washington Avenue       Fort Washington C2
229                          Fort Washington Avenue       Fort Washington C2
233                          Fort Washington Avenue       Fort Washington C2
235                          Fort Washington Avenue       Fort Washington C2
301                          Fort Washington Avenue       Fort Washington C2
303                          Fort Washington Avenue       Fort Washington C2
305                          Fort Washington Avenue       Fort Washington C2
307                          Fort Washington Avenue       Fort Washington C2
309                          Fort Washington Avenue       Fort Washington C2
315                          Fort Washington Avenue       Fort Washington C2
317                          Fort Washington Avenue       Fort Washington C2
319 [Added 1-8-2013 by Ord.  Fort Washington Avenue       Fort Washington C2
No. 13-1266]
321                          Fort Washington Avenue       Fort Washington C2
323                          Fort Washington Avenue       Fort Washington C2
403                          Fort Washington Avenue       Fort Washington C2
409                          Fort Washington Avenue       Fort Washington C2
411                          Fort Washington Avenue       Fort Washington C2
419                          Fort Washington Avenue       Fort Washington C2
421                          Fort Washington Avenue       Fort Washington C2
423                          Fort Washington Avenue       Fort Washington C2
528                          Fort Washington Avenue       Fort Washington C2
1085 and barn                Fort Washington Avenue       Fort Washington C2
1185                         Fort Washington Avenue       Fort Washington C2
1205                         Fort Washington Avenue       Fort Washington C2
1221                         Fort Washington Avenue       Fort Washington C2
1245                         Fort Washington Avenue       Fort Washington C2
1252                         Fort Washington Avenue       Fort Washington C2
1255 and barn                Fort Washington Avenue       Fort Washington C2
1305 and barn                Fort Washington Avenue       Fort Washington C2
1311                         Fort Washington Avenue       Fort Washington C2
1315                         Fort Washington Avenue       Fort Washington C2
1323                         Fort Washington Avenue       Fort Washington C2
1412                         Garrison Drive               Ambler          C2
1416                         Garrison Drive               Ambler          C2
1417                         Gentlemen’s Way            Dresher         C2
118                          Girard Avenue                Glenside        C2
202                          Girard Avenue                Glenside        C2
212                          Girard Avenue                Glenside        C2
221                          Girard Avenue                Glenside        C2
500                          Glencoe Avenue               Fort Washington C2
501                          Glencoe Avenue               Fort Washington C2
504                          Glencoe Avenue               Fort Washington C2
511                          Glencoe Avenue               Fort Washington C2
512                          Glencoe Avenue               Fort Washington C2
8                            Haddon Place                 Fort Washington C2
1101                         Hagues Mill Road             Ambler          C2
1108                         Hagues Mill Road             Ambler          C2
1158                         Hagues Mill Road             Ambler          C2
507                          Hartranft Avenue             Fort Washington C2
509                          Hartranft Avenue             Fort Washington C2
512                          Hartranft Avenue             Fort Washington C2
607                          Hartranft Avenue             Fort Washington C2
609                          Hartranft Avenue             Fort Washington C2
611                          Hartranft Avenue             Fort Washington C2
400                          Highland Avenue              Ambler          C2
401                          Highland Avenue              Ambler          C2
404                          Highland Avenue              Ambler          C2
408                          Highland Avenue              Ambler          C2
412                          Highland Avenue              Ambler          C2
416                          Highland Avenue              Ambler          C2
420                          Highland Avenue              Ambler          C2
424                          Highland Avenue              Ambler          C2
428                          Highland Avenue              Ambler          C2
501                          Highland Avenue              Ambler          C2
547                          Highland Avenue              Ambler          C2
1100                         Highland Avenue              Fort Washington C2
1200                         Highland Avenue              Fort Washington C2
1412                         Highland Avenue              Fort Washington C2
1424                         Highland Avenue              Fort Washington C2
1428                         Highland Avenue              Fort Washington C2
1601                         Holly Hill Lane              Maple Glen      C2
570                          Homestead Lane               Ambler          C2
907                          Homestead Lane               Ambler          C2
500                          Inverness Avenue             Ambler          C2
149                          Jackson Avenue               North Hills     C2
151                          Jackson Avenue               North Hills     C2
155                          Jackson Avenue               North Hills     C2
157                          Jackson Avenue               North Hills     C2
161                          Jackson Avenue               North Hills     C2
163                          Jackson Avenue               North Hills     C2
1515                         Jarrettown Road              Dresher         C2
1622                         Jarrettown Road              Dresher         C2
1649                         Jarrettown Road              Dresher         C2
1730 and barn                Jarrettown Road              Dresher         C2
1684                         Kenmare Drive                Dresher         C2
1322                         Kirks Lane                   Dresher         C2
1727                         Kirks Lane                   Dresher         C2
117                          Lafayette Avenue             Oreland         C2
125                          Lafayette Avenue             Oreland         C2
211 [Added 2-11-2014 by Ord. Lafayette Avenue             Oreland         C2
No. 14-1283]
216 [Added 2-11-2014 by Ord. Lafayette Avenue             Oreland         C2
No. 14-1283]
224 [Added 2-11-2014 by Ord. Lafayette Avenue             Oreland         C2
No. 14-1283]
229 [Added 1-8-2013 by Ord.  Lafayette Avenue             Oreland         C2
No. 13-1266]
459                          Leah Drive                   Fort Washington C2
6                            Lee Drive                    Maple Glen      C2
1225N and barn               Limekiln Pike                Dresher         C2
1444N and barn               Limekiln Pike                Dresher         C2
1322N and barn               Limekiln Pike                Jarrettown      C2
1425N                        Limekiln Pike                Jarrettown      C2
1404                         Limekiln Pike North          Dresher         C2
1417                         Limekiln Pike North          Dresher         C2
1422                         Limekiln Pike North          Dresher         C2
1453                         Limekiln Pike North          Dresher         C2
1457                         Limekiln Pike North          Dresher         C2
1460                         Limekiln Pike North          Dresher         C2
1465                         Limekiln Pike North          Dresher         C2
1506                         Limekiln Pike North          Dresher         C2
1605                         Limekiln Pike North          Dresher         C2
1635                         Limekiln Pike North          Dresher         C2
1647                         Limekiln Pike North          Dresher         C2
1651                         Limekiln Pike North          Dresher         C2
1657                         Limekiln Pike North          Dresher         C2
1708                         Limekiln Pike North          Dresher         C2
1314                         Limekiln Pike North          Jarrettown      C2
1407                         Limekiln Pike North          Jarrettown      C2
1410                         Limekiln Pike North          Jarrettown      C2
1461                         Limekiln Pike North          Jarrettown      C2
1502                         Limekiln Pike North          Jarrettown      C2
1525                         Limekiln Pike North          Jarrettown      C2
535                          Limekiln Pike North          Maple Glen      C2
600                          Limekiln Pike North          Maple Glen      C2
601                          Limekiln Pike North          Maple Glen      C2
970                          Limekiln Pike North          Maple Glen      C2
1020                         Limekiln Pike North          Maple Glen      C2
1025                         Limekiln Pike North          Maple Glen      C2
1145                         Limekiln Pike North          Maple Glen      C2
1515 [Added 6-9-2015 by Ord. Limekiln Pike South          Glenside        C2
No. 15-1304] 
1525                         Limekiln Pike South          Glenside        C2
1545                         Limekiln Pike South          Glenside        C2
1600                         Limekiln Pike South          Glenside        C2
1780                         Limekiln Pike South          Glenside        C2
1783                         Limekiln Pike South          Glenside        C2
1790                         Limekiln Pike South          Glenside        C2
Stone Arch Bridge            Limekiln Pike South (near    Glenside        C2
                             Twining Road)
127                          Linden Avenue                North Hills     C2
328                          Linden Avenue                North Hills     C2
432                          Linden Avenue                North Hills     C2
1                            Lindenwold Terrace           Ambler          C2
2 and barn                   Lindenwold Terrace           Ambler          C2
3 and barn                   Lindenwold Terrace           Ambler          C2
4 and barn                   Lindenwold Terrace           Ambler          C2
5 and barn                   Lindenwold Terrace           Ambler          C2
6 and barn                   Lindenwold Terrace           Ambler          C2
7 and barn                   Lindenwold Terrace           Ambler          C2
8 and barn                   Lindenwold Terrace           Ambler          C2
509 [Added 2-11-2014 by Ord. Loch Alsh Avenue             Fort Washington C2
No. 14-1283]
513 [Added 2-11-2014 by Ord. Loch Alsh Avenue             Fort Washington C2
No. 14-1283]
517 [Added 2-11-2014 by Ord. Loch Alsh Avenue             Fort Washington C2
No. 14-1283]
521 [Added 2-11-2014 by Ord. Loch Alsh Avenue             Fort Washington C2
No. 14-1283]
612 [Added 2-11-2014 by Ord. Loch Alsh Avenue             Fort Washington C2
No. 14-1283]
615 [Added 6-9-2015 by Ord.  Loch Alsh Avenue             Ambler          C2
No. 15-1304] 
627 [Added 6-9-2015 by Ord.  Loch Alsh Avenue             Ambler          C2
No. 15-1304] 
628 [Added 2-11-2014 by Ord. Loch Alsh Avenue             Fort Washington C2
No. 14-1283]
720                          Loch Alsh Avenue             Ambler          C2
750                          Loch Alsh Avenue             Ambler          C2
303 [Added 2-11-2014 by Ord. Locust Road                  Fort Washington C2
No. 14-1283]
125                          Logan Avenue                 North Hills     C2
158                          Logan Avenue                 North Hills     C2
200                          Logan Avenue                 North Hills     C2
204                          Madison Avenue               Fort Washington C2
207                          Madison Avenue               Fort Washington C2
208                          Madison Avenue               Fort Washington C2
209                          Madison Avenue               Fort Washington C2
210                          Madison Avenue               Fort Washington C2
211                          Madison Avenue               Fort Washington C2
212                          Madison Avenue               Fort Washington C2
216                          Madison Avenue               Fort Washington C2
220                          Madison Avenue               Fort Washington C2
223                          Madison Avenue               Fort Washington C2
224                          Madison Avenue               Fort Washington C2
226                          Madison Avenue               Fort Washington C2
228                          Madison Avenue               Fort Washington C2
231                          Madison Avenue               Fort Washington C2
306                          Madison Avenue               Fort Washington C2
308                          Madison Avenue               Fort Washington C2
316                          Madison Avenue               Fort Washington C2
400                          Madison Avenue               Fort Washington C2
404                          Madison Avenue               Fort Washington C2
406                          Madison Avenue               Fort Washington C2
414                          Madison Avenue               Fort Washington C2
517 [Added 1-8-2013 by Ord.  Madison Avenue               Fort Washington C2
No. 13-1266]
216                          Maple Avenue                 Ambler          C2
535                          Meadowbrook Avenue           Ambler          C2
546                          Meadowbrook Avenue           Ambler          C2
Temple U of Ambler                                                       
11 structures                Meetinghouse Road            Ambler          C2
442 [Added 2-11-2014 by Ord. Meetinghouse Road            Ambler          C2
No. 14-1283]
530                          Meetinghouse Road            Ambler          C2
580                          Meetinghouse Road            Ambler          C2
1000                         Meetinghouse Road            Ambler          C2
1123                         Meetinghouse Road            Ambler          C2
1200                         Meetinghouse Road            Ambler          C2
1221                         Meetinghouse Road            Ambler          C2
805 [Added 2-11-2014 by Ord. Montgomery Avenue            Fort Washington C2
No. 14-1283]
806                          Montgomery Avenue            Fort Washington C2
809                          Montgomery Avenue            Fort Washington C2
900                          Montgomery Avenue            Fort Washington C2
1002                         Montgomery Avenue            Fort Washington C2
1004                         Montgomery Avenue            Fort Washington C2
1006                         Montgomery Avenue            Fort Washington C2
1009                         Montgomery Avenue            Fort Washington C2
1107                         Montgomery Avenue            Fort Washington C2
1112                         Montgomery Avenue            Fort Washington C2
1200                         Montgomery Avenue            Fort Washington C2
1201                         Montgomery Avenue            Fort Washington C2
1205                         Montgomery Avenue            Fort Washington C2
1206                         Montgomery Avenue            Fort Washington C2
1210                         Montgomery Avenue            Fort Washington C2
10                           Morris Road                  Ambler          C2
12                           Morris Road                  Ambler          C2
33                           Morris Road                  Ambler          C2
545                          Morris Road                  Ambler          C2
1454                         Mundock Road                 Dresher         C2
1432                         Mundock Road                 Jarrettown      C2
1482                         Mundock Road                 Jarrettown      C2
1518                         Norristown Road              Ambler          C2
1527                         Norristown Road              Ambler          C2
1531                         Norristown Road              Ambler          C2
1538                         Norristown Road              Ambler          C2
1617                         Norristown Road              Ambler          C2
1705                         Norristown Road              Ambler          C2
1750                         Norristown Road              Ambler          C2
1852                         North Hills Avenue           Willow Grove    C2
400, garage, barn, tower     Orchard Lane                 Fort Washington C2
403                          Orchard Lane                 Fort Washington C2
409                          Orchard Lane                 Fort Washington C2
101 [Added 6-9-2015 by Ord.  Orlando Avenue               Oreland         C2
No. 15-1304] 
204 [Added 6-9-2015 by Ord.  Orlando Avenue               Oreland         C2
No. 15-1304] 
205 [Added 2-11-2014 by Ord. Orlando Avenue               Oreland         C2
No. 14-1283]
215                          Orlando Avenue               Oreland         C2
300                          Orlando Avenue               Oreland         C2
301                          Orlando Avenue               Oreland         C2
508 [Added 1-8-2013 by Ord.  Orlando Avenue               Oreland         C2
No. 13-1266]
510 [Added 1-8-2013 by Ord.  Orlando Avenue               Oreland         C2
No. 13-1266]
516                          Orlando Avenue               Oreland         C2
600 [Added 2-11-2014 by Ord. Orlando Avenue               Oreland         C2
No. 14-1283]
606 [Added 2-11-2014 by Ord. Orlando Avenue               Oreland         C2
No. 14-1283]
1707                         Penns Lane                   Maple Glen      C2
2001E                        Pennsylvania Avenue          Oreland         C2
200                          Pennsylvania Avenue East     Oreland         C2
408                          Pennsylvania Avenue East     Oreland         C2
900                          Pennsylvania Avenue East     Oreland         C2
435                          Pennsylvania Avenue West     Fort Washington C2
437                          Pennsylvania Avenue West     Fort Washington C2
445                          Pennsylvania Avenue West     Fort Washington C2
1380                         Pinetown Road                Fort Washington C2
1390                         Pinetown Road                Fort Washington C2
1395 and barn                Pinetown Road                Fort Washington C2
507                          Prospect Avenue              Fort Washington C2
515                          Prospect Avenue              Fort Washington C2
300                          Randolph Avenue              Ambler          C2
302                          Randolph Avenue              Ambler          C2
304                          Randolph Avenue              Ambler          C2
306                          Randolph Avenue              Ambler          C2
308                          Randolph Avenue              Ambler          C2
310                          Randolph Avenue              Ambler          C2
312                          Randolph Avenue              Ambler          C2
314                          Randolph Avenue              Ambler          C2
316                          Randolph Avenue              Ambler          C2
318                          Randolph Avenue              Ambler          C2
320                          Randolph Avenue              Ambler          C2
322                          Randolph Avenue              Ambler          C2
324                          Randolph Avenue              Ambler          C2
326                          Randolph Avenue              Ambler          C2
328                          Randolph Avenue              Ambler          C2
330                          Randolph Avenue              Ambler          C2
332                          Randolph Avenue              Ambler          C2
334                          Randolph Avenue              Ambler          C2
608                          Randolph Avenue              Fort Washington C2
612                          Randolph Avenue              Fort Washington C2
206 [Added 6-9-2015 by Ord.  Rech Avenue                  Oreland         C2
No. 15-1304]
214 [Added 2-11-2014 by Ord. Rech Avenue                  Oreland         C2
No. 14-1283]
418                          Renfrew Avenue               Ambler          C2
420                          Renfrew Avenue               Ambler          C2
422                          Renfrew Avenue               Ambler          C2
424                          Renfrew Avenue               Ambler          C2
426                          Renfrew Avenue               Ambler          C2
427                          Renfrew Avenue               Ambler          C2
428                          Renfrew Avenue               Ambler          C2
429                          Renfrew Avenue               Ambler          C2
430                          Renfrew Avenue               Ambler          C2
431                          Renfrew Avenue               Ambler          C2
432                          Renfrew Avenue               Ambler          C2
433                          Renfrew Avenue               Ambler          C2
434                          Renfrew Avenue               Ambler          C2
435                          Renfrew Avenue               Ambler          C2
436                          Renfrew Avenue               Ambler          C2
437                          Renfrew Avenue               Ambler          C2
438                          Renfrew Avenue               Ambler          C2
439                          Renfrew Avenue               Ambler          C2
440                          Renfrew Avenue               Ambler          C2
441                          Renfrew Avenue               Ambler          C2
442                          Renfrew Avenue               Ambler          C2
443                          Renfrew Avenue               Ambler          C2
444                          Renfrew Avenue               Ambler          C2
445                          Renfrew Avenue               Ambler          C2
446                          Renfrew Avenue               Ambler          C2
447                          Renfrew Avenue               Ambler          C2
448                          Renfrew Avenue               Ambler          C2
449                          Renfrew Avenue               Ambler          C2
450                          Renfrew Avenue               Ambler          C2
451                          Renfrew Avenue               Ambler          C2
452                          Renfrew Avenue               Ambler          C2
453                          Renfrew Avenue               Ambler          C2
454                          Renfrew Avenue               Ambler          C2
455                          Renfrew Avenue               Ambler          C2
456                          Renfrew Avenue               Ambler          C2
457                          Renfrew Avenue               Ambler          C2
458                          Renfrew Avenue               Ambler          C2
459                          Renfrew Avenue               Ambler          C2
460                          Renfrew Avenue               Ambler          C2
461                          Renfrew Avenue               Ambler          C2
Garages (2)                  Renfrew Avenue (in alleyway) Ambler          C2
2                            Schiavone Lane               Ambler          C2
4                            Schiavone Lane               Ambler          C2
5                            Schiavone Lane               Ambler          C2
6                            Schiavone Lane               Ambler          C2
7                            Schiavone Lane               Ambler          C2
8                            Schiavone Lane               Ambler          C2
9                            Schiavone Lane               Ambler          C2
18                           Schiavone Lane               Ambler          C2
22                           Schiavone Lane               Ambler          C2
17                           Shelly Lane                  Fort Washington C2
19                           Shelly Lane                  Fort Washington C2
704                          Spring Avenue                Fort Washington C2
707                          Spring Avenue                Fort Washington C2
708                          Spring Avenue                Fort Washington C2
1004                         Spring Avenue                Fort Washington C2
1005                         Spring Avenue                Fort Washington C2
1006                         Spring Avenue                Fort Washington C2
1007                         Spring Avenue                Fort Washington C2
104                          Stout Road                   Ambler          C2
115                          Stout Road                   Ambler          C2
119                          Stout Road                   Ambler          C2
306                          Stout Road                   Ambler          C2
103                          Summit Avenue                Fort Washington C2
105                          Summit Avenue                Fort Washington C2
107                          Summit Avenue                Fort Washington C2
109                          Summit Avenue                Fort Washington C2
116                          Summit Avenue                Fort Washington C2
121                          Summit Avenue                Fort Washington C2
122 and barn                 Summit Avenue                Fort Washington C2
123                          Summit Avenue                Fort Washington C2
124                          Summit Avenue                Fort Washington C2
200                          Summit Avenue                Fort Washington C2
203                          Summit Avenue                Fort Washington C2
204                          Summit Avenue                Fort Washington C2
205                          Summit Avenue                Fort Washington C2
207                          Summit Avenue                Fort Washington C2
208                          Summit Avenue                Fort Washington C2
209                          Summit Avenue                Fort Washington C2
210                          Summit Avenue                Fort Washington C2
213                          Summit Avenue                Fort Washington C2
217                          Summit Avenue                Fort Washington C2
223                          Summit Avenue                Fort Washington C2
224                          Summit Avenue                Fort Washington C2
225                          Summit Avenue                Fort Washington C2
228                          Summit Avenue                Fort Washington C2
229                          Summit Avenue                Fort Washington C2
231                          Summit Avenue                Fort Washington C2
232                          Summit Avenue                Fort Washington C2
233                          Summit Avenue                Fort Washington C2
235                          Summit Avenue                Fort Washington C2
301                          Summit Avenue                Fort Washington C2
302                          Summit Avenue                Fort Washington C2
303                          Summit Avenue                Fort Washington C2
305                          Summit Avenue                Fort Washington C2
307                          Summit Avenue                Fort Washington C2
308                          Summit Avenue                Fort Washington C2
309                          Summit Avenue                Fort Washington C2
311                          Summit Avenue                Fort Washington C2
312                          Summit Avenue                Fort Washington C2
313                          Summit Avenue                Fort Washington C2
314                          Summit Avenue                Fort Washington C2
316                          Summit Avenue                Fort Washington C2
318                          Summit Avenue                Fort Washington C2
319                          Summit Avenue                Fort Washington C2
400                          Summit Avenue                Fort Washington C2
403                          Summit Avenue                Fort Washington C2
404                          Summit Avenue                Fort Washington C2
405                          Summit Avenue                Fort Washington C2
407                          Summit Avenue                Fort Washington C2
408                          Summit Avenue                Fort Washington C2
409                          Summit Avenue                Fort Washington C2
410                          Summit Avenue                Fort Washington C2
412                          Summit Avenue                Fort Washington C2
413                          Summit Avenue                Fort Washington C2
415                          Summit Avenue                Fort Washington C2
416                          Summit Avenue                Fort Washington C2
417                          Summit Avenue                Fort Washington C2
418                          Summit Avenue                Fort Washington C2
419                          Summit Avenue                Fort Washington C2
1001 and garage              Susquehanna Rd               Fort Washington C2
450                          Susquehanna Road             Ambler          C2
625                          Susquehanna Road             Ambler          C2
631                          Susquehanna Road             Ambler          C2
637                          Susquehanna Road             Ambler          C2
645                          Susquehanna Road             Ambler          C2
720                          Susquehanna Road             Ambler          C2
730                          Susquehanna Road             Ambler          C2
805                          Susquehanna Road             Ambler          C2
817                          Susquehanna Road             Ambler          C2
925                          Susquehanna Road             Ambler          C2
Lutheran Cemetery            Susquehanna Road             Ambler          C2
Whitcomb Cemetery            Susquehanna Road             Ambler          C2
1445                         Susquehanna Road             Dresher         C2
1660                         Susquehanna Road             Dresher         C2
1668                         Susquehanna Road             Dresher         C2
1704                         Susquehanna Road             Dresher         C2
500                          Tennis Avenue                Ambler          C2
512                          Tennis Avenue                Ambler          C2
514                          Tennis Avenue                Ambler          C2
604                          Tennis Avenue                Ambler          C2
700                          Tennis Avenue                Ambler          C2
740                          Tennis Avenue                Ambler          C2
500                          Trinity Place                Ambler          C2
502                          Trinity Place                Ambler          C2
504                          Trinity Place                Ambler          C2
506                          Trinity Place                Ambler          C2
600                          Trinity Place                Ambler          C2
601                          Trinity Place                Ambler          C2
602                          Trinity Place                Ambler          C2
603                          Trinity Place                Ambler          C2
917                          Twining Road                 Oreland         C2
1511                         Twining Road                 Willow Grove    C2
1375                         Virginia Drive               Fort Washington C2
315                          Waldheim Drive               Ambler          C2
1045                         Walnut Lane                  Fort Washington C2
1175                         Walnut Lane                  Fort Washington C2
100                          Washington Lane              Fort Washington C2
200                          Washington Lane              Fort Washington C2
204 [Added 2-11-2014 by Ord. Washington Lane              Fort Washington C2
No. 14-1283]
205                          Washington Lane              Fort Washington C2
206                          Washington Lane              Fort Washington C2
207 [Added 1-8-2013 by Ord.  Washington Lane              Fort Washington C2
No. 13-1266]
210                          Washington Lane              Fort Washington C2
211                          Washington Lane              Fort Washington C2
120                          Weldy Avenue                 Oreland         C2
121                          Weldy Avenue                 Oreland         C2
125                          Weldy Avenue                 Oreland         C2
128                          Weldy Avenue                 Oreland         C2
200                          Weldy Avenue                 Oreland         C2
201                          Weldy Avenue                 Oreland         C2
208                          Weldy Avenue                 Oreland         C2
209                          Weldy Avenue                 Oreland         C2
213                          Weldy Avenue                 Oreland         C2
214                          Weldy Avenue                 Oreland         C2
215                          Weldy Avenue                 Oreland         C2
218                          Weldy Avenue                 Oreland         C2
222                          Weldy Avenue                 Oreland         C2
228                          Weldy Avenue                 Oreland         C2
501                          Willow Avenue                Ambler          C2
503                          Willow Avenue                Ambler          C2
504                          Willow Avenue                Ambler          C2
505                          Willow Avenue                Ambler          C2
506                          Willow Avenue                Ambler          C2
518                          Willow Avenue                Ambler          C2
522                          Willow Avenue                Ambler          C2
526 [Added 6-9-2015 by Ord.  Willow Avenue                Ambler          C2
No. 15-1304] 
531 [Added 6-9-2015 by Ord.  Willow Avenue                Ambler          C2
No. 15-1304] 
532                          Willow Avenue                Ambler          C2
100                          Wischman Avenue              Oreland         C2
115 [Added 2-11-2014 by Ord. Wischman Avenue              Oreland         C2
No. 14-1283]
200                          Wischman Avenue              Oreland         C2
202                          Wischman Avenue              Oreland         C2
208                          Wischman Avenue              Oreland         C2
209                          Wischman Avenue              Oreland         C2
216                          Wischman Avenue              Oreland         C2
300                          Wischman Avenue              Oreland         C2
308                          Wischman Avenue              Oreland         C2
316                          Wischman Avenue              Oreland         C2
404                          Wischman Avenue              Oreland         C2
408                          Wischman Avenue              Oreland         C2
412 [Added 1-8-2013 by Ord.  Wischman Avenue              Oreland         C2
No. 13-1266]
415                          Wischman Avenue              Oreland         C2
416                          Wischman Avenue              Oreland         C2
505                          Wischman Avenue              Oreland         C2
510 [Added 1-8-2013 by Ord.  Wischman Avenue              Oreland         C2
No. 13-1266]
511 [Added 1-8-2013 by Ord.  Wischman Avenue              Oreland         C2
No. 13-1266]
516 [Added 2-11-2014 by Ord. Wischman Avenue              Oreland         C2
No. 14-1283]
604 [Added 2-11-2014 by Ord. Wischman Avenue              Oreland         C2
No. 14-1283]
608 [Added 2-11-2014 by Ord. Wischman Avenue              Oreland         C2
No. 14-1283]
 
Chapter A265
FEE SCHEDULE
§
A265-1.   Schedule of fees.
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Board of Commissioners of the Township of Upper Dublin
7-9-2024 by Ord. No. 24-1392; as amended by Ord. No. 26-1412, 1-13-2026.]
§ A265-1.   Schedule of fees.
In accordance with the provisions of §
233-15, the following described intersections are hereby established as stop
intersections, and stop signs shall be installed as provided therein:
The following schedule consists of a compilation and consolidation of
provisions pertaining to fees for the various applications, licenses and
permits required or provided for under Township ordinances, rules and
regulations as included in this Code. This schedule continues in effect the fee
provisions existing in the various ordinances of the Township. To the extent
there is a conflict between this fee schedule and any other fee charged in
Township ordinances, this schedule shall control. Specific regulations,
application procedures and requirements, conditions and approval provisions
with respect to which each fee is required may be found in the pertinent
chapter of this Code. This fee schedule may be altered from time to time by
Resolution of the Board of Commissioners.
   FEE SCHEDULE INDEX
   
SECTION I
   Administration
1.   Printed Paper Copies
2.   Professional Staff Review & Inspection
3.   Realty Tax Certification
4.   Right-To-Know Requests
5.   Liquor License Transfer
6.   Online & Terminal Transactions
7.   Miscellaneous
   
SECTION II
   Building Construction
1.   Adjunct Fees
2.   Additions
3.   Alterations & Repairs
4.   Demolition
5.   Electrical Wiring & Equipment
6.   HVAC/Mechanical & Fuel Appliances
7.   New Buildings
8.   Plumbing & Sewer
9.   Property Transfer Certification (Point-of-Sale/Resale)
10.   Miscellaneous Applications, Permits, & Fees
   
SECTION III
   Engineering
1.   Grading/Excavation
2.   Stormwater Management
3.   Watercourses
   
SECTION IV
   Fire Services
1.   Fire Protection Permits
2.   Fire Safety Inspection
3.   Fire Investigative Records
4.   Housing
5.   Miscellaneous
   
SECTION V
   Police Department
1.   Peddling & Solicitation
2.   Records & Reports
3.   Special Duty
4.   Vehicle Towing
   
SECTION VI
   Parks & Recreation
1.   Cancellations, Infractions, & Security Deposits
2.   Community Pool Passes
3.   Dog Park Access
4.   Facility Rentals
5.   Park Amenities & Dedications
6.   Staff Fees
   
SECTION VII
   Public Works
1.   Highway Occupancy Permits (HOP)
2.   Sanitation
   
SECTION VIII
   Zoning, Subdivision & Land Development
1.   Hearing Applications
2.   Subdivision & Land Development
3.   Miscellaneous
SECTION I: ADMINISTRATION
 
1. Printed Paper Copies       Fees
 a. Black & White Copies*     
  i.   First 1,000 pages Up to $0.25 per copy
  ii.   Beyond 1,000 pageUp to $0.20 per copy
 b. Color Copies**           Up to $0.50 per copy
 c. Specialized Documents*** Up to actual cost
 
*A "copy" is either a single-sided copy, or one side of a double-sided copy, on
8.5"x11" or 8.5"x14" paper.
**A "copy" is either a single-sided copy, or one side of a double-sided copy,
on 8.5"x11" or 8.5"x14" paper.
***Including, but not necessarily limited to, non-standard sized documents and
blueprints. Printing of plans and blueprints are billed as a pass-through cost
and pricing is dependent on current vendor cost.
2. Professional Staff Review & Inspection Fees
2. Professional Staff Review & Inspection Fees
Professional staff review and inspection fees. Engineer and professional
staff review and inspection fees for plan reviews and inspection services, as
established by the Board of Commissioners by resolution, will be charged as
set forth herein.
 a. Township Engineer                    $106 per hour
 b. Fire Marshal                         $86 per hour
 c. Public Works Director                $90 per hour
 d. Code Enforcement Director            $86 per hour
 e. Zoning Officer                       $72 per hour
 f. Senior Inspector                     $72 per hour
 g. Inspector                            $62 per hour
 h. Property Inspector                   $62 per hour
 i. Records Administrator                $58 per hour
 j. Administrative Assistant             $58 per hour
 k. Office Assistant                     $32 per hour
 
Fees of other professionals shall be charged at the rate paid by the Township
for such services.
 
3. Realty Tax Certification                   Fees
 a. Single Tax Parcel                         
  i.   Includes preparation of and mailin$35
  ii.   Duplicate tax bill provided by ma$5
 
 
4. Right-To-Know Requests Fees
Fees for Right-To-Know requests shall be charged in accordance with the Fee
Schedule established by the PA Office of Open Records as amended from time to
time by that Commonwealth Agency.
 
 
5. Liquor License Transfer                   Fees
 a. Hearing fee for liquor license transfer $2,500
 
6. Online & Terminal Transactions               Fees
 a. OpenGov                                     
  i.   Credit card                         2.99% + $0.99 per transaction
  ii.   E-check                            $2.25 per transaction
 b.   DASH                                   
  i.   Credit card                         3.04% per transaction
  ii.   ACH transfer (not to exceed $5 per 0.5% + $0.05 per transaction
    transaction)
   1.   International                     1.5% + $0.05 per transaction
 
 
 
7. Miscellaneous               Fees
 a. CD or DVD, per CD/DVD     Actual Cost
 b. Fire Escrow Certification $250
 c. Flash Drive               Actual Cost
 d. Postage                   Actual Cost
 e. Returned Check            $15
 
SECTION II: BUILDING CONSTRUCTION
 
1. Adjunct Fees                                                                   Fees
                                                                                  Up to
 a. Late Fee*                                                                    $1,000
                                                                                  (maximum)
 b. Uniform Construction Code (UCC) Fee                                           
  i.   Added to the application fee of each Building, Demolition Electrical, $4.50
    Plumbing, HVAC/Mechanical, and Sewer Permit
 c.   UCC Consultation Fee (Third-Party)                                      $150 per
                                                                                  hour
*Any person who commences any work on a building, structure, or electrical,
gas, mechanical, or plumbing system, including any demolition, before obtaining
the required permits shall be subject to a late fee for each required permit.
The late fee shall be paid in addition to the required permit fee in an amount
equal to the required permit fee up to a maximum of $1,000.
2. Additions Fees
2. Additions                                                  Fees
 a. Residential                                               
  i.   Permit fee per 500 sqf or fraction thereof        $500
  ii.   Plan review                                       
   1.   First review                                    $100
   2.   Minimum in event permit is withdrawn            $50
   3.   Each resubmission                               $50
   4.   All plan resubmissions after the permit is issue$100
  iii.   Accessibility plan review (if applicable)       $50
 b. Nonresidential                                            
  i.   Permit fee per 1,000 sqf or fraction thereof      $425
  ii.   Plan review                                       
   1.   First review (in-house, when possible)          $250
   2.   Minimum in event permit is withdrawn            $100
   3.   Each resubmission                               $100
   4.   All plan resubmissions, after the permit is issu$250
  iii.   Accessibility plan review (if applicable)       $100
 
*Floor area is computed from the plans submitted by totaling the area
determined from the outside building exterior perimeter dimensions at ten-foot
intervals from the basement level to the mean roof elevation or top of wall,
whichever is higher, or the uppermost level, excluding unfinished basements and
unfinished attics.
3. Alterations & Repairs Fees
3. Alterations & Repairs                                                   Fees
 a. Residential                                                            
  i.   Permit fee                                                      
   1.   First 1,500 sqf*                                            $375
   2.   Each additional 500 sqf or fraction thereof                  $100
  ii.   Plan review                                                    
   1.   First review                                                 $100
   2.   Minimum in event permit is withdrawn                         $50
   3.   Each resubmission                                            $50
   4.   All plan resubmissions after the permit is issued            $100
  iii.   Accessibility plan review (if applicable)                    $50
 b. Residential kitchen and bathroom**                                     
  i.   Permit fee for each area of renovation (plus electric & plumbin$200
 c. Nonresidential                                                         
  i.   Permit fee per 1,000 sqf or fraction thereof                   $850
  ii.   Plan review (in-house, when possible)                          
   1.   First review                                                 $250
   2.   Minimum in event permit is withdrawn                         $100
   3.   Each resubmission                                            $100
   4.   All plan resubmissions after the permit is issued            $250
  iii.   Accessibility plan review (in-house, when possible)          $100
 
*Floor area is computed from the plans submitted by totaling the area
determined from the outside building exterior perimeter dimensions at ten-foot
intervals from the basement level to the mean roof elevation or top of wall,
whichever is higher, or the uppermost level, excluding unfinished basements and
unfinished attics.
**Alterations to a kitchen or bathroom when cabinets and countertops are being
replaced in exact location as existing and no walls are being altered, removed,
or added, and all plumbing fixtures remain in same location.
4. Demolition Fees
4. Demolition                                                        Fees
 a. Residential                                                      
  i.   Demolition/razing of residential building                $400
  ii.   Interior and partial exterior demolition                $400
  iii.   Any proposed interior demolition                       $100
 b. Nonresidential                                                   
  i.   Demolition/razing of a nonresidential building            
   1.   Per $1,000 of estimated cost or fraction thereof       $100
  ii.   Any proposed nonresidential interior & partial exterior  
    demolition
   1.   Per $1,000 of estimated cost or fraction thereof       $100
 c. Plan review                                                      
  i.   Residential                                              $100
  ii.   Nonresidential                                          $150
 
 
5. Electrical Wiring & Equipment                        Fees
 a. New wiring, upgrades, services                      
  i. Per $1,000 of estimated cost or fraction thereof $25
 
 
6. HVAC/Mechanical & Fuel Appliances                          Fees
 a.   Installation, conversion or replacement              
  i.   Per $1,000 of estimated cost or fraction thereof  $25
 b.   Plan review (if not associated with a building permi 
  i.   Residential                                       $50
  ii.   Nonresidential                                   $300
 
7. New Buildings Fees
7. New Buildings                                                               Fees
 a. Residential                                                                
  i.   New single-family & two-family dwellings, townhomes, and buildings  
    accessory thereof
   1.   First 1,500 sqf                                                  $400
   2.   Each additional 500 sqf or fraction thereof                      $150
  ii.   Accessory buildings and detached garages                           
   1.   First 1,500 sqf                                                  $350
   2.   Each additional 500 sqf or fraction thereof                      $150
  iii.   Plan review                                                       
   1.   First review                                                     $100
   2.   Minimum in event permit is withdrawn                             $50
   3.   Each resubmission                                                $50
   4.   All plan resubmissions after the permit is issued                $100
 b. Nonresidential                                                             
  i.   Permit fee per 1,000 sqf or fraction thereof                       $400
  ii.   Plan review (in-house when possible)                               
   1.   First review                                                     $250
   2.   Minimum in event permit is withdrawn                             $100
   3.   Each resubmission                                                $100
   4.   All plan resubmissions after the permit is issued                $250
  iii.   Accessibility plan review (in-house when possible)               $100
 
8. Plumbing & Sewer Fees
8. Plumbing & Sewer                                                    Fees
 a. Fixtures — New & Replacement                                     
  i.   New construction or additional fixtures — First ten (10) $100
    fixtures
  ii.   Each additional fixture                                   $25
 b. Garbage disposal/grinder                                          $25 per
                                                                       unit
 c. Water service                                                      
  i.   Connection, tapping, re-installation, or repair            $75
 d. Water softener                                                    $25
 e. Portable privies                                                  $25
 f. Public sewer                                                       
  i.   Sewer lateral connection, tapping, re-installation, or repa$75
 g. Closure of existing septic tank, cesspool                         $50
 h. Reinspection*                                                     $100
 i. Plan review (if not associated with a building permit)             
  i.   Residential                                                $150
  ii.   Non-residential                                           $300
*Reinspection caused by failure of the applicant to comply with Code
requirements or to expeditiously correct defects after initial inspections..
 
9. Property Transfer Certification (Point-of-Sale/Resale) Fees
 a. Application fees                                      
  i.   More than 30 days before settlement           $45
  ii.   Within 8 to 29 days of settlement            $90
  iii.   Within 7 days of settlement                 $135
 
10. Miscellaneous Applications, Permits & Fees Fees
10. Miscellaneous Applications, Permits & Fees                    Fees
 a. Accessibility plan review                                     
  i.   Residential                                           $50
  ii.   Nonresidential                                       $100
 b. Certificate of occupancy                                      
  i.   Residential                                           $80
  ii.   Nonresidential                                       $100
 c. Decks                                                         
  i.   Per $1,000 of estimated construction cost or fraction $25
    thereof
10. Miscellaneous Applications, Permits & Fees (Cont’d)Fees
 d. Display & fee-standing signs
  i.   Per $1,000 of estimated construction cost or fraction thereof $25
 e. Expedited plan review (when possible)30% surcharge of permit fee
 f. Fixed signs
  a.   Plan review
                                                               i.   Freestanding signs1.0% of construction cost
                                                               ii.   Wall and projection signs$100 per sign
 g.   Plan review
  i.   Miscellaneous plans (for all work requiring permits not itemized elsewhere)
                                                               1.   Per cost of construction ($150 minimum)1.0% of construction
                                                                  cost
 h. Reinspection* $50
 i. Renewal permit** $25
 j. Retaining walls (if the height of the wall at any point is greater than 4-feet)
  i.   Per $1,000 of estimated construction cost or fraction thereof $25
 k. Roadside stands $25
 l. Roofing/reroofing
  i.   First $1,000 construction cost $25
  ii.   Each Additional $1,000 estimated construction cost or fraction thereof +$10
 m.    Sheds over 120 sqf
  i.   Per $1,000 of estimated construction cost or fraction thereof $25
 n. Solar panels
  i.   Per $1,000 of estimated construction cost or fraction thereof $25
 o. Swimming pools, spas, hot tubs, artificial bodies of water, or structures of similar character
  i.   Per $1,000 of construction cost or fraction thereof $25
  ii.   Escrow for In-Ground Pools 20% of pool construction cost
  iii.   Plan review (residential)
                                                               1.   In-ground$350
                                                               2.   Aboveground (water depth in excess of 24")$100
                                                               3.   Spas & hot tubs$150
                                                               4.   Inflatable (water depth in excess of 24")$100
  iv.   Plan review (nonresidential)$600
 p.    Temporary construction trailer $50 per trailer
 q. Miscellaneous (for all work requiring permits that is not itemized elsewhere)
  i.   Per $1,000 of estimated construction cost or fraction thereof $25
*In all cases the fee for a permit includes intermediate and final inspections
to determine compliance with Township Codes. If additional inspections are
required because upon initial inspection the work does not comply with Township
Codes, a re-inspection fee of $50 may be charged for each additional inspection
required, payable in advance of the reinspection. This fee may also be charged
where the contractor fails to appear for a scheduled inspection.
**Renewal permits shall be valid no more than six (6) months.
SECTION III: ENGINEERING
 
1. Grading/Excavation Fees
1. Grading/Excavation                                       Fees
 a. Application and Initial Inspection                    $65 + $80
                                                            inspection fee
  i.   Each additional inspection fee                  +$80
 b. New Homes                                              $400 + $80
                                                            inspection fee
 c. Home Additions                                          
  i.   </= 400 sqf                                     $120 + $80
                                                            inspection fee
  ii.   > 400 sqf                                      $400 + $80
                                                            inspection fee
 d. Garage — Detached                                     
  i.   </= 400 sqf                                     $120 + $80
                                                            inspection fee
  ii.   > 400 sqf                                      $300 + $80
                                                            inspection fee
 e. Patios — Slab on Grade or Elevated                    
  i.   New                                             $150
  ii.   Replacement                                    $100
 f. Decks (if Patio or Slab underneath)                     
  i.   New </= 400 sqf                                 $100
  ii.   New > 400 sqf                                  $150
  iii.   Replacement or change in impervious coverage  $60
 g. Driveways                                               
  i.   New </= 400 sqf                                 $100
  ii.   New > 400 sqf                                  $150
  iii.   Replacement                                   $60
 h. Retaining Walls                                         
  i.   </= 4 ft                                        $100
  ii.   > 4 ft                                         $150
 i. Walkways                                                
  i.   New </= 400 sqf                                 $100
  ii.   New > 400 sqf                                  $150
  iii.   Replacement                                   $55
 j. Swimming Pools                                          
  i.   Above-Ground Pools                              $145
  ii.   In-Ground Pools                                $275 + $80
                                                            inspection fee
 k. Sheds over 120 sqf                                     $150
 l. Gardens (Raised) — Beds, Berms, Diversions, Mounding $60 + $80
  Sales                                                     inspection fee
 
 
2. Stormwater Management                                                           Fees
 a. Plan Review*                                                                   
  i.   Sketch stormwater management plan for exempt activities pursuant to § $125
    206-16 
  ii   Stormwater management plan for regulated activities pursuant to §     $500
    206-5 
  iii.   Modified plan, resubmitted plan, or renewal of expired plan          $150
  iv.   Review of swales, berms, and diversions                               $225
 b. Permit Issuance                                                               $25
 
*No permit to begin any work on the project shall be issued and no site work
shall begin until the requisite plan review and permit fees have been paid.
Inspection fees will be billed by the Township according to its standard
schedule. The Township reserves the right to revoke any storm water management
permit for nonpayment of inspection fees.
Modification of plans: If it is determined that an existing storm water
management plan shall be modified, a new storm water management permit shall
not be issued until any additional review or permit fees have been paid by the
applicant.
Renewal of expired plan: If an applicant requests the renewal of an expired
plan, the application will not be approved nor a permit reissued until any
additional review fees have been paid by the applicant.
 
3. Watercourses         Fees
In accordance with
Chapter 240, Watercourses, a permit shall be required to stop, fill up,
confine, pave or otherwise interfere with or change the course of any drain,
ditch, stream, swale, stormwater management facility or watercourse. In
additional to the permit fee, the applicant shall pay the actual costs of any
inspections per each hour or portion thereof a Township inspector or the
Township Engineer is engaged on the work.
 a. Watercourse permit $225
 
SECTION IV: FIRE SERVICES
1. Fire Protection Permits Fees
1. Fire Protection Permits                                     Fees
 a. Residential
  i.   Sprinklers                                          
   1.   New                                              $75 + third
                                                               party review fee
   2.   Modifications                                    $75
  ii.   Fire Suppression Systems (Plan Review & Permit Fee 
   1.   First $1,000 of cost or fraction thereof         $75
   2.   Each additional $1,000 of cost or fraction thereo+$10
  iii.   Fire Alarms                                       
   1.   Per $1,000 of cost or fraction thereof           $25
  iv.   Fireplace/Stove                                   $75
  v.   Storage Tank Installation/Removal                  $75
  vi.   Membrane Structure/Tents                          $75
  vii.   Blasting                                         $250
 b. Nonresidential
  i.   Sprinklers                                          
   1.   New                                               
      a.   First $1,000 of cost or fraction thereof   $75
      b.   Each additional $1,000 of cost or fraction +$10
      thereof
  ii.   Fire Suppression Systems (Plan Review & Permit)    
   1.   First $1,000 of cost                             $75
   2.   Each additional $1,000 of cost or fraction thereo+$10
  iii.   Fire Alarms (Registration & Permit)               
   1.   First $1,000 of cost or fraction thereof         $75
   2.   Each additional $1,000 of cost or fraction thereo+$10
  iv.   Fireplace/Stove                                   $75
  v.   Storage Tank Installation/Removal                  $75
  vi.   Fuel & Oil Storage Tanks of every description     $75 per tank
  vii.   Gasoline Pumps                                   $15 per pump
  viii.   Membrane Structure/Tents                        $75
  ix.   Blasting                                          $250
 c.   Plan review                                           
  i.   Fire sprinkler                                     $250
  ii.   Fire alarm                                        $250
 
2. Fire Safety Inspection Fees
2. Fire Safety Inspection                                                   Fees
 a. For all Occupancies and Use Groups*                                     
  i.   Up to 3,500sqf                                                  $75
  ii.   3,501 sqf to 12,000 sqf                                        $115
  iii.   12,001 sqf to 36,000 sqf                                      $155
  iv.   36,001 sqf to 50,000 sqf                                       $195
  v.   50,001 sqf to 99,000 sqf                                        $380
  vi.   99,001 to 100,000 sqf                                          $420
   1.   Each additional 25,000 sqf or portion thereof, beyond 100,000 +$75
      sqf
   2.   All second re-inspections                                     $75
 
*Failure to pay inspection fees incurred by the Fire Marshall within 30 days of
billing may result in a collection fee of $20% of the fee not paid, and/or the
filing of a municipal claim therefore.
 
3. Fire Investigative Records   Fees
 a. Fire Investigation Reports $15
 
4. Housing Fees
4. Housing                                                              Fees
 a. Rental Unit Permit                                                  
  i.   Within an Apartment or Condo                                 
   1.   First inspection, includes one (1) reinspection per buildi$60
   2.   Permit/License Renewal                                     
      a.   Paid per unit every two (2) years                   $30
  ii.   Within a Single or Two-Family Dwelling                      
   1.    First inspection, includes one (1) reinspection*         $60
   *Must be renewed every two (2) years.                              
 b. Motel & Hotel Rooms                                                 
  i.   First inspection, includes one (1) reinspection             $60
 c. Reinspection for all Housing Types                                  
  i.   Each additional reinspection beyond the first included      +$30
    reinspection
 
5. Miscellaneous Fees
5. Miscellaneous                                                             Fees
 a. Consulting Services by the Fire Marshal                                  
  i.   Including extensive technical review, research, or specification $100 per
    review                                                                   hour
 b. Fire Operational Permits*                                               $75
 c. Fireworks Display/Performance Permit                                    $250
                                                                             +$250 per
  i.   Standby fee remitted to Fort Washington Fire Co.                 hour, per
                                                                             apparatus
 d. Storage/Handling/Sale of...                                              
  i.   Explosives, Fireworks, or Pyrotechnic Special Effects            $250
 
*Quantities and amounts will be determined as per the International Fire Code —
Required Operational Permits. Aerosol products, amusement buildings, aviation
facilities, carnivals and fairs, cellulose nitrate film, combustible dust-
producing operations, combustible fibers, compressed gas covered and open
malls, cryogenic fluids, cutting and welding, dry cleaners, exhibits and trade
shows, flammable and combustible liquids, hazardous materials, high-piled
storage, mobile food preparation vehicles, motor fuel-dispensing facilities,
temporary membrane structures.
SECTION V: POLICE DEPARTMENT
 
 
1. Peddling & Solicitation                            Fees
 a. Identification card - valid for three (3) months $150 per ID
 
2. Records & Reports Fees
2. Records & Reports                                   Fees
 a. Record Fees (Not Right-to-Know)                    
  i.   AA 500 Crash Report - Established by State $15
    law
  ii.   Incident Report — Redacted              $15
  iii.   Investigative Report — Redacted        $15
  iv.   Supplemental Report — Redacted          $15
  v.   Photograph(s) - Less than 50               $25 + cost of flash
                                                       drive
  vi.   Photograph(s) - More than 50              $50 + cost of flash
                                                       drive
  vii.   Scale Drawing                            $125 per hour (minimum)
 
 
3. Special Duty Fees
A fee is imposed for the use of off-duty Township police, in uniform,
providing police services to private individuals or corporations for special
duty. The fee shall be the hourly rate, per officer, determined by the current
Police Bargaining Unit Agreement.
 
4. Vehicle Towing Fees
4. Vehicle Towing                                                      Fees
 a.   Standard Towing - 10,000 lbs or less                         $185
 b.   Standard Towing - 10,001 lbs to 26,000 lbs                   $275
 c.   Standard Towing - 26,001 lbs or more***                      $475
 d.   Storage* (per day)                                            
  i.   10,000 lbs. or less                                        $80
  ii.   10,001 lbs to 26,000 lbs                                  $120
  iii.   26,001 lbs or more                                       $150
 e.   Per Hour Fee**                                               $100
 f.   Clean Up (per crash)                                         $70
 g.   Oil Dry (per bag or part thereof)                            $25
 h.   Winching (per hour)                                          $110
 i.   Mileage Fee (per mile outside of the borders of Upper Dublin $7.50
  Township)
* Storage applies to a vehicle placed in the storage of the duty tow
provider and no storage fee shall be assessed for the first 24 hours after
the vehicle was placed in the storage of the duty tow provider.
** No per hour fee shall be assessed for the first one-half hour following
the arrival of the tow vehicle at the scene.
*** This fee shall be an hourly rate.
****The Towing/Storage Fee Schedule set forth in §§
233-28 to
233-28.2 may be amended from time to time by resolution.
 
SECTION VI: PARKS & RECREATION
 
1. Cancellations, Infractions, & Security Deposits Fees
1. Cancellations, Infractions, & Security Deposits     Fees
 a. Rental Security Deposit                           $200
 b. Rental Infraction Penalties                       Up to $200
 c. Cancellation Fees                                  
  i.   Facility & Field Rental                     
   1.   11+ business days before                 $10
   2.   6-10 business days before                25% of total fee + $10
   3.   1-5 business days before                 50% of total fee + $10
   4.   Day-of/No Show                           100% of total fee
  ii.   Programs/Special Events & Sport/Specialty  
    Camps
   1.   11+ business days before                 Up to $10
   2.   6-10 business days before                25% of total fee + $10
   3.   5 or less business days before           100% of total fee
  iii.   X-Zone & Twining Valley Day Camp          
   1.   30+ days before                          $10 per child, per week
   2.   15-29 days before                        50% of total fee + $10
                                                       per child, per week
   3.   14 or less days before                   Up to 100% of total fee
  iv.   Trips                                      
   1.   30+ days before                          $10
   2.   Less than 30 days before                 Up to 100% of total fee
 d. Late Pick-Up Fees                                  
  i.   Programs/Special Events & Sport/Specialty   
    Camps
   1.   5 minutes or less                        No Fee
   2.   6-15 minutes                             $5 per car
   3.   16-20 minutes                            $10 per car
   4.   21-25 minutes                            $15 per car
   5.   26-30 minutes                            $20 per car
   6.   31 minutes or more                       $30 + $1 per minute over
                                                       30 minutes, per car
 
2. Community Pool Passes Resident Nonresident
2. Community Pool Passes     Resident Nonresident
No entry fees are required for children 0-2 years of age.
 a. Ages 3-12                        
  i.   Daily Entry               
   1.   Weekday        $1       $3
   2.   Weekend/Holiday$2       $6
  ii.   Season Pass              
   1.   Full Season    $50      $150
   2.   Weekdays       $30      $90
   3.   Weekends/Holida$25      $75
 b. Ages 13+                         
  i.   Daily Entry               
   1.   Weekday        $2       $6
   2.   Weekend/Holiday$4       $12
  ii.   Season Pass              
   1.   Full Season    $75      $225
   2.   Weekdays       $50      $150
   3.   Weekends/Holida$40      $120
 c. Pool Camps                       
  i.   1.5 hours        $2       $2
  ii.   3 hours         $4       $4
 
 
3. Dog Park Access                            Resident Nonresident
 a. Dog Park Fob — Annual Access           No Fee   $50
 b. Dog Park Fob — Replacement Fob (per fob$15      $15
 c. Dog Park Fob—Additional Fob (per fob)  $15      $15
 
4. Facility Rentals
4. Facility Rentals
Rental time extension fees (/Ext.) may apply as indicated below for certain
facilities and alcohol permits.
a. Grass Field                      Resident /    Nonresident /  Alcohol Permit
                                    Ext.          Ext.           / Ext.
 i.   Field – Seasonal        $425          $475           $350
  1.   Facility Attendant      + $100        + $100          
 ii.   Field/Court – 4-hrs    $35           $45            $10
 iii.   Field/Court – 4-hrs   $50           $60            $10
  (tournament)
b. Mondauk Common Track             Resident /    Nonresident /   
                                    Ext.          Ext.
 i.   Fundraising Walk – 4-hrs                            
  1.   1-25 people             $35 / +$10    $70 / +$15 per  
                                    per hour      hour
  2.   26-50 people            $65 / +$10    $100 / +$15     
                                    per hour      per hour
  3.   51-75 people            $95 / +$10    $150 / +$15     
                                    per hour      per hour
  4.   76-100 people           $125 / +$10   $200 / +$15     
                                    per hour      per hour
  5.   101-150 people          $185 / +$10   $300 / +$15     
                                    per hour      per hour
  6.   151-200 people          $250 / +$10   $400 / +$15     
                                    per hour      per hour
c. Pavilion                         Resident /    Nonresident /  Alcohol Permit
                                    Ext.          Ext.           / Ext.
 i.   Business/Non-Profit                                   
  1.    Facility Attendant Fee +$25 per hour +$25 per hour   
     a.   1-25 people       $75 / +$20    $100 / +$25    $25 / +$5 per
                                    per hour      per hour       hour
     b.   26-50 people      $150 / +$40   $200 / +$45    $50 / +$10 per
                                    per hour      per hour       hour
     c.   51-75 people      $250 / +$60   $325 / +$65    $75 / +$15 per
                                    per hour      per hour       hour
     d.   76-100 people     $325 / +$80   $425 / +$85    $100 / +$20
                                    per hour      per hour       per hour
     e.   101-120 people    $400 / +$100  $525 / +$105   $125 / +$25
                                    per hour      per hour       per hour
     f.   126-150 people    $475 / +$120  $625 / +$125   $150 / +$30
                                    per hour      per hour       per hour
     g.   151-175 people    $550 / +$140  $725 / +$145   $175 / +$35
                                    per hour      per hour       per hour
     h.   176-200 people    $625 / +$160  $825 / +$165   $200 / +$40
                                    per hour      per hour       per hour
 ii.   Personal/Private                                     
  1.   Facility Attendant Fee  +$25 per hour +$25 per hour   
     a.   1-25 people       $50 / +$10    $75 / +$15 per $25 / +$5 per
                                    per hour      hour           hour
     b.   26-50 people      $100 / +$20   $150 / +$25    $50 / +$10 per
                                    per hour      per hour       hour
     c.   51-75 people      $175 / +$30   $250 / +$35    $75 / +$15 per
                                    per hour      per hour       hour
     d.   76-100 people     $225 / +$40   $325 / +$45    $100 / +$20
                                    per hour      per hour       per hour
     e.   101-120 people    $275 / +$50   $400 / +$55    $125 / +$25
                                    per hour      per hour       per hour
     f.   126-150 people    $325 / +$60   $475 / +$65    $150 / +$30
                                    per hour      per hour       per hour
     g.   151-175 people    $375 / +$70   $550 / +$75    $175 / +$35
                                    per hour      per hour       per hour
     h.   176-200 people    $425 / +$80   $625 / +$85    $200 / +$40
                                    per hour      per hour       per hour
 iii.   Pavilion Rental Utility $25 per       $25 per         
  Use                               utility       utility
 iv.   Pop-up Tent Rental       $10 per tent  $10 per tent    
d. Room Rental                      Category 1*   Category 2**   Category 3***
  i.   1-12 people             No Fee        $10 per hour   $25 per hour
  ii.   13-22 people           No Fee        $15 per hour   $25 per hour
  iii.   23-30 people          $15 per hour  $20 per hour   $30 per hour
  iv.   31-50 people           $20 per hour  $25 per hour   $40 per hour
  v.   51-125 people           $30 per hour  $35 per hour   $50 per hour
*Category 1: Upper Dublin Residents/Community Groups & Nonprofits (where
groups/nonprofits are based in Upper Dublin and/or serve the region).
**Category 2: Upper Dublin businesses/For-profit; Nonresident/Nonprofit
(residing outside Upper Dublin Township); any C2 events where an admission or
registration fee is charged.
***Category 3: Nonresident Business/For-profit.
e. Turf Field                       Resident /    Nonresident /  Attendant /
                                    Ext.          Ext.           Lighting
Turf field rentals may require Facility Attendant and Lighting fees as
indicated below.
 i.   Seasonal per hour                                     
  1.   Category 1-A            $12.50                      $25 per hour /
                                                                 Metered
  2.   Category 2-A            No Fee                      $25 per hour /
                                                                 Metered
  3.   Category 3-A            No Fee        No Fee          
  4.   Category 4-A            $75           $125           $25 per hour /
                                                                 $10
 ii.   Special Use per hour                                 
  1.   Category 1-B            $25                         $25 per hour /
                                                                 Metered
  2.   Category 2-B            $25           $50            $25 per hour /
                                                                 $10
  3.   Category 3-B            $50           $75            No Fee / $10
  4.   Category 4-B            $100          $150           $25 per hour /
                                                                 $10
 iii.   Quarterly Non-Exclusive $100          $150            
  Use
f. Twining Valley Park Trail        Resident /    Nonresident /  Attendant
                                    Ext.          Ext.
 i.   4 hours of trail use      $500 / $125   $600 / $150    $25 per hour
                                    per hour      per hour
 
 
5. Park Amenities & Dedications Fees
 a. Memorial Park Bench        $1,200
 b. Memorial Bricks            $100
 
 
6. Staff Fees                                      Fees
 a. Facility Attendant (if requested or required) $25 per hour
 b. Staff Overtime                                 
  i.   Weekday or Saturday                    150% of Salary/Wage
  ii.   Sunday or Holiday                     200% of Salary/Wage
 
SECTION VII: PUBLIC WORKS
 
1. Highway Occupancy Permits (HOP) Fees
1. Highway Occupancy Permits (HOP)                                               Fees
 a. Base Permit Fee (Applied to each permit)                                    $90
 b. Inspection Fee (Applied to each permit)                                     $90
 c. Curbs                                                                      $90
  i.   Every 10 linear foot (LF) or fraction thereof for inspection         +$5 per
                                                                                 10 LF
 d. Sidewalk/Aprons                                                            $90
 e. Street Opening — Township*                                                 
  i.   Opening/Excavating in Highway, Road, Street, Avenue, or Public Alley  
    with Improved or Paved Surface
   1.   First five (5) square yards (y2) or portion thereof                $40 per
                                                                                 y2
   2.   For each square yard (y2) over 5 y2                               +$32
                                                                                 per y2
                                                                                 $7 per
  ii.   Opening/Excavating in the Township right-of-way with Unimproved     y2 or
    Surface (Grass Area)                                                         portion
                                                                                 thereof
  iii.   Standard holes                                                     $7 per
                                                                                 hole
  iv.   Utility poles                                                       $10 per
                                                                                 pole
  v.   Dumpster                                                             $25 per
                                                                                 week
 
*Contact PennDOT (610-205-6795) for State Roads and Montgomery County (610-278-
3613) for County Roads.
2. Sanitation Fees
2. Sanitation                                           Fees
 a. Cart Pricing                                        
  i. First Trash (brown), Recycling (blue), & Yard    No Fee
    Waste (green) cart
  ii. Additional Carts (95-gallon)                     
   1. Trash                                          $250
   2. Recycling                                      $250
   3. Yard Waste                                     $65
  iii. Replacement Carts (95-gallon)                   
   1. Trash                                          $65
   2. Recycling                                      $65
 b. (Reserved)                                          
 c. Additional Collections                              
  i. Extra Cardboard Collection                       No Fee
  ii. Extra Yard Waste Collection (ONLY Areas B & C)  No Fee
 d. Bulk Pick-up Pricing                                
  i. Additional Refuse Collection                     $10
  ii. Air Conditioner                                 $40
  iii. Aquarium (Glass)                               $10
  iv. Area Rug                                        $10
  v. Basketball                                        
   1. Base and Backboard                             $10
   2. Backboard and Pole Disassembly                 $20
   3. Pole (Metal)                                   $15
  vi. Bath Tub (Cast Iron, Fiberglass or Porcelain)   $20
  vii. Beach or Outdoor Umbrella with Pole            $15
  viii. Bed Frame                                      
   1. Metal                                          $15
   2. Wood                                           $10
  ix. Bicycle                                         $15
  x. Book Case                                         
   1. Metal (Disassembled)                           $15
   2. Wood (Flattened)                               $10
  xi. Box Spring                                      $10
  xii. Bureau/Dresser                                  
   1. Single or Double Drawer                        $10
   2. Triple Drawer                                  $20
  xiii. Cabinet                                        
   1. Metal                                          $15
   2. Wood                                           $10
  xiv. Car Seat                                       $10
  xv. Carpeting                                        
   1. Large Room                                     $25
   2. Small Room                                     $15
  xvi. Chair                                           
   1. Metal/Folding                                  $15 per pair
   2. Plastic/Stacking                               $5 per pair
   3. Reclining or Upholstered                       $15
   4. Wood or Desk                                   $10
  xvii. Christmas Tree (Synthetic)                    $10
  xviii. Couch/Sofa                                    
   1. Love Seat/Two-Seater                           $10
   2. Ottoman                                        $5
   3. Sectional                                       
      a. Without recliner                         $30
      b. With recliner                            $40
   4. Sleeper                                        $25
   5. Standard/Three-Seater                           
      a. Without recliner                         $20
      b. With recliner                            $25
  xix. Counter Top (Wood)                             $10 per 4-foot section
  xx. Crib (Metal or Wood)                            $15
  xxi. Dehumidifier                                   $40
  xxii. Desk                                           
   1. Metal                                          $20
   2. Wood                                           $10
  xxiii. Dishwasher                                   $15
  xxiv. Door                                           
   1. Glass or Mirrored                              $10
   2. Metal                                          $20
   3. Wood                                           $10
  xxv. Dryer                                          $15
  xxvi. Entertainment Center (Wood/Particle Board)    $20
  xxvii. Exercise Equipment                            
   1. Large                                          $20
   2. Small                                          $15
  xxviii. Freezer                                     $40
  xxix. Furnace                                       $20
  xxx. Garage Door                                     
   1. Metal                                          $30
   2. Wood                                           $20
  xxxi. Garage Door Opener                            $15
  xxxii. Glass Item or Pieces                         $10 per box
  xxxiii. Grill                                       $15
  xxxiv. Headboard                                     
   1. Metal                                          $15
   2. Wood                                           $10
  xxxv. Helium Tank (Empty)                           $10
  xxxvi. Hot Water Heater                             $20
  xxxvii. Kayak                                       $30
  xxxviii. Ironing Board                              $15
  xxxix. Ladder                                        
   1. Metal                                          $15
   2. Wood                                           $10
  xl. Lamp                                             
   1. Glass or Wood                                  $10
   2. Metal                                          $15
  xli. Lawn Furniture                                  
   1. Metal                                          $15 per item
   2. Plastic                                        $10 per item
   3. Wood                                           $10 per item
  xlii. Lawn Mower                                     
   1. Push                                           $15
   2. Riding/Tractor                                 $20
  xliii. Mattress                                     $10
  xliv. Metal Shredder                                $20
  xlv. Microwave                                      $15
  xlvi. Mirror                                        $10
  xlvii. Night Stand                                  $10
  xlviii. Patio Heater                                $20
  xlix. Picnic Table or Bench (Wood)                  $15
  l. Ping Pong Table                                  $10
  li. Plastic Storage Bins/Totes                      $10 per ten (10) items
  lii. Playhouse                                       
   1. Large (Plastic or Wood)                        $20
   2. Small (Plastic or Wood)                        $15
  liii. Pool Cover                                    $20
  liv. Pool Table (Disassembled)                      $25
  lv. Porch Swing (Wood)                              $10
  lvi. Refrigerator (All sizes)                       $40
  lvii. Rubbermaid Shed                               $20
  lviii. Sandbox                                      $10
  lix. Satellite Dish                                 $15
  lx. Shutters (Wood)                                 $5 per shutter
  lxi. Sink                                            
   1. Porcelain                                      $10
   2. Stainless Steel                                $15
  lxii. Snow Blower                                   $15
  lxiii. Stove/Oven/Range (Wall or Standard)          $15
  lxiv. Stroller                                      $10
  lxv. Swing Set                                       
   1. Metal (Disassembled)                           $30
   2. Plastic (Disassembled)                         $20
   3. Wood (Disassembled)                            $40
   4. Wood with Playhouse (Disassembled)             $50
  lxvi. Table                                          
   1. Metal                                          $15
   2. Wood                                           $10
  lxvii. Tarp                                         $10
  lxviii. Toilet                                      $10
  lxix. Tools (Large/Garden)                          $15
  lxx. Toy (Children's Ride-On)                       $10
  lxxi. Trampoline                                     
   1. Base (Metal)                                   $20
   2. Net                                            $10
  lxxii. Vacuum                                       $15
  lxxiii. Washing Machine                             $15
  lxxiv. Water Cooler                                 $40
  lxxv. Water Heater                                  $20
  lxxvi. Water Softener                               $20
  lxxvii. Window Blinds                                
   1.   With metal pole                           $15
   2.   Without metal pole                        $10
  lxxviii. Wood Pallet or Crate                       $10
  lxxix. Wood Pieces (Bundled, no more than 6 foot in $10 per bundle
    length)
 
SECTION VIII: ZONING, SUBDIVISON & LAND DEVELOPMENT
 
1. Hearing Applications Fees
1. Hearing Applications                                        Fees
 a. Conditional Use Application                              $1,000
  i.   Escrow                                             Project-
                                                               dependent
 b. Building Code Board of Appeals                             
  i.   Residential                                        $550
  ii.   Nonresidential                                    $1,000
 c. Petition for Zoning Change or Text Amendment             $250
  i.   Escrow                                             $5,000
 d. Zoning Hearing Board Application                           
  i.   Residential                                        $500
   1.   Continuance/Postponement Fee*                    +$100
  ii.   Nonresidential                                    $1,500
   1.   Continuance/Postponement Fee*                    +$100
 e. Zoning Hearing Board/Board of Commissioners Appeals        
  i.   Challenging the substantive validity of a land use $1,000
    ordinance
   1.   Continuance/Postponement Fee*                    +$100
   2.   Stenographer & Advertising (if continued for 2+  +Actual Cost
      nights)
   3.   Re-advertising (if postponed by applicant)       +Actual Cost
 
*The continuance fee is to cover the costs of multiple hearings. The
continuance fee will not be collected with the submitted application. Fees will
be assessed if hearings are continued.
*Applicant is responsible for the review fees of the Township Engineer and
other professionals retained by the Township to process the application. Such
fees shall be charged against the initial escrow fund at the rates approved by
Resolution of the Board of Commissioners and by the rates other professionals
charge the Township. Applicants shall replenish the escrow fund by a subsequent
escrow deposit in the amount of the initial deposit or the estimated amount of
the additional costs, whichever is the lesser.
2. Subdivision & Land Development Fees
2. Subdivision & Land Development                           Fees
 a. Plan processing                                         
  i.   Lot consolidation                               $250
  ii.   Lot line changes                               $250
  iii.   Sketch plan                                   $250
  iv.   Minor subdivision                               
   1.   Residential                                    
      a.   2-5 lots                                $200
      b.   6-10 lots                               $300
   2.   Nonresidential                                 
      a.   2-5 lots                                $300
  v.   Preliminary/Final plan                           
   1.   Residential                                    
      a.   2-5 units                               $150 + $30 per unit
      b.   6-10 units                              $280 + $30 per unit
      c.   11-20 units                             $430 + $30 per unit
      d.   21-99 units                             $580 + $30 per unit
      e.   100 or more units                       $720 + $30 per unit
   2.   Nonresidential                                $300 + $70 per acre
 b. Escrow fund*                                            
  i.   Residential subdivision plans per lot           $750
  ii.   Nonresidential – All Land Developments       $2,000
   1.   Additional per disturbed acre or portion there+$400
 c. Amendments to approved or recorded plans              $800
 d. Open space contribution** (3 or more dwelling units)   $1,500 per unit
 
*Applicant is responsible for the review fees of the Township Engineer and
other professionals retained by the Township to process the application. Such
fees shall be charged against the initial escrow fund at the rates approved by
Resolution of the Board of Commissioners and by the rates other professionals
charge the Township. Applicants shall replenish the escrow fund by a subsequent
escrow deposit in the amount of the initial deposit or the estimated amount of
the additional costs, whichever is the lesser.
**Paid to the Township as a contribution for the purchase and maintenance of
open space, parks, and recreation areas. A dwelling unit shall include but not
be limited to a single-family dwelling, townhouses, apartments and each half of
duplexes and mobile homes. The said contribution shall be made at the time a
building permit is obtained from the Township. When, at the discretion of the
Commissioners, circumstances surrounding the development of a site warrant
special consideration, this contribution may be reduced or waived.
3. Miscellaneous Fees
3. Miscellaneous                                Fees
 a. Fences – New & Replacement               $50
 b. Notice of Preliminary Opinion under        $300 + advertisement costs
  Municipalities Planning Code 
 c. Portable Storage Units (PODS)              $25 per unit
 d. Real estate signs in nonresidential zoning  
  districts
  i. Renewed every six (6) months             $50
 e. Sheds of 120 sqf and under                $50 per unit
 f. Written opinion of the Zoning Officer     $150
 g. Zoning Certifications                     $150
 
DISPOSITION LIST
Chapter DL
DISPOSITION LIST
§ DL-1.   Disposition of legislation.
The following is a chronological listing of legislation of the Township of
Upper Dublin adopted since the publication of the Code, indicating its
inclusion in the Code or the reason for its exclusion. [Enabling legislation
which is not general and permanent in nature is considered to be non-Code
material (NCM).] Information regarding legislation which is not included in the
Code nor on this list is available from the office of the Township Secretary.
The last legislation reviewed for the original publication of the Code was Ord.
No. 864, adopted 2-8-1994. A complete listing, including disposition, of all
legislation reviewed in conjunction with the original publication of the Code
is on file in the office of the Township Secretary.
§ DL-1.   Disposition of legislation.
Ord. No. Adoption Date Subject Disposition
Ord. No.      Adoption Date    Subject               Disposition
822           6-9-1992         Sewers: general       Superseded by Ord.
                               provisions amend ment No. 11-1242
845           8-10-1993        Sewers: general       Superseded by Ord.
                               provisions amend ment No. 11-1242
865           3-8-1994         County Consortium     NCM
                               Agreement amendment
866           6-14-1994        Zoning amendment      Ch. 255
867           6-14-1994        Zoning amendment      Ch. 255
868           6-14-1994        Zoning amendment      Ch. 255
869           6-14-1994        Zoning Map amendment  NCM
870           6-14-1994        Shade trees           Ch. 195
871           6-14-1994        Construction of       NCM
                               sidewalk
872           7-12-1994        Installation of       NCM
                               public sanitary sewer
873           8-9-1994         Installation of       NCM
                               public sanitary sewer
874           11-9-1994        Wastewater control    Superseded by Ord.
                               regulations           No. 11-1242
875           11-9-1994        Installation of       NCM
                               public sanitary sewer
876           12-13-1994       Appropriation         NCM
877           12-13-1994       Tax levy: 1995        NCM
878           12-13-1994       Subdivision and land  Ch. 212
                               development amendment
879           1-10-1995        Adoption of Code      Ch. 1, Art. I
             §§ 180- 1–180Property maintenance  Superseded by Ord.
                                                     No. 1206
             §§ 192-9, 192-1Sewers: general       Superseded by Ord.
                               provisions amend ment No. 11-1242
880           1-10-1995        Building construction Ch. 1, Art. II; Ch.
                                                     73, Art. I
881           1-10-1995        Building construction Ch. 1, Art. II; Ch.
                                                     73, Art. II
882           1-10-1995        Fire prevention       Ch. 1, Art. II; Ch.
                                                     117
883           1-10-1995        Plumbing              Ch. 1, Art. II; Ch.
                                                     174
884           1-10-1995        Mechanical standards  Ch. 1, Art.; Ch. 152
885           1-10-1995        Property maintenance  Ch. 1, Art. II; Ch.
                                                     180
                               Waste control         Superseded by Ord.
886           1-10-1995        regulations amend     No. 11-1242
                               ment
887           1-10-1995        Municipal claims      Ch. 28
                               Establishing the
888           1-10-1995        dates of the regu lar NCM
                               meetings
                               Flood damage          Ch. 122  (Repealed by
889           2-14-1995        prevention; and zon   Ord. 16-1313);  Ch.
                               ing amendments        255
890           2-14-1995        Fees amendment        Repealed by Ord. 24-
                                                     1392
891           3-14-1995        Police Pension and    Repealed by Ord. No.
                               Pension Fund          971
892           3-14-1995        Official Map          NCM
893           3-14-1995        Cable television      Ch. 82
                               franchises
894           5-9-1995         Cable television      Ch. 82
                               franchises amend ment
895           9-12-1995        Zoning amendment      Ch. 255
896           10-10-1995       Installation of       NCM
                               public sanitary sewer
897           11-14-1995       Bond ordinance        NCM
898           12-12-1995       Appropriation         NCM
899           12-12-1995       Tax levy: 1996        NCM
900           12-12-1995       Alarms amendment      Ch. 57
                               Establishing the
901           1-9-1996         dates of the regu lar NCM
                               meetings
902           1-9-1996         Fees amendment        Repealed by Ord. 24-
                                                     1392
903           2-13-1996        Subdivision and land  Ch. 212
                               development amendment
904           2-13-1996        Zoning amendment      Ch. 255
                               Benefit assessment
905           2-13-1996        for sanitary          NCM
                               wastewater facilities
906           2-13-1996        Extension of public   NCM
                               sanitary sewer system
907           3-12-1996        Yard waste collection Repealed by Ord. 24-
                                                     1395
908           3-12-1996        Vehicles and traffic  Ch. 233
                               amendment
909           5-14-1996        Vehicles and traffic  Ch. 233
                               amendment
910           5-14-1996        Benefit assessment    NCM
911           7-9-1996         Zoning amendment      Ch. 255
912           8-13-1996        Vehicles and traffic  Ch. 233
                               amendment
913           8-13-1996        Vehicles and traffic  Ch. 233
                               amendment
914           8-13-1996        Shade trees amendment Ch. 195
915           8-13-1996        Zoning amendment      Ch. 255
916           9-10-1996        Zoning amendment      Ch. 255
917           9-10-1996        Zoning amendment      Ch. 255
918           9-10-1996        Zoning amendment      Ch. 255
919           9-10-1996        Vehicles and traffic  Ch. 233
                               amendment
920           10-8-1996        Vehicles and traffic  Ch. 233 (Sec. 2: tem
                               amendment             porary measure)
921           10-8-1996        Manager amendment     Ch. 25
922           11-12-1996       Vehicles and traffic  NCM (temporary
                               amendment             measure)
923           11-12-1996       Vehicles and traffic  Ch. 233
                               amendment
924                           Budget                NCM
925                           Tax levy: 1997        NCM
926           1-7-1997         Zoning Map amendment  NCM
927           1-7-1997         Zoning amendment      Ch. 255
928           1-14-1997        Meeting dates         NCM (annual mea sure)
929           1-14-1997        Fees amendment        Repealed by Ord. 24-
                                                     1392
930           2-11-1997        Salaries              NCM
931           2-11-1997        Municipal claims      Ch. 28
                               amendment
932           3-11-1997        Participation in      NCM
                               insurance trust
933           4-8-1997         Subdivision and land  Ch. 212
                               development amendment
934           4-8-1997         Subdivision and land  Ch. 212
                               development amendment
935           4-8-1997         Nonelectoral debt     NCM
936           4-8-1997         Vehicles and traffic  Ch. 233
                               amendment
937           4-8-1997         Vehicles and traffic  NCM (temporary
                               amendment             measure)
938           4-8-1997         Vehicles and traffic  Ch. 233
                               amendment
                               Nonuniformed
939           4-8-1997         employees pension     Ch. 35, Art. II
                               plan
940           5-6-1997         Street vacation       NCM
941           5-6-1997         Street vacation       NCM
942           5-6-1997         Street vacation       NCM
                               Nuisances; amusement
                               games; ani mals;      Chs. 158; 61; 64; 86;
943           5-13-1997        disorderly conduct;   255; 110 (Repealed by
                               zoning; and fees      Ord. 24-1392)
                               amendments
944           5-13-1997        Manager amendment     Ch. 25
945           8-12-1997        Vehicles and traffic  Ch. 233
                               amendment
946           8-12-1997        Vehicles and traffic  Ch. 233
                               amendment
947           8-12-1997        Zoning amendment      Ch. 255
948           9-9-1997         Fees amendment        Repealed by Ord. 24-
                                                     1392
949           9-9-1997         Parks and recreation  Ch. 168
                               areas amend ment
950           9-9-1997         Streets and sidewalks Ch. 207
                               amendment
951           9-9-1997         Intergovernmental     NCM
                               cooperation agreement
952           9-9-1997         Vehicles and traffic  Ch. 233
                               amendment
953           10-14-1997       Subdivision and land  Ch. 212
                               development amendment
954           10-14-1997       Subdivision and land  Ch. 212
                               development amendment
955           10-14-1997       Nuisances amendment   Ch. 158
956           11-5-1997        Zoning amendment      Ch. 255
957           11-11-1997       Numbering of          Ch. 76
                               buildings amendment
958           11-11-1997       Fire prevention       Ch. 117
                               amendment
959           11-11-1997       Fire Board and        Ch. 18
                               Department amend ment
960           12-11-1997       1998 budget           NCM
961           12-11-1997       Tax rate, 1998        NCM
                               Emergency Services
                               Board; Fire Board and
                               Department; Library;  Chs. 11; 18; 32; 39;
962           12-9-1997        Parks and Recreation  142; 195; 255
                               Advisory; Planning
                               Agency; Shade trees;
                               Zon ing
                               Establishing the
963           2-10-1998        dates of the regu lar NCM
                               meetings
964           2-10-1998        Fees amendment        Repealed by Ord. 24-
                                                     1392
965           3-10-1998        Library amendment     Ch. 142
966           4-14-1998        Street vacation       NCM
967           4-14-1998        Vehicles and traffic  Ch. 233
                               amendment
968           6-9-1998         General obligation    NCM
                               note
969           6-9-1998         Public sanitary sewer NCM
                               collection line
970           6-9-1998         Vehicles and traffic  Ch. 233
                               amendment
971           7-14-1998        Police Pension Plan   Ch.35, Art. I;
                               and Pension Fund      repealer only
                               Subdivision and land
972           7-14-1998        development           Chs. 212; 255
                               amendment; zoning
                               amendment
                               Excavations
                               amendment; fees
                               amendment; stormwater Chs. 99 (Repealed by
973           7-14-1998        manage ment;          Ord. 22-1378); 110
                               subdivision and land  (Repealed by Ord. 24-
                               develop ment          1392); 206; 212; 255
                               amendment; zoning
                               amend ment
974           7-14-1998        Zoning amendment      Ch. 255
Res. No. 1666 7-14-1998        Police pension plan   Ch. A261
975           8-11-1998        Public sanitary sewer NCM
                               collection line
976           10-13-1998       Zoning amendment      Ch. 255
977           10-13-1998       Nuisances amendment   Ch. 158
978           11-10-1998       Zoning amendment      Ch. 255
979           11-10-1998       Subdivision and land  Ch. 212
                               development amendment
                               Participation in
980           11-10-1998       Delaware Valley       NCM
                               Municipal Health
                               Insurance Trust
981           12-8-1998        1999 budget           NCM
982           12-8-1998        Tax rate, 1999        NCM
983           12-8-1998        Zoning amendment      Ch. 255
984                           Meeting dates         NCM (annual measure)
985           1-12-1999        Fire prevention       Ch. 117
                               amendment
986           1-12-1999        Streets and sidewalks Ch. 207
                               amendment
987           2-9-1999         Zoning amendment      Ch. 255
988           2-9-1999         Fees amendment        Repealed by Ord. 24-
                                                     1392
                               Nonuniformed
Res. No. 1690 2-9-1999         employees pension     Ch. A262
                               plan
                               Fees amendment; fire  Chs. 110 (Repealed by
989           3-9-1999         prevention amendment; Ord. 24-1392); 117;
                               zoning amendment      255
990           3-9-1999         Subdivision and land  Ch. 212
                               development
                               Fees amendment;       Chs. 110 (Repealed by
991           3-9-1999         vending machines      Ord. 24-1392); 125,
                               amendment             Part 1
                               Earned income tax
992           3-9-1999         amendment;            Ch. 224, Arts. II and
                               administrative        III
                               appeals
993           4-13-1999        Public sanitary sewer NCM
                               collection line
994           4-13-1999        Benefit assessment    NCM
995           4-13-1999        Subdivision and land  Ch. 212
                               development amendment
996           5-11-1999        Vehicles and traffic  Ch. 233
                               amendment
997           5-11-1999        Vehicles and traffic  Ch. 233
                               amendment
998           6-8-1999         Benefit assessment    NCM
999           6-8-1999         Benefit assessment    NCM
1000          6-8-1999         General obligation    NCM
                               note
1001          6-8-1999         Zoning amendment      Ch. 255
1002          7-13-1999        Vehicles and traffic  Ch. 233
                               amendment
1003          8-10-1999        Zoning amendment      Ch. 255
1004          9-14-1999        Zoning amendment      Ch. 255
1005          9-14-1999        Subdivision and land  Ch. 212
                               development amendment
                               Flood damage
                               prevention amend      Ch. 122 (Repealed by
1006          9-14-1999        ment; subdivision and Ord. 16-1313), Chs.
                               land develop ment     212 and 255
                               amendment; zoning
                               amend ment
1007          9-14-1999        Fees amendment        Repealed by Ord. 24-
                                                     1392
1008          9-14-1999        Public sanitary sewer NCM
                               collection line
1009          9-14-1999        Public sanitary sewer NCM
                               collection line
1010          10-12-1999       Zoning amendment      Ch. 255
1011          11-9-1999        Subdivision and land  Ch. 212
                               development amendment
1012          12-14-1999       2000 budget           NCM
1013          12-14-1999       Tax rate, 2000        NCM
1014          12-14-1999       Zoning amendment      Ch. 255
1015          12-14-1999       Zoning amendment      Ch. 255
1016          12-14-1999       Vehicles and traffic  Ch. 233
                               amendment
1017          1-11-2000        Vehicles and traffic  Ch. 233
                               amendment
1018          1-11-2000        Garbage and refuse    Repealed by Ord. 24-
                               collection amendment  1395
                               Benefit assessment
1019          1-11-2000        for Andover Es tates  NCM
                               sanitary sewer
                               project
1020          1-11-2000        Vehicles and traffic  Ch. 233
                               amendment
1021          2-8-2000         Notice requirements   Chs. 69; 82; 206;
                               amendment             230; 255
1022          2-8-2000         Fees amendment        Repealed by Ord. 24-
                                                     1392
1023          2-8-2000         Vehicles and traffic  Ch. 233
                               amendment
                               Establishing the
1024          2-8-2000         dates of the regu lar NCM
                               meetings
1025          3-14-2000        Fees amendment        Repealed by Ord. 24-
                                                     1392
1026          3-14-2000        Fees amendment        Repealed by Ord. 24-
                                                     1392
1027          4-11-2000        Sewers: general       Superseded by Ord.
                               provisions amend ment No. 1094
1028          4-11-2000        Fire prevention       Ch. 117
                               amendment
1029          5-9-2000         Official Map adopted  NCM
                               Highland Avenue
1030          5-9-2000         Sanitary Sewer        NCM
                               Project
1031          5-9-2000         Vehicles and traffic  Ch. 233
                               amendment
1032          5-9-2000         Vehicles and traffic  Ch. 233
                               amendment
                               Benefit assessment
1033          5-9-2000         for Catlin Way sewer  NCM
                               project
                               Subdivision and land
1034          6-13-2000        development           Ch. 212; Ch. 255
                               amendment; zoning
                               amendment
1035          6-13-2000        Animals amendment     Ch. 64
1036          6-13-2000        Streets and sidewalks Ch. 207
                               amendment
1037          7-11-2000        Public sanitary sewer NCM
                               collection line
1038          7-11-2000        Vehicles and traffic  Ch. 233
                               amendment
1039          8-8-2000         Zoning Map amendment  NCM
1040          8-8-2000         Zoning amendment      Ch. 255
1041          8-8-2000         Zoning amendment      Ch. 255
1042          8-8-2000         Zoning amendment      Ch. 255
1043          9-12-2000        Streets and sidewalks Ch. 207
                               amendment
                               Sewers: wastewater    Superseded by Ord.
1044          9-12-2000        control regula tions  No. 1094
                               amendment
1045          10-10-2000       Zoning amendment      Ch. 255
1046          10-10-2000       Fire prevention       Ch. 117
                               amendment
1047          10-10-2000       General obligation    NCM
                               note amendment
1048          11-14-2000       Public sanitary sewer NCM
                               collection line
1049          12-12-2000       2001 budget           NCM
1050          12-12-2000       Tax rate, 2001        NCM
1051          12-12-2000       Transportation        NCM
                               development district
1052                          Establishment of      NCM
                               regular meeting dates
1053          1-9-2001         Vehicles and traffic  Ch. 233
                               amendment
1054          1-9-2001         Police Pension Plan   Ch. A261
                               amendment
                               Nonuniformed Employee
1055          1-9-2001         Pension Plan          Ch. A262
                               amendment
1056          2-13-2001        Vehicles and traffic  Ch. 233
                               amendment
1057          2-13-2001        Fees amendment        Repealed by Ord. 24-
                                                     1392
1058          2-13-2001        Fees amendment        Repealed by Ord. 24-
                                                     1392
1059          2-13-2001        Salaries amendment    NCM
1060          3-13-2001        Vehicles and traffic  Ch. 233
                               amendment
1061          3-13-2001        Benefit assessment    NCM
1062          5-8-2001         Snow and ice removal  Ch. 198
1063          5-8-2001         Police Pension Plan   Ch. A261
                               amendment
1064          6-12-2001        Vehicles and traffic  Ch. 233
                               amendment
1065          7-10-2001        Zoning amendment      Ch. 255
                               Signs; streets and
1066          7-10-2001        sidewalks amend ment; Chs. 196, 207 and 255
                               zoning amendment
Shade Tree    8-2-2001         Shade Tree Commission Ch. A263
Commission                     rules and regulations
1067          8-14-2001        Parks and recreation  Ch. 168
                               areas amend ment
1068          10-9-2001        Sale of sewer system  NCM
1069          10-9-2001        Vehicles and traffic  Ch. 233
                               amendment
1070          10-9-2001        Benefit assessment    NCM
1071          11-13-2001       Vehicles and traffic  Ch. 233
                               amendment
1072          12-11-2001       2002 budget           NCM
1073          12-11-2001       Tax rate, 2002        NCM
1074          12-11-2001       Vehicles and traffic  Ch. 233
                               amendment
1075          12-11-2001       General obligation    NCM
                               bond
1076          2-12-2002        Establishment of      NCM
                               regular meeting dates
1077          2-12-2002        Vehicles and traffic  Ch. 233
                               amendment
1078          3-12-2002        Vehicles and traffic  Ch. 233
                               amendment
1079          3-12-2002        Vehicles and traffic  Ch. 233
                               amendment
1080          3-12-2002        Zoning amendment      Ch. 255
1081          3-12-2002        Yard waste collection Repealed by Ord. 24-
                               amendment             1395
1082          4-9-2002         Zoning amendment      Ch. 255
1083          4-9-2002         Fees amendment        Repealed by Ord. 24-
                                                     1392
1084          4-9-2002         Shade trees amendment Ch. 195
1085          4-16-2002        Zoning Map amendment  NCM
1086          4-16-2002        Zoning amendment      Ch. 255
1087          4-16-2002        Zoning amendment      Ch. 255
1088          4-16-2002        Zoning amendment      Ch. 255
1089          6-11-2002        Zoning amendment      Ch. 255
1090          6-11-2002        Vehicles and traffic  Ch. 233
                               amendment
1091          8-13-2002        Electoral districts   (Superseded by Ord.
                               amendment             24-1390)
1092          9-10-2002        Zoning amendment      Ch. 255
                               Nuisances amendment;
1093          10-8-2002        subdivision and land  Chs. 158; 212
                               development amendment
                               Fees amendment;       Chs. 110 (Repealed by
1094          10-8-2002        subdivision and land  Ord. 24-1392); 212
                               development amendment
1095          10-8-2002        Vehicles and traffic  Ch. 233
                               amendment
1096          11-12-2002       Subdivision and land  Ch. 212
                               development amendment
1097          12-10-2002       2003 budget           NCM
1098          12-10-2002       Tax rate, 2003        NCM
1099          12-10-2002       Fees amendment        Repealed by Ord. 24-
                                                     1392
                               Signs amendment;
1100          12-10-2002       streets and side      Chs. 196; 207
                               walks amendment
1101          12-10-2002       Adult-oriented        Ch. 54
                               businesses
1102          12-10-2002       Parks and recreation  Ch. 168
                               areas amend ment
1103          3-11-2003        Adult-oriented        Ch. 54
                               businesses amend ment
1104          3-11-2003        Vehicles and traffic  Ch. 233
                               amendment
1105          3-11-2003        Vehicles and traffic  Ch. 233
                               amendment
1106          4-8-2003         Records               Ch. 43
1107          5-13-2003        Signs amendment       Ch. 196
1108          5-13-2003        Vehicles and traffic  Ch. 233
                               amendment
1109          6-12-2003        Fees amendment        Repealed by Ord. 24-
                                                     1392
1110          6-12-2003        Vehicles and traffic  Ch. 233
                               amendment
1111          7-8-2003         Fees amendment        Repealed by Ord. 24-
                                                     1392
1112          7-8-2003         Street abandonment    NCM
1113          7-8-2003         Zoning amendment      Ch. 255
1114          9-23-2003        Subdivision and land  Ch. 212
                               development amendment
1115          9-23-2003        Zoning amendment      Ch. 255
1116          10-14-2003       Zoning amendment      Ch. 255
1117          11-11-2003       Zoning amendment      Ch. 255
1118          12-9-2003        2004 budget           NCM
1119          12-9-2003        2004 tax rate         NCM
                               Watercourses; fees    Chs. 240; 110
1120          12-9-2003        amendment             (Repealed by Ord. 24-
                                                     1392)
                               Tattooing and body    Chs. 221; 110
1121          12-9-2004        piercing; fees        (Repealed by Ord. 24-
                               amendment             1392)
1122          1-13-2004        Peddling and          Ch. 171
                               soliciting amendment
1123          2-10-2004        2004 meeting dates    NCM
1124          2-10-2004        Subdivision and land  Ch. 212
                               development amendment
1125          3-9-2004         Vehicles and traffic  Ch. 233
                               amendment
1126          3-9-2004         Streets and sidewalks Ch. 207
                               amendment
1127          5-11-2004        Zoning amendment      Ch. 255
1128          5-11-2004        Zoning Map amendment  NCM
1129          5-11-2004        Nuisances amendment   Ch. 158
1130          5-11-2004        Garbage and refuse    Repealed by Ord. 24-
                               collection amendment  1395
1131          6-8-2004         Sidewalk construction NCM
                               on N. Lime kiln Pike
                               Uniform construction
1132          6-15-2004        code; fire pre        Chs. 73 and 117
                               vention amendment
1133          7-13-2004        Police Pension Plan   Ch. A261
                               amendment
1134                                                
1135          7-13-2004        Vehicles and traffic  Ch. 233
                               amendment
                               Subdivision and land
1136          9-14-2004        development           Chs. 212 and 255
                               amendment; zoning
                               amendment
1137          9-14-2004        Zoning Map amendment  NCM
1138          9-14-2004        Zoning amendment      Ch. 255
1139          9-14-2004        Subdivision and land  Ch. 212
                               development amendment
                               Fees amendment;       Chs. 110 (Repealed by
1140          9-14-2004        watercourses          Ord. 24-1392) and 240
                               amendment
1141          9-14-2004        Stormwater management Ch. 260
                               Amending various
                               chapters to in clude
                               references to and     Chs. 91, 99 (Repealed
1142          9-14-2004        provisions regulating by Ord. 22-1378),
                               stormwater management 145, 158, 207 and 208
                               and water quality
                               protection
1143          9-14-2004        Fees amendment        Repealed by Ord. 24-
                                                     1392
1144          10-12-2004       Vehicles and traffic  Ch. 233
                               amendment
1145                                               NCM
1146                                               NCM
1147                                               NCM
1148          4-12-2005        Zoning amendment      Ch. 255
1149          4-12-2005        Vehicles and traffic  Ch. 233
                               amendment
1150          4-19-2005        Zoning amendment      Ch. 255
1151          4-19-2005        Zoning Map amendment  NCM
1152          7-19-2005        Zoning Map amendment  NCM
1153          8-9-2005         Vehicles and traffic  Ch. 233
                               amendment
1154                          General obligation    NCM
                               note
1155          9-13-2005        Zoning amendment      Ch. 255
1156          10-11-2005       Vehicles and traffic  Ch. 233
                               amendment
1157          12-13-2005       2006 budget           NCM
1158          12-13-2005       2006 tax rate         NCM
1159          1-10-2006        Numbering of          Ch. 76
                               buildings amendment
                               Emergency and
1160          1-10-2006        municipal services    Sup. by 1189
                               tax
1161          1-17-2006        Zoning Map amendment  NCM
1162          1-17-2006        Zoning amendment      Ch. 255
1163                                               NCM
1164          2-14-2006        Zoning Map amendment  NCM
1165          2-14-2006        Fire Department       Ch. 18
                               amendment
1166          3-28-2006        Zoning Map amendment  NCM
1167          5-23-2006        Zoning Map amendment  NCM
1168          6-13-2006        Vehicles and traffic  Ch. 233
                               amendment
                               Planning Agency
1169          8-8-2006         amendment subdi       Ch. 39; Ch. 212
                               vision and land
                               development amendment
1170                          Zoning Map amendment  NCM
1171          8-8-2006         Vehicles and traffic  Ch. 233
                               amendment
1172          10-10-2006       Vehicles and traffic  Ch. 233
                               amendment
                               Subdivision and land
1173          11-14-2006       development           Ch. 212; Ch. 255
                               amendment; zoning
                               amendment
                               Subdivision and land
1174          11-14-2006       development           Ch. 212; Ch. 255
                               amendment; zoning
                               amendment
                               Building construction
                               - Uniform
                               construction code
1175          11-14-2006       amendment; his toric  Ch. 73; Ch. 127; Ch.
                               preservation;         212; Ch. A264
                               subdivision and land
                               development, historic
                               resource inventory
1176          12-12-2006       2007 budget           NCM
1177          12-12-2006       2007 tax rate         NCM
1178          1-9-2007         2007 meeting schedule NCM
1179          1-9-2007         Vehicles and traffic  Ch. 233
                               amendment
1180          2-13-2007        Vehicles and traffic  Ch. 233
                               amendment
1181          2-13-2007        Zoning Map amendment  Ch. 255
                               Subdivision and land
1182          2-13-2007        development           Ch. 212; Ch. 255
                               amendment; zoning
                               amendment
1183          4-10-2007        Peace and good order  Repealed by Ord. No.
                                                     11-1248
1184          7-10-2007        Police Pension Plan   Ch. A261
                               amendment
1185          9-25-2007        Realty transfer tax   Ch. 224
                               amendment
                               Vacate and abandon a
                               portion of a certain
1186          10-9-2007        right-of-way known    NCM
                               and des ignated as
                               Golden Drive (a/k/
                               a Gol den Circle)
1187          11-13-2007       Zoning amendment      Ch. 255
                               Subdivision and land
1188          11-13-2007       development           Ch. 212; Ch. 255
                               amendment; zoning
                               amendment
1189          11-13-2007       Local services tax    Ch. 224
1190          12-11-2007       2008 budget           NCM
1191          12-11-2007       2008 tax rate         NCM
1192          12-11-2007       Vehicles and traffic  Ch. 233
                               amendment
1193          12-11-2007       Vehicles and traffic  Ch. 233
                               amendment
1194          1-8-2008         2008 meeting schedule NCM
                               Subdivision and land
1195          3-11-2008        development           Ch. 212; Ch. 255
                               amendment; zoning
                               amendment
1196          3-11-2008        Historic resource     Ch. A264
                               inventory amend ment
1197          3-11-2008        Vehicles and traffic  Ch. 233
                               amendment
1198          3-11-2008        Vehicles and traffic  Ch. 233
                               amendment
1199          3-11-2008        Vehicles and traffic  Ch. 233
                               amendment
                               Nuisances - smoking
                               amendment; Parks and
1200          4-8-2008         recreation areas -    Ch. 158; Ch. 168
                               rules and regulations
                               amendment
1201          5-13-2008        Zoning amendment      Ch. 255
1202                                               NCM
1203          7-8-2008         Vehicles and traffic  Ch. 233
                               amendment
1204          10-14-2008       Zoning amendment      Ch. 255
                               Fees - zoning         Ch. 110 (Repealed by
1205          10-14-2008       amendment; Zoning     Ord. 24-1392); Ch.
                               amendment             255
1206          10-14-2008       Property maintenance  Ch. 180
1207          10-14-2008       Vehicles and traffic  Ch. 233
                               amendment
1208          12-9-2008        2009 budget           NCM
1209          12-9-2008        2009 tax rate         NCM
                               Establishing the
                               dates of the regu lar
09-1210       1-13-2009        meetings of the       NCM
                               Commissioners during
                               the year 2009
09-1211       3-10-2009        Peddling and          Ch. 171
                               soliciting amendment
09-1212       5-12-2009        Historic resource     Ch. A264
                               inventory amend ment
                               Providing for the
                               design, laying out,
09-1213       7-14-2009        construction and      NCM
                               installation of a
                               public sidewalk
                               Building construction
09-1214       7-14-2009        - Uniform             Ch. 73
                               construction code
                               amendment
09-1215       8-11-2009        Zoning amendment      Ch. 255
09-1216       8-11-2009        Zoning amendment      Ch. 255
09-1217       8-11-2009        Subdivision and land  Ch. 212
                               development amendment
                               Building construction
                               - Uniform
                               construction code
09-1218       9-8-2009         amendment; his toric  Ch. 73; Ch. 127; Ch.
                               preservation          218
                               amendment; swimming
                               pools - Construction
                               standards amendment
09-1219       9-8-2009         Mechanical standards  Ch. 152
                               amendment
09-1220       9-8-2009         Plumbing amendment    Ch. 174
                               Library; board of
09-1221       10-13-2009       directors; creation;  Ch. 142
                               rules and regulations
                               amendment
09-1222       11-10-2009       Vehicles and traffic  Ch. 233
                               amendment
                               Parks and recreation
09-1223       11-10-2009       areas; rules and      Ch. 168
                               regulations amendment
09-1224       12-8-2009        2010 budget           NCM
09-1225       12-8-2009        2010 tax rate         NCM
                               Building construction
                               - uniform con         Ch. 73; Ch. 110
10-1226       1-12-2010        struction code        (Repealed by Ord. 24-
                               amendment; fees       1392)
                               amendment
                               Establishing the
                               dates of the regu lar
10-1227       2-9-2010         meetings of the       NCM
                               Commissioners during
                               the year 2010
                               Fees amendment;       Ch. 110 (Repealed by
10-1228       2-9-2010         Property transfer     Ord. 24-1392); Ch.
                               certification         180
10-1229       4-13-2010        Zoning amendment      Ch. 255
                               Issuance of general
10-1230       5-11-2010        obligation bonds for  NCM
                               $12,500,000
10-1231       5-11-2010        Police Pension Plan   Ch. A261
                               amendment
10-1232       5-8-2010         Vehicles and traffic  Ch. 233
                               amendment
                               Providing for the
                               design, laying out,
10-1233       9-14-2010        construction and      NCM
                               installation of a
                               public sidewalk
10-1234       12-14-2010       2011 budget           NCM
10-1235       12-14-2010       2011 tax rate         NCM
                               Establishing the
                               dates of the regu lar
11-1236       1-11-2011        meetings of the       NCM
                               Commissioners during
                               the year 2011
11-1237       2-8-2011         Fees amendment        Repealed by Ord. 24-
                                                     1392
11-1238       5-10-2011        Zoning amendment      Ch. 255
                               Building construction
11-1239       5-10-2011        - uniform con         Ch. 73
                               struction code
                               amendment
11-1240       6-14-2011        Subdivision and land  Ch. 212
                               development amendment
                               Historic preservation
11-1241       6-14-2011        amendment; zoning     Ch. 127; Ch. 255
                               amendment
                               Building construction
11-1242       6-14-2011        - uniform con         Ch. 73; Ch. 192
                               struction code
                               amendment; sewers
11-1243       8-9-2011         Vehicles and traffic  Ch. 233
                               amendment
11-1244       9-13-2011        Zoning amendment      Ch. 255
11-1245       9-13-2011        Zoning amendment      Ch. 255
                               Issuance of general
11-1246       10-11-2011       obligation bonds for  NCM
                               $5,860,000
11-1247       10-11-2011       Vehicles and traffic  Ch. 233
                               amendment
11-1248       11-8-2011        Peace and good order  Repealed Ord. No.
                                                     1183
11-1249       12-13-2011       2012 budget           NCM
11-1250       12-13-2011       2012 tax rate         NCM
11-1251       12-13-2011       Zoning amendment      Ch. 255
11-1252       12-13-2011       Vehicles and traffic  Ch. 233
                               amendment
11-1253       12-13-2011       Vehicles and traffic  Ch. 233
                               amendment
                               Establishing the
                               dates of the regu lar
12-1254       2-14-2012        meetings of the        
                               Commissioners during
                               the year 2012
12-1255       3-13-2012        Vehicles and traffic  Ch. 233
                               amendment
12-1256       4-10-2012        Zoning amendment      Ch. 255
12-1257       4-10-2012        Zoning amendment      Ch. 255
12-1258       4-10-2012        Zoning amendment      Ch. 255
12-1259       9-11-2012        Zoning amendment      Ch. 255
12-1260       12-11-2012       2013 budget           NCM
12-1261       12-11-2012       2013 tax rate         NCM
                               Alternate collector
12-1262       12-11-2012       of delinquent real    Ch. 224
                               estate taxes
12-1263       12-11-2012       Police Pension Plan   Ch. A261
                               amendment
13-1264       1-8-2013         Zoning amendment      Ch. 255
                               Establishing the
                               dates of the regu lar
                               meetings of the
13-1265       1-8-2013         Commissioners of the  NCM
                               Township of Upper
                               Dublin during the
                               year 2013.
13-1266       1-8-2013         Historic Resource     Ch. A264
                               Inventory amend ment
                               Set the compensation
                               of the Upper Dublin
13-1267       2-12-2013        Township Tax          NCM
                               Collector, ef fective
                               January 6, 2014.
13-1268       2-12-2013        Fire prevention       Ch. 117
                               amendment
13-1269       3-12-2013        Parks and recreation  Ch. 168
                               areas amend ment
13-1270       3-12-2013        Nuisances amendment   Ch. 158
                               Issuance of general
13-1271       5-14-2013        obligation bonds for  NCM
                               $17,500,000
13-1272       5-14-2013        Subdivision and land  Ch. 212
                               development amendment
                               Subdivision and land
13-1273       5-14-2013        development           Ch. 212; Ch. 255
                               amendment; zoning
                               amendment
13-1274       5-14-2013        Zoning amendment      Ch. 255
13-1275       5-14-2013        Zoning amendment      Ch. 255
13-1376       10-8-2013        Zoning amendment      Ch. 255
13-1277       11-26-2013       Zoning amendment      Ch. 255
13-1278       12-10-2013       2014 budget           NCM
13-1279       12-10-2013       2014 tax rate         NCM
14-1280       1-14-2014        Electoral districts   Repealed by Ord. No.
                                                     14-1281
14-1281       2-11-2014        Electoral districts   Repealed Ord. No. 14-
                                                     1280
                               Establishing the
                               dates of the regu lar
                               meetings of the
14-1282       2-11-2014        Commissioners of the  NCM
                               Township of Upper
                               Dublin during the
                               year 2014.
14-1283       2-11-2014        Historic resource     Ch. A264
                               inventory amend ment
14-1284       3-11-2014        Zoning amendment      Ch. 255
14-1285       3-11-2014        Nuisances amendment   Ch. 158
14-1286       3-11-2014        Alarms amendment      Ch. 57
14-1287       3-11-2014        Vehicles and traffic  Ch. 233
                               amendment
                               Vacate and abandon a
                               portion of a certain
14-1288       5-13-2014        right-of-way known    NCM
                               and des ignated as
                               Lewisville Drive
14-1289       5-13-2014        Fees amendment        Repealed by Ord. 24-
                                                     1392
14-1290       5-13-2014        Sewers amendment      Ch. 192
14-1291       8-12-2014        Zoning amendment      Ch. 255
14-1292       11-11-2014       Zoning amendment      Ch. 255
14-1293       11-11-2014       Zoning amendment      Ch. 255
14-1294       12-9-2014        2015 budget           NCM
14-1295       12-9-2014        2015 tax rate         NCM
                               Establishing the
                               dates of the regu lar
                               meetings of the
15-1296       1-13-2015        Commissioners of the  NCM
                               Township of Upper
                               Dublin during the
                               year 2015.
                               Fees amendment;       Ch. 110 (Repealed by
15-1297       1-13-2015        Peddling and so       Ord. 24-1392); Ch.
                               liciting amendment    171
15-1298       2-10-2015        Brush, grass and      Ch. 69
                               weeds amendment
15-1299       2-10-2015        Electoral districts   (Superseded by Ord.
                               amendments            24-1390)
                               Issuance of general
15-1300       3-10-2015        obligation bonds for  NCM
                               $4,000,000
15-1301       3-10-2015        Fees amendment        Repealed by Ord. 24-
                                                     1392
15-1302       5-12-2015        Sewers amendment      Ch. 192
15-1303       6-9-2015         Vehicles and traffic  Ch. 233
                               amendment
15-1304       6-9-2015         Historic resource     Ch. A264
                               inventory amend ment
15-1305       7-14-2015        Parks and recreation  Ch. 168
                               areas amend ment
15-1306       7-14-2015        Fees amendment        Repealed by Ord. 24-
                                                     1392
15-1307       9-8-2015         Zoning map change     NCM
15-1308       9-8-2015         Zoning map change     NCM
15-1309       12-8-2015        Annual budget         NCM
15-1310       12-8-2015        Fixing the tax rate   NCM
15-1311       12-8-2015        Compensation of       NCM
                               commissioners
15-1312       12-8-2015        Promissory note       NCM
16-1313       2-9-2016         Flood provisions and  Ch. 122; Ch. 255
                               amending zoning
16-1314       2-9-2016         Establishing 2016     NCM
                               council meeting dates
16-1315       3-8-2016         Approving DVRFA loan  NCM
                               Amending zoning code,
16-1316       4-12-2016        subdivision and land  Ch. 206; Ch. 212; Ch.
                               development code, and 255
                               stormwater management
16-1317       4-12-2016        Vacating Harrington   NCM
                               Road
16-1318       4-12-2016        Hunting and firearms  Ch. 129
16-1319       5-10-2016        Zoning text amendment Ch. 255
16-1320       7-12-2016        Nuisances             Ch. 158
                               Intergovernmental
                               Agreement for
16-1321       7-12-2016        alternative TMDL Plan NCM
                               for Wissahickon Creek
                               Watershed
16-1322       9-13-2016        General Municipal     Ch. 27
                               Authority
16-1323       9-13-2016        General obligation    NCM
                               bonds
16-1324       9-13-2016        Revising fee schedule Repealed by Ord. 24-
                                                     1392
16-1325       9-13-2016        Vehicles and traffic  Ch. 233
                               amendments
16-1326       12-6-2016        Zoning amendment -    Repealed and replaced
                               Mixed use development by Ord. No. 17-1330
16-1327       12-13-2016       2017 budget           NCM
16-1328       12-13-2016       2017 tax rate         NCM
17-1330       3-28-2017        Zoning amendments -   Ch. 255
                               Mixed use development
                               Intergovernmental
                               agreement with the
17-1331       5-9-2017         Municipal Authority   NCM
                               for the provision of
                               services
                               Providing for the
                               design, layout,
17-1332       5-9-2017         construction and      NCM
                               installation of a
                               public sanitary sewer
                               collection line
17-1333       9-12-2017        Human Relations       Ch. 128
                               Commission
17-1334       10-3-2017        Intergovernmental     NCM
                               agreement
17-1335       11-14-2017       General obligation    NCM
                               notes
17-1336       12-12-2017       2018 budget           NCM
17-1337       12-12-2017       2018 tax rate         NCM
18-1338       1-9-2018         Incurrence of lease   NCM
                               rental debt
                               Establishing 2018
18-1339       2-13-2018        Commissioners meeting NCM
                               dates
                               Amending Uniform      Ch. 73; Ch. 110
18-1340       2-13-2018        Construction Code     (Repealed by Ord. 24-
                                                     1392)
18-1341       4-10-2018        Zoning map change     NCM
                               Human Relations
18-1342       7-10-2018        Commission;           Ch. 128
                               discrimination
18-1343       7-10-2018        Municipal Authority;  Ch. 27
                               service area map
18-1344       10-9-2018        Public sanitary sewer NCM
                               assessment
18-1345       12-11-2018       2019 budget           NCM
18-1346       12-11-2018       2019 tax rates        NCM
19-1347       1-8-2019         Landscaping           Ch. 212
                               Establishing 2019
19-1348       1-8-2019         Commissioners meeting NCM
                               dates
19-1349       1-8-2019         Sewer assessment;     NCM
                               installment payments
19-1350       4-9-2019         Public swimming pools Ch. 218
                               Zoning amendments;
19-1351       5-14-2019        subdivision and land  Ch. 212; Ch. 255
                               development
                               amendments
19-1352       5-14-2019        Zoning map change     NCM
19-1353       8-13-2019        General obligation    NCM
                               notes
19-1354       8-13-2019        Revising height       Ch. 255 Appendix A
                               restrictions map
                               Zoning real estate    110-3 (Repealed by
19-1355       8-13-2019        sign regulations      Ord. 24-1392), 196-2,
                                                     196-3, 255-152.2
19-1356       12-10-2019       2020 budget           NCM
19-1357       12-10-2019       2020 tax rates        NCM
                               Establishing 2020
20-1358       2-11-2020        Commissioners meeting NCM
                               dates
20-1359       7-14-2020        General obligation    NCM
                               notes
                               Amending zoning       255-287, 255-288,
20-1360       8-11-2020        Greater Fort          255-288.1, 255-293,
                               Washington District   255-295
                               Amending zoning Ft.   255-7, 255-244, 255-
20-1361       8-11-2020        Washington Village    245, 255-246.1, 255-
                               District              247 - 255-249, 255-
                                                     251
20-1362       8-25-2020        Nuisances             158-1, 158-12
20-1363       12-8-2020        2021 budget           NCM
20-1364       12-8-2020        2021 tax rates        NCM
21-1365       1-12-2021        2021 meeting schedule NCM
21-1366       3-9-2021         Parking prohibited    233-55
                               certain hours
                               Design and
21-1367       3-23-2021        installation for      255-263
                               solar energy systems
                               Indoor storage        255-7, 255-135, 255-
21-1368       3-23-2021        facility              288, 255-288.1, 255-
                                                     293, 255-294
21-1369       4-13-2021        General obligation    NCM
                               notes
21-1370       6-15-2021        Permit fees           (Repealed by Ord. 24-
                                                     1392)
21-1371       7-13-2021        Floodplain buffer     255-7, 255-162
                               requirement deleted
21-1372       12-14-2021       2022 budget           NCM
21-1373       12-14-2021       2022 tax rates        NCM
                               Establishing 2022
22-1374       2-8-2022         Commissioners meeting NCM
                               dates
22-1375       5-10-2022        Mobile home           255-119, 255-121,
                               development district  255-124 - 255-126
22-1376       10-11-2022       Zoning map change     Ch. 255 Zoning Map
                                                     Amendments
                               Zoning definitions;
                               steep slopes,         255-7, 255-31, 255-
22-1377       12-13-2022       impervious surfaces   33
                               and riparian
                               corridors
                               Erosion,              99-1 - 99-15
22-1378       11-9-2022        sedimentation and     Repeals and replaces
                               grading               Ch. 99
22-1379       12-13-2022       2023 budget           NCM
22-1380       12-13-2022       2023 tax rates        NCM
23-1381       1-10-2023        Truck exclusions      255-40
                               Zoning definitions
23-1382       1-10-2023        and storage of        255-7, 255-40.1
                               vehicles
                               Establishing 2023
23-1383       1-10-2023        Commissioners meeting NCM
                               dates
23-1384       2-14-2023        Merger of lots        255-24.1
                               Design and
23-1385       4-11-2023        installation for      255-263
                               solar energy systems
23-1386       11-14-2023       Volunteer service     Ch. 120
                               credit program
23-1387       12-12-2023       2024 budget           NCM
23-1388       12-12-2023       2024 tax rates        NCM
24-1389       3-12-2024        Single use plastic    Ch. 203, Art. V
                               regulations
24-1390       6-11-2024        Electoral districts   Ch. 9
                               amendment
                               Zoning regulations;
24-1391       7-9-2024         lot, yard and bulk;   255-15, 255-32
                               impervious surfaces
24-1392       7-9-2024         Fee schedule          Ch. A265;
                                                     Repeals Ch. 110
24-1393       9-10-2024        Parking prohibited;   233-54, 233-56
                               time limit parking
24-1394       10-8-2024        General obligation    NCM
                               notes
24-1395       10-8-2024        Solid waste and       Repeals and replaces
                               recyclable materials  Ch. 203, Arts. I - IV
                               Nonuniformed Employee
24-1396       11-12-2024       Pension Plan; one-    NCM
                               time retirement
                               incentive
24-1397       12-10-2024       2025 budget           NCM
24-1398       12-10-2024       2025 tax rates        NCM
24-1399       12-10-2024       Police Pension Plan   Ch. A261, Art. XIV
                               amendment
                               Zoning; stacked
25-1400       3-11-2025        townhouse dwelling;   255-7, 255-61.1   
                               OC mixed use
                               development
                               Establishing 2025
25-1401       1-14-2025        Commissioners meeting NCM
                               dates
25-1402       1-14-2025        Educational service   Repeals Ch. 6
                               agency
25-1403       3-11-2025        General obligation    NCM
                               notes
                               Disclosure to buyers
25-1404       5-13-2025        in certain            Ch. 85
                               residential
                               transactions
25-1405       6-10-2025        Towing of certain     Ch. 233, Art. IV
                               vehicles
25-1406       7-8-2025         Zoning Hearing Board  255-172
25-1407       8-12-2025        Crossing guards       Ch. 233, Art. IX
25-1408       12-9-2025        Vehicle dealer        255-7, 255-153.6,
                               storage lots          255-246, 255-247
25-1409       12-9-2025        Traffic schedules     233-50, 233-54, 233-
                                                     59
25-1410       12-9-2025        2026 budget           NCM
25-1411       12-9-2025        2026 tax rates        NCM
26-1412       1-13-2026        Fee schedule          Ch. A265
                                                   
 
 
